3:17:12 PM10/20/2004





Political Violence and Democracy: Do Societal  Identity Threats Matter?   The Security and Politics of Identity





Mr. Bryn Hughes

School of Political Science and International Studies

University of Queensland









Refereed paper presented to the  Australasian Political Studies Association Conference  University of Adelaide  29 September - 1 October 2004



Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 2





ABSTRACT

The Democratic Peace (DP) proposition, which claims that democratic states do not fight  each  other,  begins  its  inter-state  assertions  with  an  intra-state  supposition:  liberal   democracies  are  free  from  political  violence  because  liberal  democratic  principles  of   accommodation  remove  the  reasons  for  political  violence.  This  intra-state  supposition   matters  to  DP’s  inter-state  claim  because  the  justification  for  democratization  loses   traction if political conflict is seen to persist within democracies. It is on this exact point  which  DP’s  supposition  faces  empirical  challenges.  High  profile  examples  such  as  the   IRA  in  Northern  Ireland  and  ETA  in  Spain  confront  DP’s  domestic  assumption.  The   British and Spanish cases, furthermore, highlight the powerful linkages between identity  and (in)security within consolidated democracies. The objective of this paper, therefore,  is to shed some light on this important area where DP does not tread by examining the  domestic  intersection  of  these  three  factors:  democracy,  security,  and  identity.  The   questions  pursued  revolve  around  the  relationships  between  identity  and  political   violence  within  a  liberal  democratic  structure.  To  conduct  its  investigation,  the  paper   begins  with  the  DP  debate  then  reviews  conc eptions of security before moving on to  explore  the  ways  in  which  identity  underpins  security  and  liberal  democracy.  The   paper’s  conclusions,  while  warning  against  an  unproblematic  acceptance  of  the  DP   supposition  generally,  focus  on  the  centrality  of  identity.   More  specifically,  the   ‘construction’  of  identity  plays  the  key  role  vis-ÃÂ -vis  the  prospect  for  political  violence   within liberal democratic structures. As the presence of democratic regimes continues to  expand,  the  achievement  of  peace  within  democracies  is  an  increasingly  noteworthy   issue to global politics.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 3

Overview and The Democratic Peace

For good reason Freedom House (1999) touts the 20th Century as the ‘Democratic

Century’.  More  people  now  live  in  democracies  than  any  other  political  system

(Polity  Project  IV).  Furthermore,  the  trend  of  democratization  continues  its

considerable momentum with non-Western states such as Iraq, Liberia and even

a  possible  sovereign  Palestine  earmarked  for  democratic  style  regimes.  The

foreign policy plank of democratization itself is underpinned by beliefs central to

the  Democratic  Peace  (DP)  which  are  encapsulated  by  these  words  from  U.S.

President  Clinton  (New  York  Times  1994:  17):  “democracies  don’t  attack  each

other”  and  therefore  “the  best  strategy  to  insure  our  security  and  to  build  a

durable  peace  is  to  support  the  advance  of  democracy  elsewhere”.  DP’s

significant  impact  on  political  studies  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  it  has  been

described in terms of “the conventional wisdom” of the 1990’s (Maoz 1997: 162).

However,  while  DP’s  raison  d’etre  and  thus  its  justification  for  the  strategy  of

democratization  is  inter-state  peace  and  security,  its  logic  relies  on  a  ‘domestic

analogy’ whereby the same rationale that drives the inter-state peace ensures that

consolidated1  liberal  democracies  lack  violent  political  conflict  internally.  As

Bruce  Russett  (1993b:  31,  emphasis  added),  arguably  the  chief  DP  proponent,

observes:  “the  culture,  perceptions,  and  practices  that  permit  compromise  and  the

peaceful resolution of conflicts without the threat of violence within countries comes to

apply  across  national  boundaries  toward  other  democratic  countries”.  Yet  the

political violence in Northern Ireland and Spain serve to challenge this domestic

analogy  claim.  The  British  and  Spanish  cases  also  serve  to  highlight  the  central

role played by identity since the stated grievances in these conflicts are primarily

about maltreatment along religious, linguistic, and cultural lines. Therefore, it is

at  the  crossroads  of  these  three  variables  -  liberal  democracy,  security  and

identity - that this article maintains its analysis.



1 The aim of this study is to examine the ‘ideal’ liberal democratic structure as best as practicable. Therefore I  distinguish established, relatively stable democracies from those undergoing transition to a democratic style regime in  order to quarantine the many troublesome issues that plague systems in a state of flux - thereby distorting the

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 4



The questions pursued within the paper relate to this domestic blind spot of DP.

The  exploration  is  primarily  conceptual  rather  than  an  attempt  to  evaluate

theorizations  empirically.  The  overarching  question  asked  is  about  how  liberal

democracy  affects  political  violence.  Yet  in  a  more  specific  sense,  the

investigation  relates  to  the  relationships  between  identity  and  political  violence

in  a  liberal  democratic  structure.  To  conduct  its  investigation,  the  paper  is

divided  into  three  main  sections  addressing  respectively  DP,  security  and

identity. The section on DP introduces the overall investigation by looking at the

debate  and  importance  surrounding  DP  as  well  as  its  linkages  to  both  security

and identity. In the next section, conceptions of security are reviewed with an eye

to  how  they  relate  to  democracy  and  identity.  The  final  section  interrogates the

notion of identity along with its linkages to security and liberal democracy. In the

concluding  part,  insights  about  this  intersection  of  liberal  democracy,  security

and  identity  are  put  forth.  It  is  at  this  crossroads  of  security,  democracy  and

identity  that  the  paper’s  conclusions  offer  an  original  contribution.  With

democracy’s seemingly indomitable global growth, it has become more relevant

than ever to understand security within its borders. I turn now to the conception

of the Democratic Peace since it is the entry point for this investigation.





Democratic Peace and Liberal Democracy



characteristics of the governmental system in a stable context. Edward D. Mansfield and Jack Snyder (1995) make a  related point: states’ undergoing shifts to democratic regimes behave differently, in that they are significantly more  prone to war, than those having consolidated into democracy.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 5

As  indicated  the  above  introduction,  there  should  be  little  doubt  that  DP’s

international relevance is substantial. In the broader sense, democracy is a salient

force in world politics due to its prevalence as a governing system2. Democracy is

on the rise; monarchs and authoritarian systems are on the wane3. This advance

of  democracy  -  or  the  foreign  policy  plank  of  democratization4  in  the  more

narrow  sense  -  is  underpinned  by  the  central  DP  claim  that  liberal  democracy

promises security because democratic states do not fight each other (Doyle 1983;

Maoz and Russett 1993)5. DP holds clearly consequential inter-state ramifications.

Yet DP’s conceptual and empirical scope does not encompass intra-state analysis.

Rather its intra-state supposition that democracies lack political violence, through

the notion of ‘domestic analogy’, is said to mirror the logic of its inter-state focus.

Hence  the  brief  description  of  DP’s  inter-state  security  logic  that  follows  is

necessary to understand why DP maintains that liberal democratic systems cause

both domestic and inter-state peace.





2 More  and  more  of  humanity  find  themselves  living  within  ‘democratic’  regimes.  Since  1991  the  majority  of  the   world’s population is now under what are classified as democratic regimes (Polity IV Project 2004).   3

Statistically, there were 25 states (or only 12.4% of the world’s population) practicing clearly restricted forms of  democracy in 1900, whereas by 2000 there were 120 (or 62.5% of the world’s population) noted as democratic  (Freedom House 1999). To mention a few contemporary examples of the global impact of this trend, democratic  political systems are planned for Iraq, Liberia, and a possible new Palestinian state at the time of this writing.  Moreover, democratization is conflated with two even broader trends comprising the neoliberalization and  globalization (Tickell and Peck 2003).  4

The dedication by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, in particular, to the expansion of liberal democracy evident  within the Versailles Treaty following World War One (Krasner and Froats 1998: 240-1) arguably sparked the modern  move to democratize.  5

Referring to U.S. democratisation foreign policy efforts, Anthony Lake (1993:3) cites the “strategy of enlargement”;  its goal is to establish an international community of “market democracies”.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 6

In  short,  DP’s  main  claim  is  that  democratic  states  do  not  engage  in  war  with

other democracies - even though they do go to war with non-democratic states.

At  the  heart  of  this  claim  are  two  discrete  yet  inter-related  causal  explanations.

First,  democratic  norms  and  culture  lead  to  peace;  and  second,  democratic

institutions  or  structure  effect  peace  (Maoz  and  Russett  1993).  The  first  strand

relies on a democratic ethos which is based on “peaceful competition, persuasion

and  compromise”  (Maoz  and  Russett  1993:  625).  The  structural  or  institutional

strand  of  DP  causal  logic  emphasizes  the  potential  for  electoral  retribution  to

discourage decision makers from waging war should the costs of war outweigh

the  benefits  (Doyle  1983).  Taken  together,  the  perception6  of  these  ideal  liberal

democratic features - practices of equality, accommodation and accountability -

are  not  only  meant  to  achieve  peace  between  democratic  states  but  also  peace

within democracies7.



According  to  DP,  the  structure  (defined  broadly  throughout  the  paper  as

practices and the underpinning ideals) of a liberal democratic political system is

said to manage conflict similarly to the  logic described below by Conrad Brunk

(2000: 30)8:



What a good political system does is to find effective rules and mechanisms for

deciding what laws and policies to follow, without actually ending the diversity

of  opinion  and  disagreement  about  these  things…Democracy…is  a  system  of

conflict management. It resolves questions by a set of rule-governed mechanisms

like  voting  (majority  rule),  establishing  rules  to  protect  the  minority  (or

minorities), and so on.



6  John Owen (1994: 125) introduces the notion that perception matters (an inter-subjective idea to be pursued later in  the paper) in that only when the opposing polities perceive each other as possessing these democratic norms and  institutions do the two causal strands of DP bring about pacific relations between democracies.  7

Refer again to the comments of Bruce Russett (1993b: 31),about the domestic analogy of DP.  8  See also statements by others like Brian Barry (2001: 122): "The defining feature of liberalism is, I maintain, the  principles of equal freedom that underwrite basic liberal institutions: civic equality, freedom of speech and religion,  non-discrimination, equal opportunity, and so on...I suggest simply that liberal principles are the fairest way of  adjudicating the disputes that inevitably arise as a result of conflicting interests and incompatible beliefs about the  social conditions of the good life."

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 7



Democracy, according to this logic, mitigates conflict by protecting diversity. The

need  for  political  violence  is  thus  removed.  The  protection  of  diversity,

moreover, is set to remain a key issue across global politics: as John Rawls (1971)

maintains  through  his  term  the  ‘reasonable  fact  of  pluralism’,  the  human

condition is marked by an ongoing and unending diversity of opinion regarding

‘the  good  life’.  One  would  in  deed  struggle  in  vain  to  find  any  time  in  history

when humanity held a universal viewpoint about how to live together. With this

in  mind,  each  citizen  -  and  thus  by  extension  collective  of  citizens9  -  has  a

guaranteed  capacity  or  freedom  to  pursue  unique  interests  within  a  liberal

democratic  structure  (Barry  2001:  122).  Liberal  democratic  individual  freedoms

include “civic rights such as freedom of religion” (Doyle 1983:5). As I explore in

more depth at several points below, these protections necessarily encompass the

protection of identity - when taking the view propounded by Alexander Wendt

(1992) among others that identity informs interests. The pursuit, for example, of

the  religious  freedoms  of  practice  and  association  are  the  realization  of  both

interests  and  identities  simultaneously.  Interests  and  identities,  in  this  way,  are

mutually reinforcing and incapable of being pursued separately.



In this way it becomes possible to maintain that liberal democracy has a special

relationship with identity. Arguably the hallmark of liberal democratic structures

pertains  to  the  above  promise  of  protection  for  equal  rights  that  permit  a

diversity  of  interests  and  thus  identity.  The  liberal  democratic  celebration  of

diversity  contrasts  the  central  aims  of  other  systems.  As  examples,

Marxist/communist systems strive for economic homogeneity; theocratic systems

encourage religious  similarity;  and  totalitarian/fascist  systems  emphasize  the

subservience  of  the  individual  to  the  nation.  More  accurately  though,  it  is  the



9  While in classical liberal thought there is no moral ontology for the “idea of collective rights” (Kymlicka 1989: 140),  another view argues there is space for a ‘collective’ value when seen as being derived from a contribution to the  individual value (Kymlicka 1989: 140; Barry 2001: 123; Ivison 2002: 6). Therefore, I conflate individual with group in  all respects throughout this paper.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 8

‘liberal’  component  of  a  liberal  democracy  which  contributes  the  intra-state

protections rather than the democratic variable.



Democracies  hold  the  potential  to  behave  illiberally  (Lynn-Jones  1996:  xxxii).

Without  a  liberal  element  democracies  are  able  to  descend  into  a  condition

whereby a majority can tyrannize the minorities10. And while the use of the term

‘democracy’ is explicit in the DP discussion, the term ‘liberal’ is generally implicit

when  not  mentioned,  but  it  is  equally  important  nonetheless.  The  two  discrete

concepts  are  frequently  conflated  due  to  their  developmental  and  conceptual

symbiosis.  For  instance,  Michael  Doyle  (1983:  4)  highlights  how  the  democratic

principles  of  individual  freedom  stand  as  a  defining  feature  of  liberalism.  John

Owen (1994: 118) writes: “I define a liberal democracy as a state that instantiates

liberal  ideas,  one  where  liberalism  is  the  dominant  ideology”.  Consequently,  I

now  delve  into  the  concept  of  ‘liberal’  in  order  to  elucidate  further  how  liberal

democracy links domestically to security and identity.



The  ‘liberal’  in  liberal  democracy  is  defined  by  equal  freedom  as  manifested  in

ways  like  freedom  of  speech  and  religion  as  well  as  equal  opportunity  (Barry

2001:  122).  No  different  to  the  notion  of  a  conflict  management  system  put

forward  by  Brunk  above,  liberalism  aims  to  address  the  terms  and  conditions

whereby  people  can  “live  together  peacefully  in  political  association”  (Ivison

2002:16).  Therefore,  illiberal  practices  of  democracies  serve  to  undermine  the

essence  of  DP’s  causal  logic  since  the  ethos  of  compromise  and  the  institutions

protecting  freedoms  associated  with  diverse  identities  are  no  longer  present.

Peaceful  competition  can  no  longer  be  guaranteed  in  an  illiberal  democratic

system.  Conceptually, the door is opened for political violence.





10  This relates to the concept of the ‘tyranny of the majority’ whereby leaders who are fairly elected nonetheless have  the capacity to legislate in ways that disadvantage those outside their majority constituents. Subjugation and  maltreatment of minorities results.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 9

A  separate  but  related  point  addresses  the  timelessness  and  universality  of

liberally  grounded  democratic  systems.  Specifically,  do  liberal  principles,  as

argued  by  Brian  Barry  (2001:122,  emphasis  added)  provide  “the  fairest  way  of

adjudicating  the  disputes that inevitably arise  as  a  result  of  conflicting  interests

and  incompatible  beliefs  about  the  social  conditions  of  the  good  life”?   If  so,

liberal  democratic  structures  are  essentially  the  zenith  of  political  system

evolution - capable of accommodating humanity universally and timelessly, with

every  society  able  to  enjoy  an  equal  protection  of  its  collective  identity  and

interests.  After  all,  liberalism  offers  everyone  identical  political  and  legal  rights

and thus one status of citizenship (Barry 2001: 7).  No special conditions, rights or

concessions should be granted to particular groups above others (Barry 2001).



There  is  however  an  opposing  view  which  challenges  this  claim.  A  perspective

broadly  known  as  ‘multiculturalism’  stresses  that  liberalism  is  inescapably

culturally  derived  and  therefore  not  neutral.  Liberalism  is  the  invention  of  a

particular cultural perspective and therefore cannot accommodate in the same or

equal  ways  cultures  that  derive  from  non-liberal  democratic  identity  origins

(Parekh 2000) because it is insensitive to their nuances (Ivison 2002: 16). Special

rights  may  be  necessary  to  ensure  the  outcome  of  equality  prevails  (Kymlicka

1989;  Parekh  2000).  The  relevant  consequence  that  the  multiculturalist

viewpoint11 brings to this paper is the belief that the liberal democratic structure

may  pose  a  nuanced  yet  fundamental  threat  to  the  identity  of  non-liberal

democratic group identities. It forces them to live together in ways contradictory

to  their  preferred  manner  and  identity.  I  expand  on  this  idea  in  the  section  on

identity.



These  contrasting  views  comprise  a  debate  broadly  referred  to  as  the

‘Multiculturalism/Liberalism’  debate.  As  indicated,  the  core  of  the  debate  is

about how liberalism is meant to manage diversity of interest and identity, which

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 10

in turn adds further evidence to support the assertion that liberal democracy and

identity hold a special relationship.



Overall,  the  examination  of  DP  and  liberal  democracy  in  this  section  serves  to

highlight  three  observations.  First,  DP  logic  links  the  protection  of  identity  to

security  within  liberal  democracies  by  maintaining  that  political  violence  does

not  occur  because  the  structure  accommodates  diverse  interests  and  thus

identities.  Second,  as  this  causal  logic  relies  on  liberal  principles,  democracies

that behave illiberally cannot expect the same pacific result. Third, insights from

the  multiculturalism/liberalism  debate  reveal  that  liberal  democracy  is  perhaps

not  a  universal  framework  by  which  non-liberal  democratic  societal  identities

prefer  to  live  -  and  thus  a  liberal  democratic  structure  can  be  seen  to  threaten

rather than protect the identity of such groups.



Competing Security Conceptions



The discussion to this point has skimmed over the concept of security, preferring

instead  to  concentrate  on  the  entry  point  for  the  overarching  investigation;

namely, DP logic and the characteristics of liberal democracy. The DP conception

of security fits within mainstream notions: it views states and state militaries as

the  narrow  purview  of  security  discourse  and  analysis.  This  conception  of

security has a long tradition going back further than the Fifth Century B.C. Greek

philosopher Thucydides in both realism and liberalism. Although the energy of

DP  and  liberalism  more  generally,  compared  to  realism,  is  directed  toward

evolving  away  from  violent  conflict,  the  referent  object  of  security  remains  the

state  and  the  consequential  source  of  threat  continues  to  come  from  state

militaries.  Overall,  however,  the  mainstream  conception  denies  a  broader

inclusion  of  referents  and  threat  sources  necessary  to  investigate  the  DP  blind

spot  of  intra-state  violence  with  the  prospect  of  threat  sources  beyond  state



11  See, for example, the work of Will Kymlicka, Bhiku Parekh, and Duncan Ivison.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 11

military  versus  state  military.  Thus,  an  alternate  conception  of  security  is

required.  This  rather  brief  section  is  dedicated  to  establishing  this  alternate

conception.



Searching further a field than the mainstream notion underpinning DP, I borrow

from  an  increasingly  popular  view12  which  maintains  that  ‘security’  can  mean

different  things  to  different  people  at  different  times13.  This  non-mainstream

approach identifies the mainstream as ‘problem-solving’ theory in that it takes a

set  of  existing  assumptions  as  given  and  then  proceeds  to  solve  a  (security)

problem  (Cox  1981),  rather  than  acknowledging  that  political  science  research,

and  thus  theory  formulation,  inescapably  involves  subjective  rather  than

objective  choices  for  both  its  framework  and  assumptions  (Huysmans  2002:  42;

Onuf  1970:  332).  To  the  non-mainstream  approach,  there  is  a  nexus  between

power  and  knowledge  (Smith  2000:  74).  “Theory  is  always  for  someone  and  for

some  purpose.”  (Cox  1981:  128)  Security  is  not  objective,  but  created  or

constructed through language inter-subjectively (Buzan et al. 1998: 57; Campbell

1992),  facilitated  by  power  broadly  defined  as  derived  from  institutional,

structural  and  material  sources  (McDonald  2004:  5).  A  profitable  way  thus  to

understand  the  security  discourse  is  to  recognize  that  theories  about  security  -

not dissimilar to other theories - tell a particular story.14 Each story emphasizes

certain aspects while de-emphasizing or ignoring others altogether.



Empirical  evidence  from  the  20th  Century  supports  the  idea  that  if  security  is

ultimately about the survival and well-being of humans - which is ostensibly the

core purpose for mainstream notions - then the potential for an intra-state locus

of  security  is  quite  valid.  During  the  20th  Century  threats  of  armed  force  to



12  Particularly in the past 25 years, an increasing number of scholars have made compelling arguments highlighting  mainstream problematique. See the numerous publications of Michael Shapiro, Steve Smith, Christian Reus-Smit,  Robert Cox, Immanuel Wallterstein and Johan Galtung as just a few examples.  13

I am indebted to Edward Locke and Matt McDonald for this particular way of phrasing the inter-subjective notion of  security.   14  My use of a ‘story’ metaphor, in relation to investigating the security debate, owes much to the work of Steve Smith  (2000: 74) and also Roland Bleiker (2000: 9)

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 12

individuals  came  much  more  from  the  military  and  policing  forces  of  the

inhabitants’  own  state  -  at  a  rate  of  more  than  five  to  one  (Bassiouni  cited  in

Madigan  1998)  -  than  those  of  other  states  like  suggested  by  the  mainstream

view.  The  large  portion  of  these  internal  deaths  were  due  to  the  domestic

‘security’  practices  of  tyrannical  regimes,  while  another  substantial  percentage

refers to organized intra-state political violence between groups and/or the state

forces.15  Nonetheless,  the  vast  number  of  violent  armed  conflicts  since  World

War II has occurred at the intra-state, instead of the mainstream’s inter-state, level

(Holsti  1991;  Reilly  2000).16  Chechnya,  Bosnia  and  Somalia  are  a  few  of  the

abundant  examples  of  intra-state  political  violence.  Human  individuals  often

experience  insecurity  in  ways  that  have  little  to  do  with  state  militaries  or

military issues (Ullman 1983; Waever 1995: 47).



Barry  Buzan  is  foremost  among  those  thinkers  to  put  forth  a  conception  of

security  which  considers  referent  objects  and  threat  sources  outside  of  the

mainstream boundaries17. Buzan puts forth five sectors - namely the political, the

military,  the  economic,  the  environmental,  and  the  societal  -  from  which  to

analyze security. Therefore, the importance of the move to borrow from alternate

conceptions of security is this: the referent object of security can relate to a sub-state  society  and  the  threat  source  can  stem from other than the material might

and presence of a state military.





15  According to a study completed by Bassiouni cited in the Madigan (1998) article, in the 20th Century there were  some 203 million “man-made” fatalities. Only 33 million (less than one in five) were due to traditional, inter-state  military clashes, whereas the vast majority were, instead, caused by state actors - tyrannical regimes in particular - on  their own populace.  16

Holsti’s (1991: 273-278) review of total violent conflicts from 1945 to 1989 concluded that of the 58 conflicts that  fit their definition of battle deaths > than 1,000, they found that 22 were traditional interstate with the remaining  majority being intra-state. Reilly’s (2000: 162) analysis of conflict found that of the 110 major conflicts that occurred  between 1989 and 1999, only seven were traditional inter-state while the other 103 took place within existing states.  17

Buzan’s moves to broaden the security debate have been described as “a watershed” in the evolution of security  studies (Booth 1991: 317) and “path breaking” in its effect (Knudsen 2001: 358).

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 13

This alternative understanding of security is encapsulated by a conceptualization

called  ‘securitization’18.  Developed  by  a  group  of  scholars  dubbed  ‘The

Copenhagen  School’,  securitization  tells  how  security  threats  escalate  in  a

constructed  social  world  by  capturing  the  way  in  which  processes  of  social

interaction  form  as  well  as  alter  interests,  and  in  doing  so  actually  create  or

construct  security.  Securitization  thus  contrasts  the  mainstream’s  notion  of

security  escalation  (i.e.  the  security  dilemma)  which  is  founded  on  the  rational

choice  ‘logic  of  consequentialism’  whereby  actors’  interests  and  preferences  are

mainly  fixed  during  processes  of  interaction (March and Olsen 1998: 948-951). I

dedicate  appreciable  attention  to  the  logic  of  securitization  now  since  later  it

forms  the  foundation  for  the  investigation  of  political  violence  within  liberal

democratic structures.



As  with  mainstream  depictions,  securitization’s  security  is  about  threats  to  the

existence  of  referent  objects  (Buzan  et  al.  1998:  23-24).  However,  securitization

differs in fundamental ways to the mainstream’s version of threat escalation and

in doing so it accommodates a broadened inter-subjective lens of security (to be

discussed  in  more  detail  in  a  subsequent  section)  which  enables  the  paper’s

principal investigation of  DP’s intra-state  claim. At the  same time  securitization

shares  some  conservative  elements  such  as  the  retention  of  existing  power

structures (Williams 2004: 227) and the ‘us’ versus ‘them’ oppositional mentality

(Bilgin  et  al.  cited  in  Williams  2004:  227).  Due  to  word  length  considerations,  I

limit the below elaboration to two crucial contentions.



First, securitization privileges language as central to security analysis. By simply

saying  “security”,  actors  (called  ‘securitizing  actors’)  invoke  the  right  to  use

whatever means necessary to stop a threatening development (Waever 1995: 55).

Speech “injects” security into issues (Buzan et al. 1998: 204), which therefore have



18  This conception is most comprehensively articulated in Buzan et al., (1998) Security: A New Framework for  Analysis, yet its bases are also found in other articles and books, primarily by Ole Waever, but also from other scholars

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 14

no  ‘objective’  core  claim  to  the  security  label.  Whether  or  not  the  issue  holds  a

material potential to extinct a referent object is immaterial because interpretation

is  what  matters to  this  conception  of  security.  Consequently,  so-called  ‘illusory’

threats can become security agenda issues because securitization logic denies that

‘real’ (i.e. objective) threats exist (Buzan et al. 1998: 39-42). President George Bush

Sr.’s  rather  sudden  claim  in  1989  that  drugs  constituted  “the  gravest  domestic

threat  facing”  the  nation  and  thus  drugs  must  be  fought  with  extra-ordinary

measures  (Campbell  1992:  172)  illustrates  this  notion.  The  inter-subjective

grounding for this conception of language is a ‘speech act’, which means the “act

of  speaking  in  a  form  that  gets  someone  else  to  act”,  and  where  its  success

depends upon the addressee’s response (Onuf 1970: 327-328).  The specific form

of  speech  act  used  to  securitize  an  issue  “construct(s)  a  plot  that  includes  an

existential threat, point of no return, and a possible way out” (Buzan et al. 1998:

33).



The litmus test for security is the successful mobilization of an audience - in the

name  of  the  issue(s)  being  portrayed  by  securitizing  actors  as  ‘security’  threats

(Buzan  et  al.  1998:  25).  Simply  put,  without  a  mobilization  outside  of  normal

political procedures the issue cannot be considered a ‘security’ issue (Buzan et al.

1998: 23-24). This approach avoids the enduring problematic inherent in security

dilemma  logic  of  how  to  determine  whether  an  actor’s  intentions  are  benign  or

malign (Hollis and Smith 1990: 172). The locus of security analysis rather is “who

can ‘do’ security in the name of what?” (Buzan et al. 1998: 45). Language, rather

than  the  military  build  up  of  the  security  dilemma’s  logic,  is  the  force  driving

security  threat  escalations.  Invoking  the  term  security,  hence,  can  be  seen  as  a

“powerful political tool” when it comes to the behavior of both governments and

populations (Buzan 1991: 370) and sub-state groups for that matter.





generally affiliated with the Copenhagen Peace Research Institute.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 15

Yet,  what  distinguishes  a  security  related  speech  act  that  successfully  mobilizes

from  one  that  fails?  In  short,  the  exercise  of  power  relies  broadly  on

legitimization (Bourdieu cited in Swartz 1997: 6). Therefore, a second contention

of securitization pertains to those factors which may be seen to facilitate (but do

not  determine)  the  mobilization  outcome  so  essential  to  threat  escalation.

‘Facilitating  conditions’  comprise  the  following:  a)  the  speech  act  outlines

emergency  measures  purportedly  capable  of  overcoming  the  threat;  b)  the

securitizing  actor  must  have  social  capital  (legitimacy)  in  the  eyes  of  the

audience; c) “features of the alleged threats” can be referenced (Buzan et al. 1998:

32-33). The last point encompasses the idea that material components effect limits

upon  human  agency  to  construct  a  particular  reality  (Onuf  1970)  and  is

developed further in one of the subsequent sections.



Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 16

To  these  I  add  a  fourth  condition  which  serves  to  ground  the  others:  d)  the

cognitive  bias  of  the  audience19  coincides  with  a  securitizing  attempt.  This

condition  relies  on  the  proposition  that  humans  generally  accept  arguments

which  confirm  their  pre-formed  beliefs  about  ‘reality’  while  tending  to  reject

those arguments which contradict existing beliefs. This matters fundamentally to

discussions  about  securitization  attempts  because  the  exact  same  material  and

ideational  phenomena  (e.g.  an  argument’s  logic,  the  securitizing  actor,  and

external references) can then be interpreted with dramatically different meaning

depending  on  the  audience’s  pre-conceived  views  of  ‘reality’20.  In  other  words,

the  construction  of  meaning  and  identity  is  influenced  by  inherited  notions  of

what is or is not perceived as reasonable (Tarrow 1998: 200-203). Humans do not

start  the  contemplation  of  a  securitizing  attempt  from  a  cognitively  neutral

position,  and  therefore,  this  fourth  facilitating  condition  undergirds  the  other

conditions  since  they  are  unavoidably  interpreted  through  a  pre-formed

cognitive  filter.  Moreover,  this  fourth  condition  helps  to  explain  why,  for

example,  the  Bush  administration’s  securitizing  move  to  invade  Iraq  resonated

widely among the conservative elements of the American public and not among

the  more  liberal  audiences  -  despite  the  fact  both  groups  lived  in  the  same

overall state structure21.



Securitization  attempts,  overall,  are  constrained  by  socially  constructed  limits

(Buzan et al. 1998: 39). Facilitating conditions contribute directly to these limits in

a  constraining  or  enabling  sense.  The  study  of  how  socially  constructed  limits



19  I draw directly here from the notion of ‘habitus’ put forth by Pierre Bourdieu (cited in Swartz 1997: 95-116) where  habitus is broadly about “a set of deeply internalized master dispositions that generate action” and perceptions, related  to a “cultural unconscious” that corresponds to “earlier socialization” (Bourdieu cited in Swartz 1997: 101-103). In  short, each group may be said to contain a different potential predisposition which, in turn, greatly influences its  perceptions and thus helps to explain why the same securitizing attempt resonates to such different degrees across  different audiences.   20

Sidney Tarrow (1998: 200-206) uses notions with some elements in common to Bourdieu when he talks about these  preexisting frameworks. Two which apply here broadly are the concepts of “culturally familiar repertoires” and  “cultural frames”.  21

See, for example, a poll done by  Program on International Policy Attitudes in 2003 on the Iraq War and  misperceptions of facts about the war where Republican voters were - across the board - more likely to have  misperceptions about the rhetoric coming from the Bush Administration concerning the war.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 17

affect securitization is thus a key component of security studies (Buzan et al 1998:

39). After all, in order to successfully break the political rules a securitizing move

must  be  legitimized  (Buzan  et  al.  1998:  25).  In  summary,  the  “way  to  study

securitization  is  to  study  discourse  and  political  constellations…”  Buzan  et  al.

(1998: 25). This view of security as constructed through primarily language based

upon  power  relations  contrasts  fundamentally  the  mainstream  belief  that

security is determined prior to and in spite of the influences of social interaction -

and where language is only a periphery factor used to simply either to describe

or conceal the objective existence of security.



Identity: Security and Liberal Democracy



Having created the space for a conception of security which relates to intra-state

referents and principal threats other than state militaries, the discussion to follow

continues  this  trajectory  with  a  focus  on  identity.  In  this  section  I  look  at  the

relationships between identity and security, identity in general, and the linkages

between  identity  and  liberal  democracy.  What  are  the  qualities  of  identity  and

how  might  these  qualities  relate  to  conflict?  Furthermore,  what  relationships

does identity hold with liberal democratic systems?



However,  I  preface  the  examination  with  a  basic  observation  intended  to  stress

the  importance  and  centrality  of  identity  in  political  science  investigations

generally: identity underscores how humans organize and therefore understand

the world. Hence, identity is an inescapable dimension of being (Campbell 1992:

9). As William Connolly (1995: 165) so summarily puts it: “Boundaries abound”.

Without identity boundaries demarcating concepts we are left with what William

James (cited in Huntington 1993: 186) called “a bloomin’ buzzin’ confusion”. The

direct relevance of this observation to this investigation begins to come into full

view when considering that identity boundaries allow us to distinguish humans

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 18

from  animals,  culture  from  nature,  and  between  genders,  races,  classes,  and

nations (Connolly 1995: 165). I now discuss four consequences of this.



Firstly, the use of identity to distinguish one thing from another is the foundation

for insecurity and conflict. Security and identity are ineluctably related; after all,

something  has  to  be  identified  in  order  to  security  it  (G.M.  Dillon  cited  in

Campbell 1992: 199). This becomes vital because it allows for the demarcation of

‘us’ versus ‘other’, ‘domestic’ from ‘foreign’ (Campbell 1992:9) without which an

‘enemy’ could not be identified. In conflict, basic questions are asked like: “What

side  are  you  on?”  or  “What  are  you?”  (Huntington  1993:  27).  Through  identity

we  not  only  more  clearly  know  ‘us’  when  we  are  able  to  compare  ourselves  to

‘other’; we do not even have an ‘us’ until we have established an ‘other’ (Ignatieff

1994).



Secondly,  this  identity  demarcation  enables  the  mobilization  of  audiences  to

carry out conflict. Consistent with an ‘instrumentalist’  view22, identity serves as

an essential tool by which to mobilize, direct and sustain conflict. Moreover, for

the purposes of effective mobilization, the simpler the identity demarcations are

the  better.  Simple  dichotomous  ‘us’  versus  ‘them’  statements,  which  ignore  the

multi-dimensional nature of identity and fail to acknowledge the complexity and

interconnectedness of our lives nevertheless prove more effective (Said 2001: 3).

No  matter  what  the  particular  boundaries  are  identified  as,  identity’s  role  in

mobilization proves indispensable to the pursuit of political goals.



Thirdly, and as a corollary to the last point, because identity forms the basis for

interests (Wendt 1992), the pursuit of political goals (i.e. interests) is unavoidably

the pursuit of identity. In other words, superpower identities inform superpower

interests,  small  power  identities  inform  small  power  interests  and  so  forth.

Canada,  for  example,  is  better  able  to  project  an  identity  of  ‘good  international

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 19

citizen’ when the interests it pursues adhere to that particular identity. Otherwise

put, the seemingly ubiquitous struggles over interests which culminate in conflict

are inescapably struggles about identity.



Fourthly, because identity provides humans with a sense of belonging (Ignatieff

1994),  it  provides  the  emotional  underpinnings  for  issues  of  security.  As  social

creatures, humans find solace and comfort in sameness (Thakur 2003: 2). Identity,

to those within the ‘school of culture’, offers a “sense of secure belonging and a

set of scripts that give meaning to individual lives.” (Gutmann 2002: 543) Actors

which  depict  issues in  terms  of  threat  and  survival  in  order  to  mobilize  masses

for  political  goals  rely  upon  these  emotional  foundations.  These  emotional

foundations are not to be conflated with the primordialist ideal of identity that it

is, in and of itself, the cause of conflict23.





22  See, for example, Lake and Rothchild (1998) for further explanation of this notion.   23  See Lake and Rothchild (1998: 5) for a brief explanation of the primordialist position.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 20

The above discussion about the relationships between identity and (in)security is

underpinned by a certain conception of identity. I turn now briefly to qualities of

identity,  generally,  which  serve  as  prerequisites  for  an  argument  relating  the

intra-state DP security investigation. Overall, identity can be known as ‘supple’ -

not  fixed  -  along  the  following  three  lines.  First,  identity  is  multi-dimensional

(Smith 1991: 4) since humans can be described accurately by multiple identities at

once.  Symbols  -  such  as  language  (Gow  2002),  food  (Allen  2002:  186-214),

territory  (Mayall  1995),  and  values24  -  help  humans  to  grasp  these  identity

dimensions.  This  aspect  allows  leaders  to  pick  and  choose  which  identity

dimension  suits  their  political  goals  best.  At  the  same  time,  it  reinforces  the

ineluctable  link  between  the  pursuit  of  interests  (e.g.  religious  and  ethnic

practices) and identity. Second, identity is relational. “There is no identity without

difference.” (Connolly 1995: xx) Otherwise expressed: “Difference  is constituted

in relation to identity” (Campbell 1992: 9).  The dichotomies of ‘us’ versus ‘them’

for  the  purpose  of  mobilization  rely  on  this  feature.  Third,  identity  is  dynamic.

Owing  largely  to  its  multi-dimensional  and  relational  features,  identity  has  the

capacity  if  not  the  tendency  to  change.  Some  labels,  like  those  pertaining  to

ideological  or  political  stances  for  example,  may  be  changed  almost  instantly

(Huntington  1993:27).  Because  identity  can  be  viewed  as  lived,  performed  and

thus reinforced daily through the practices and customs of society (Gow 2002: 2-3; Campbell 1992), it holds the  potential for constant flux. Consider the  cultural

identity changes imposed on indigenous Americans or Australians by European

settlers.



A crucial conclusion of identity’s suppleness is that, like security, delineations of

identity  are  ultimately  constructed  inter-subjectively  (Reus-Smit  2001).  In  other

words, boundaries for a particular identity are built through an emphasis on only



24  See, for example, an election email sent by George W. Bush to voters which emphasizes ‘value’ symbols like liberty,  freedom, and religious conviction vis-ÃÂ -vis a particular notion of the American identity. (The Real "Heart and Soul" of  America>Date sent: Fri, 30 Jul 2004 00:10:47 -0400 )

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 21

a  subset  of  the  many  identity  labels  that  arguably  apply.  Moreover,  context

matters integrally to this construction (Garb 1998: 186), and therefore ideational,

structural and material forces impact not only a construction’s shape but also its

resonance.  Identity  is  not  fixed  or  immutably  pre-given  by  God  or  nature

(Campbell 1992: 9). Identity is not about a simple search and discover, rather it is

ultimately a matter of choice and decision (Ra 1996: 2-3) which in turn allows for

Benedict  Anderson’s  (1991)  widely-known  idea  of  ‘imagined  communities’.

Identity  constructions  are  political  by  their  very  natures  and  thus  the

deconstruction  of  identity  reveals  the  politics  behind  the  construction  (Butler

1989:148).  For  instance,  the  identity  of  ‘Asia’  is  said  to  have  started  as  ‘non-Europe’, invented and defined by Europeans for European uses (Ra 1996: 3).



Fortunately, identity constructions are not necessarily conflictual or oppositional

inherently.  As  William  Connolly  (1995:  165)  argues,  identity  contains  the

potential  for  rather  than  the  inevitability  of  conflict.  On  the  one  hand,  the

assertions made above indicate that identity difference may be used to demonize

the ‘other’ to promote violent conflict (Campbell 1992: 189) as illustrated by this

statement from George W. Bush: ‘terrorists groups’ would use WMD “without a

hint of conscience.” (Bumilller 2002). Societies thus are taught by political leaders

to either fear outsiders or blame ills that befall them on others (Thakur 2003: 2).

On  the  other  hand,  constructions  of  identity  difference  can  avoid  the

demonization  ploy  and  instead  weave  a  notion  of  acceptance.  The  direction  for

an  accepting  construction  of  identity  is  encapsulated  well  within  a

conceptualization  termed  the  ‘ethics of  difference’.  To  this  ideal  acceptance  and

toleration  are  the  ways  by  which  difference  is  engaged  (Bleiker  2001:  121).

Support  for  Connolly’s  above  assertion  is  found  in  study  data  generated  on

quantitative  analysis  for  all  civil  wars  occurring  since  1965  that  indicates  ethnic

heterogeneity  of  political  unit/state  had  no  bearing  on  incidence  of  civil  war

(Collier  and  Hoeffler  1998).  Hence,  identities  can  be  constructed  to  encourage

conflict, or conversely, to promote peaceful co-existence.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 22



This contention matters because the language which constructs identity becomes

a key to security analysis. It places the focus on how identity is being constructed

by  a  given  actor(s)  within  the  various  political  arguments  that  unavoidably

construct  a  given  identity.  Does  a  particular  identity  construction  encourage

conflictual  or  accommodating  behavior  by  its  members  towards  others?

Methodologically  we  must  investigate  which  interests  are  at  stake  and  who  the

actors are that are pursuing each of these particular interests (McSweeney 1996:

90-1) and thus identities.



The  idea  of  securitization  captures  those  constructions  which  encourage

conflictual  trajectories  for  behavior  since  it  articulates  how  language  is  used  to

mobilize audiences by ‘injecting’ security. A further development which aids the

DP intra-democratic investigation occurs by combining securitization’s escalatory

logic  with  another  Copenhagen  School  concept,  the  Societal  Identity  Security

lens. Societal Identity Security places group identity overtly and primarily as the

referent  object  of  security  (Buzan  et  al.  1998).  This  amalgam  introduces  a

conceptualization whereby actors use language principally to construct the need

to escalate security measures in order to protect group identity.



At this point, it becomes useful to outline briefly the Copenhagen School’s idea of

Societal  Identity  Security.  As  mentioned  in  the  security  conceptions  section,  of

Buzan’s five security sectors I am most interested in the societal sector logic due

to its connections with identity. The choice of a sector with an identity emphasis

is  justifiable  for  this  particular  investigation  because  of  liberal  democracy’s

special linkages to identity protection discussed earlier. Societal Identity Security

logic  implies  that  threats  to  the  societal  identity  referent  may  be  seen  to  come

from other societal identities first and foremost, rather than immediate threats to

the  physical  survival  of  humans  either  from  state  militaries  or  other  threat

sources such as poverty. Different to the more popular idea of ‘identity politics’

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 23

where  identity  serves  primarily  to  distinguish  ‘us’  from  ‘other’  (Stavenhagen

1990:  119)  for  purposes  of  mobilizing  audiences25,  identity  is  itself  the  referent

object of security. The term ‘identity entrepreneurs’  is introduced at  this juncture

to  denote  securitizing  actors  who  use  identity  (primarily)  as  both  the  referent

object and the threat source of security26. Threats to societal identity can be seen

along a spectrum of intentional and programmatic to unintentional (Buzan et al.

1998: 121).



The  concept  of  ‘cultural  genocide’  defined  broadly  as  the  forced  assimilation  of

sub-state groups (Ryan 1995: 9) fits within the Societal Identity Security spectrum

at  the  intentional  and  programmatic  end.  The  Basque  society  in  contemporary

Spain  serves  as  an  ideal  example  of  deliberate  and  systematic  identity  threat

waged,  initially  at  least,  by  the  Franco  regime.  Two  closely-related  processes

cited  by  Ole  Waever  (1995:  43)  encapsulate  the  Basque  experience:  firstly,

suppressing  the  expression  of  identity  through  such  measures  as  forbidding  the

use of language, names, and dress of a society; and secondly, interfering with an

identity’s  ability  to  reproduce  itself  by,  for  example,  closing  the  institutions

and/or  practices  that  allow  identity  reproduction.  On  the  other  hand,  more

subtle  (and  perhaps  less  intentional)  forms  of  identity  threat  can  be  seen  in  the

processes Buzan et al. (1998: 121) term ‘vertical’ and/or ‘horizontal competition’

whereby the identity of a society is overtaken by other identities in an absorption

manner.  The  Quebecoise  ethnicity  in  Canada  appears  to  fit  this  conceptual

category  in  that  the  enunciated  concerns  relate  to  the  loss  of  Francophone

identity  due  to  English  identity  pressures.  Many  intra-state  conflicts  between

states and sub-state groups stem from contestations where identity occupies the

prime  referent  of  threat  (Buzan  et  al.  1998:  132)  -  regardless  of  which  of  these

specific category forms the threat assumes.



25  This notion is used widely in the ethnic, nationalism conflict literature which took centre stage in the 1990’s in  particular.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 24



Societal  identity  threat  logic  refers  to  situations  where  identity  is  emphasized  as

the  referent.  However,  the  construction  of  societal  identity  itself  has  wider

ramifications  than  Buzan’s  societal  security  sector.  Like  Wendt’s  (1992)  position

that  identity  underpins  interests,  I  maintain  that  societal  identity  constructions

comprise  recommended  action  across  all  interest  categories  (e.g.  economic,

ideological  and  so  forth).  The  vision,  for  example,  of  the  American  identity  put

forth by President George W. Bush contains either explicit or implicit behavioral

recommendations  on  a  vast  array  of  interests.  These  interests  are  incapable  of

being  divorced  from  one  another  without  altering  overall  identity.  The

constructions  tell  a  society  how  to  live  together.  Societal  identity  constructions

underscore Buzan’s other four sectors vis-ÃÂ -vis conflict and the pursuit of human

interests in two relevant ways described below.



First, societal identity constructions are themselves a source of threat - directly as

well  as  indirectly.  Indirectly,  identity  construction  contains  the  possibility  for

identity  threat  since  the  adoption  and  practice  of  one  identity  necessarily

precludes  the  fulfillment  of  another  by  the  same  audience.  A  member  of  the

Basque  society,  for  instance,  cannot  simultaneously  be  a  member  of  the  (non-Basque)  Castilian  society  with  its  contrasting  societal  identity  construction.  The

multi-dimensionality of identity does not allow for mutually exclusive identities

such as ‘father’ and ‘non-father’. Directly, within identity constructions are found

that  identity’s  stance  toward  the  existence  and  identity  of  ‘others’.  Stances

toward  the  ‘other’  can  be  viewed  along  a  continuum  of  intention  ranging  from

‘accepting’  to  ‘eliminating’.   In  other  words,  does  a  particular  construction,  the

guidelines of how to live, encourage acceptance of others or incite a treatment of

domination  toward  all  those  who  are  purportedly  different?   Is  a  society’s

existence,  in  the  words  of  President  George  W.  Bush,  a  clear  cut  battle  of  those



26  ‘Identity entrepreneurs’ are notably more identity laden than those actors using identity rather singularly to mobilize  masses for political interests less about identity security and more about power, territory or economic interests as in

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 25

who are ‘good’ fighting against those who are ‘evil’? Or is it more about the need

to  negotiate  with  and  understand  those  holding  differing  views?  Because  the

construction  of  societal  identity  (and  security  for  that  matter)  is  dynamic  by  its

nature, constructions can and do vary according to time, space and securitizing

actor.  This  means  constructions  should  be  understood  and  analyzed  in  context

rather than the temptation to generalize across occurrences.



Michael  Barnett  (1999)  provides  a  compelling  case  study  analysis  on  these

aspects.  He  illustrates  how  group  identity  constructions  necessarily  contain

security  prescriptions  toward  the  ‘other’.  Barnett  recounts  how  two  Israeli

leaders  put  forth  contrary  notions  of  identity  for  the  Israeli  people:  one

construction  advocates  the  continued  subjugation  of  and  oppositional

relationship  to  the  Palestinian  people  whereas  the  other  urges  a  tolerant

treatment  of  ‘them’.  The  suppleness  of  identity  permits  actors  to  construct

societal identities that contain different approaches to treatment of the ‘other’. At

the  same  time,  the  case  study  demonstrates  how  the  struggle  to  realize  a

particular  identity  construction  by  following  its  recommended  behavior  entails

the need to secure one identity at the expense of the other. Identity constructions

have these two capacities: namely, to threaten by their mere existence, but also to

direct how to treat other identities.







much of the ‘identity politics’ literature.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 26

A second and corollary point is that societal identity constructions relate directly

to  the  type  of  political  system  governing  that  society.  Political  systems  can  be

thought of as extensions or manifestations of societal identity, in that the systems

are essentially ‘structures’ defined earlier broadly as ideals and practices. Ideals

and  practices  of  a  structure  stem  from  identity  constructions  exhorting  or

reinforcing certain ways of living together. Structures both constrain and enable

the  agency  of  (internal)  actors (Reus-Smit  2001:  218)27;  structures  thus  affect  the

capacity of an actor to securitize an issue like group identity. Liberal democracy,

hence,  is  a  political  structure  which  forms  and  evidences  a  significant  part  of  a

certain  societal  identity  construction;  it  contains  the  ideals  and  practices  which

tell  those  members  of  its  society  how  to  live  together.  Therefore,  a  political

system can be seen as a source of threat to societal identity similar to the ‘direct’

manner mentioned above in which a societal identity construction articulates the

way by which to treat the ‘other’.



How  do  these  assertions  about  societal  identity  constructions  assist  the

investigation? Overall, societal identity constructions become the core of security

analysis since the different articulations contain the ideals and practices by which

to  treat  ‘others’.  Methodologically,  by  evaluating  what  each  set  of  actors  puts

forward for its specific societal identity construction, like Barnett (1999) does and

McSweeney  (1996)  advise,  the  interests  of  the  group  are  known  as  part  and

parcel of its identity. The same applies to how the constructions that underpin a

political  system  treat  others,  in  addition  to  the  interpretation  of  that  system  by

actors. A  political  system  itself  can  serve  as  a  nuanced  form  of  societal  identity

threat  to  persons  whose  societal  identity  constructions  are  at  odds  with  the

system’s underlying practices and ideals. A political system may then be used as

an ‘external feature’ by societal leaders attempting to evidence sources of societal

identity  insecurity.  It  is  here  that  the  link  to  liberal  democracy  comes  full  circle



27  I refer here specifically to the ‘structurationist’ strand of constructivism which maintains that agents and structures  are mutually constituted (Reus-Smit 2001: 218).

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 27

because the ideal liberal democratic structures - the principles of equality and the

practices of compromise - according to DP’s causal logic, promise to restrain the

construction of predatory identities by protecting the pursuit of unique identity.

Identity  in  a  liberal  democratic  structure,  it  is  said,  cannot  be  used  to  escalate

political violence due to the conflict management design of the political system.



Hence,  in  the  ways  described  above,  identity  plays  integral  roles  vis-ÃÂ -vis  the

prospect  of  political  violence  in  liberal  democracy.  Not  only  can  identity  be

placed as the referent object and threat source of security, it serves as the means

by  which  threat  escalation  is  organized.  Moreover,  (security)  ethics  of  how  to

treat others are inescapably a part of group identity construction. Societal identity

becomes  the  principal  referent  object  and  threat  source  of  security  when  the

constructions are more clearly about a mutual exclusivity of identity rather than

an acceptance and co-existence of identity difference. It is important, however, to

reiterate  that  the  ‘presence’  of  these  societal  identity  construction  threats  is  not

objective;  forces  of  threat  do  not  matter  to  security  analysis  until  securitization

attempts commence and mobilization is ultimately garnered around the issue of

societal identity security.





Conclusions



I  began  the  paper  by  pointing  to  DP’s  assumption  that  democracies  are  able  to

avoid  political  violence  due  to  liberal  democratic  norms  and  practices,  and  by

maintaining  that  the  prospect  of  political  violence  within  democracies  is  a

significant  issue  regarding  efforts  for  global  peace  because  of  the  growing

pervasiveness of democratic regimes. The investigation next engaged the security

debate in order to come away with a conception of security that applies outside

the traditional state referent and state military threat source notion and therefore

to  the  intra-state  arena.  It  was  at  this  juncture  that  I  introduced  the  inherent

influences  and  roles  played  by  identity  -  with  particular  regard  to  a  liberal

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 28

democratic  structure  and  its  special  relationship  to  identity.  I  return  to  the

paper’s original questions. How does liberal democracy affect political violence?

And more specifically, what are the relationships between identity and political

violence  in  a  liberal  democratic  structure?  The  below  conclusions  offer  insights

on an area which the DP supposition dangerously misrecognizes as incapable of

political violence.



In  its  ideal  form,  the  liberal  democratic  structure  paradoxically  both  constrains

and  enables  attempts  to  escalate  threats  to  societal  identity.  On  the  one  hand,

liberal democracy constrains violent escalation in that its practices and ethos are

relatively  accommodating  of  identity  expression  on  many  levels,  unlike

totalitarian  systems  such  as  Stalinist  Russia  or  present-day  theocratic  Iran  for

instance. At its core liberal democracy promises to protect the pursuit of diverse

interests and thus, as I have maintained, identity. Citizens are free to select their

own identity. Hence, attempts by ‘identity entrepreneurs’ to argue that a liberal

democratic  system  is  intolerant  towards  identity  fulfillment  resonate  less  well

among the target audience. In other words, it becomes implausible to cast liberal

democratic practices as an ‘external feature’ (i.e. evidence) of identity repression.



On  the  other  hand,  liberal  democracy  enables  escalatory  moves.  The

accommodating  freedoms  afforded  by  liberal  democratic  ideals  and  practices  -

speech  in  particular  but  also  freedoms  of  expression  and  association  more

generally - facilitate efforts to disseminate constructions which securitize issues.

These  same  freedoms  are  not  afforded  in  totalitarian  systems.  Consequently,

identity  entrepreneurs  have  an  enhanced  opportunity  to  reach  and  mobilize  a

wide  audience  with  constructions  that  contain  violent  courses  of  action

purporting  to  protect  societal  identity  interests.  To  a  view  of  security  that

suggests  threat  is  not  objective  rather  perceived,  the  capability  to  spread  the

perception of threat means mobilization is possible - regardless of a threat’s ‘real’

existence.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 29



While the above conclusions refer directly to the exemplary principles of a liberal

democratic  structure,  the  messiness  of  the  social  world  brings  less  than  ideal

actualities.  Structures  influence  rather  than  determine  agency.  Therefore  the

question  becomes:  under  what  conditions  does  a  liberal  democracy  fail  to

constrain  the  recourse  to  political  violence  as  promised  above?  Otherwise  put:

under  what  conditions  might  security  arguments  about  threats  to  societal

identity resonate widely?



The  more  obvious  ‘conditions’  relate  to  illiberal  practices.28  Take  Israel’s

consistent discrimination against Arab Israelis in terms of political, property, and

citizenship rights (Benvenisti 1995) or the equally broad prejudicial treatment of

Black Americans leading to civil rights movements in the 1960’s. In such cases the

societal  identity  constructions  underpinning  the  practice  of  the  political  system

are  materially  and  ideationally  hostile  towards  certain  societal  identities;  the

system serves as a source of identity threat. This is in stark contrast to the

promise  of  liberal  democracy  serving  to  embrace  identity  diversity.

Consequently,  where  conditions  of  illiberal  practices  can  be  evidenced  as

‘external  features’  of  societal  identity  repression,  attempts  to  securitize  identity

threats  are  more  likely  to  be  successful.  Politically  violent  courses  of  action  for

the repressed, as in Northern Ireland and Spain, resonate more widely.



However, less obvious conditions exist as well. Of particular note here is whether

or not a society’s identity construction is based in the Western liberal democratic

mold.  This  relates  to  the  earlier  assertion  that  political  systems’  can  serve  as

nuanced  sources  of  societal  identity  threat  to  those  groups  whose  societal

constructions  differ.  Eastern  cultural  identities,  for  instance,  emphasize  a  quest

for  harmony  and  consensus,  whereas  Western  cultural  notions  focus  on  ‘rights’



28  A number of scholars take up the theme of conflict which relates to the “illiberal” behavior of democracies. See John  Owen 1994 and Sean Lynn-Jones 1996 for examples.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 30

(Bilveer  2000:  622),  individualism  and  egoism.  Consequently,  for  those  societies

which derive their identity from non-liberal democratic (Western) traditions, the

liberal  democratic  structure  may  itself  be  perceived  more  readily  as  a  threat  to

group  identity.  Under  this  latter  condition,  leaders  from  non-Western  like

societies  -  to  include  many  indigenous  societies  as  well  -  may  argue  more

convincingly  that  a  threat  to  the  reproduction  of  their  societal  identity  exists.29

The rhetoric of Osama bin Laden serves as an example here when he argues for

political  violence  against  the  Western,  primarily  liberal  democratic  influences

because they threaten his particular construction of an Islamic identity.



Taken together, these conclusions add insight as well as caution to the DP’s main

implication that world peace is furthered rather automatically with the growth of

democracy. Societal identity constructions matter significantly to the capacity to

escalate violence in a democracy. Each circumstance must be examined in its own

context  - within the  framework  of  these  broader  assertions - in  order  to  gain a

more accurate understanding of how liberal democracy affects political violence

and  identity.  A  better  understanding  about  the  relationships  between  liberal

democracy, political violence and identity is increasingly vital in a world where

democratic  structures  seem  poised  to  dominate  the  way  in  which  humans  live

together.



29  As indicated earlier, this point comes through in the multicultural debate (see Parekh 2000, Kymlicka 1989) but also  in other discussions, see for example, Richard Shapcott 2002, ‘Cosmopolitan Conversations: Justice Dialogue and the  Cosmopolitan Project’, Global Society, Vol. 16, No. 3, page 224.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 31

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY



Algappa, Muthiah. 1995. Political Legitimacy in Southeast Asia: The Quest for Moral  Authority. Ed Muthiah Algappa. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Aljazeera Web Site. 2003. “Haliburton Iraq Contracts worth $2Bn”.  http://english.aljazeera.net/NR/exeres/65753C17-BC3A-49A5-AD04-6418547B8CFF.htm, accessed 26/2/04.

Allen, Stewart Lee. 2002. In the Devil’s Garden: A Sinful History of Forbidden Food.  New York: The Ballantine Publishing Group.

Anderson, Benedict R. 1993. “Imagining East Timor”. Arena Magazine. No. 4  April-May.

Annan, Kofi A. 2000. “We the Peoples: The Role of the United Nations in the 21st  Century”. United Nations Millenium Report, Chapter 3, p.43-44.   08/22/01

Ayoob, Mohammed. 1991. “The Security Problematic of the Third World”. World  Politics. Vol 43: no 2, pp 257-83.

Ayoob, Mohammed 1997. “Defining Security: A Subaltern Realist Perspective”.  In Critical Security Studies eds. Keith Krause and Michael C. Williams.  Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Arendt, Hannah. 1968. Between past and future: eight exercises in political thought.  New York: Viking Press.

Baldwin, David A. 1997. “The Concept of Security”. Review of International  Studies. Vol 23, no 1, pp 5-26

Barnett, Michael. 1999. “Culture, Strategy and Foreign Policy Change: Israel’s  Road to Oslo”.  European Journal of International Relations.  Vol. 5 Issue 1, pp 5-36.

Barry, Brian. 2001. Culture and Equality. Cambridge: Polity Press.

BBC NEWS. “ETA: Key events. BBC News Online traces ETA's 35-year campaign  for a sovereign Basque state, which has cost more than 800 lives.”   , accessed  12/11/03.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 32

Bellamy, Alex J. and Matt McDonald.2002. “The Utility of Human Security':  Which Humans? What Security? A Reply to Thomas & Tow”. Security Dialogue.  Vol 33, no 3, pp373-377.

Benvenisti, Meron. 1995. Intimate Enemies: Jews and Arabs in a Shared Land.  Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Bhaskar, R. 1989. Reclaiming Reality: A Critical Introduction to Contemporary  Philosophy. London: Verso.

Bilveer, Singh. 2000. “Civil-Military Relations in Democratizing Indonesia:  Change Amidst Continuity”. Armed Forces and Society. Vol. 26, issue 4.

Bleiker, Roland. 2001. “Identity and security in Korea.” The Pacific Review. Vol. 14,  No. 1, pp 121-148.

Booth, Ken. 1991. “Security and Emancipation”. Review of International Studies.  Vol. 17.

Brown, Michael E. 1993. ed. Ethnic Conflict and International Security. Princeton,  NJ: Princeton University Press.

Brunk, Conrad G. 2000. “Shaping a Vision: The Nature of Peace Studies”. In  Patterns of Conflicts, Paths to Peace. Fisk and Schellenberg (eds.). Peterborough,  CAN: Broadview Press.

Bull, Hedley. 1977. The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics.  London: Macmillan.

Bumiller, Elizabeth. 12 March 2002. “Bush Vows to Aid Other Countries in War  on Terror”, The New York Times on the Web,  www.nytimes.com/2002/03/12/international /12PREX.html



Buzan, Barry. 1991. People States and Fear An Agenda for International Security  Studies in the Post-Cold War Era. Second Edition. Hemel Hempstead Hertfordshire,  UK: Harvester Wheatsheaf.



Buzan, Barry, Ole Waever and Jaap de Wilde. 1998. Security: A New Framework for  Analysis. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers.

Campbell, David. 1992. Writing Security United States Foreign Policy and the Politics  of Identity. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 33



Campbell, David. 1996. “Violent Performances: Identity, Sovereignty,  Responsibility”. In The Return of Culture and Identity in IR Theory, eds Yosef Lapid  and Freidrich Kratochwil. Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner.

Carr, Edward H. 1939. The Twenty Years’ Crisis 1919-1939. London: Macmillan  and Co. Ltd.

Collier, Paul. 2000. “Doing Well Out of War.” in Greed and Grievance: Economic  Agendas in Civil Wars. Eds Mats Berdal and David M. Malone. Boulder CO: Lynne  Rienner Publishers.

Collier, Paul and Anke Hoeffler. 1998. “On the Economic Causes of War.” Oxford  Economic Papers 50, no 4, October, pp 563-573.

Connolly, William E. 1995. The Ethos of Pluralization. Minneapolis: University of  Minneapolis Press.

Cox, Robert W. 1981. “Social Forces, States, and World Orders: Beyond  International Relations.” Millennium, 10:2.

Dauvergne, Peter. 1998. “Weak States, Strong States: A State-in-Society  Perspective”. In Weak and Strong States in Asia-Pacific Societies. Peter  Dauvergne ed. Canberra, Australia: Department of International Relations RPAS.

Deudney, Daniel. 1990. “The Case Against Linking Environmental Degradation  and National Security.” Millennium. Vol 19, no 3.

Deudney, Daniel. 1995. “Political Fission: State Structure, Civil Society, and  Nuclear Security Politics in the United States.”  In On Security. ed Ronnie D.  Lipschutz. New York: Columbia University Press.

Devetak, Richard. 2001. “Critical Theory”. in Theories of International Relations  2nd Edition. NY: Palgrave.

Dillon, Michael. 1996. Politics of Security: Towards a Political Philosophy of  Continental Thought. London: Routledge.

Doyle, Michael W. 1983. “Kant, Liberal Legacies, and Foreign Affairs”. In  Debating the Democratic Peace. eds Michael Brown, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and  Steven E. Miller. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, pp. 3-57.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 34

Dunne, Timothy and Brian C. Schmidt. 2001. ‘Realism’. in The Globalization of  World Politics: An introduction to international relations. eds John Baylis and Steve  Smith 2nd edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press

Elster, Jon. 1998. “Introduction”. Deliberative Democracy. Ed. Jon Elster.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Enloe, Cynthia. 1990. Bananas, Beaches and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of  International Politics.

Foucault, Michel. 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York:  Vintage.

Foucault, Michel. 1980. Power/Knowledge: Selected Writing and Other Writings 1972-1977. Colin Gordon ed. New York: Pantheon Books.

Foucault, Michel. 1984. “The Order of Discourse.” In Language and Politics.  Michael J. Shapiro ed. Oxford: Blackwell.

Freedom House. “Democracy’s Century: A Survey of Global Political Change in  the 20th Century. http://www.freedomhouse.org/reports/century.html, website  accessed 3/3/03.

Galtung, Johan. 1969. “Violence, Peace, and Peace Research.” Journal of Peace  Research. Vol  6.

Galtung, Johan. 1990.  “Cultural Violence.” Journal of Peace Research. Vol  27 no.3.

Garb, Paula. 1998. “Ethnicity, Alliance Building, and the Limited Spread of  Ethnic Conflict in the Caucasus”. In The International Spread of Ethnic Conflict: Fear,  Diffusion, and Escalation, eds.

Gilpin, Robert. 1981. War and Change in World Politics.  Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press.

Goldstein, Joshua S. 2001. International Relations.4th edn. NY: Longman.

Gow, Greg. 2002. The Oromo in Exile: From the Horn of Africa to the Suburbs of  Australia. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.

Gutmann, Amy. 2002. “Identity and Democracy: A Synthetic Perspective.” In  Political Science: The State of the Discipline. Ira Katznelson and Helen V. Milner eds.  New York: W.W. Norton and Company.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 35

Hollis, Martin and Steve Smith. 1990. Explaining and Understanding Int’l  Relations. Oxford Dlarendon Press

Holsti, Kalvei Jaakko. 1991. Peace and War: Armed Conflicts and International Order,  1648-1989. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Huntington, Samuel P. 1993. “The Clash of Civilizations?” Foreign Affairs. Vol 72:  Issue 3, pp 22-28

Huysmans, Jef. 2002. “Defining social constructivism in security studies: the  normative dilemma of writing security.” Alternatives: Global, Local, Political.  Vol 27, issue 1, p41-61).

Ignatieff, Michael. 1994. Blood and Belonging: Journeys into the New Nationalism.  London: Farrar Straus & Giroux.

Ivison, Duncan. 2002.  Post Colonial Liberalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press.

Jackson, Robert. 1990. Quasi-states: sovereignty, international relations, and the Third  World, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kaufman, Stuart J. 1996. “An ‘International’ Theory of Inter-Ethnic War”. Review  of International Studies. Vol. 22, No. 2. pp149-171.

Keohane, Robert O. 1986. Neorealism and Its Critics. ed. Robert Keohane. NY:  Columbia Uni. Press.

Klein, Bradley S. 1997. “Conclusion: Every Month  Is ‘Security Awareness  Month’”. In Critical Security Studies eds. Keith Krause and Michael C. Williams.  Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Knudsen, Olav F. 2001. “Post-Copenhagen Security Studies: Desecuritizing  Securitization.” Security Dialogue. Vol. 32, no. 3. pp355-368.

Krasner, Stephen D. and Daniel T. Froats. 1998. “Minority Rights in the  Westphalian Model”. In The International Spread of Ethnic Conflict: Fear, Diffusion,  and Escalation, eds. David A. Lake and Donald Rothchild. Princeton, NJ:

Princeton University Press, pp. 227-250.

Kratochwil, Friedrich. 1988. “The Protagorean Quest: Community Justice, and the  ‘Oughts’ and ‘Musts’ of International Politics. International Journal. Vol. 43

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 36

Kratochwil, Friedrich. 1993. “The Embarrassment of Changes: neo-Realism as the  Science of Realpolitik Without Politics. Review of International Studies. Vol 19. pp  73-93.

Kratochwil, Friedrich. 1989. Rules, Norms, and Decisions: On the Conditions of  Practical and Legal Reasoning in International Relations and Domestic Affairs.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kratochwil, Friedrich. 1987. “Rules, Norms, Values and the Limits of  ‘Rationality’”. Archiv fur Rechts- und Sozialphilosophie. Vol 73 pp 301-29.

Kymlicka, Will. 1989. Liberalism, Community and Culture. Oxford: Oxford  University Press.

Lake, Anthony. 1993.  “From Containment to Enlargement”, U.S. Department of  State, Bureau of Public Affairs. Dispatch. Vol. 4, No. 39.

Lake, David A. and Donald Rothchild. 1996. “Containing Fear: The Origins and  Management of Ethnic Conflict”. In Theories of War and Peace, eds. Michael E.  Brown, Owen R. Cote Jr., Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller. Cambridge,  MA: The MIT Press, pp.292-326.

Lijphart, Arend. 2004. “Constitutional Design for Divided Societies.” Journal of  Democracy. Vol 15, no 2. pp 96-109.

Linklater, Andrew. 2002. “The problem of Harm in World Politics: implications  for the sociology of states-systems.” International Affairs. Vol 78, no 2, pp 319-339.

Linklater, Andrew. 2001. “Rationalism”. in Theories of International Relations, 2nd  Edition. NY: Palgrave.

Lynn-Jones, Sean M. 1996. “Preface”. In Debating the Democratic Peace. Eds  Michael Brown, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller. Cambridge, MA: The  MIT Press, pp. ix-xxxiii



Madigan, Charles M. Oct 25, 1998. “One country’s Hero is another’s despot”.  Chicago Tribune - quotes a 1996 writing of M. Cherif Bassiouni)

Mansfield, Edward D. and Jack Snyder. 1995. “Democratization and the Danger  of War”. In Debating the Democratic Peace. eds Michael Brown, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, pp. 301-336.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 37

Maoz, Zeev. 1997. “The Controversy over the Democratic Peace: Rearguard  Action or Cracks in the Wall?” International Security. Vol.22, No. 1, pp 162-198.

Maoz, Zeev, and Bruce M. Russett. 1993. “Normative and Structural Causes of  Democratic Peace, 1946-86” American Political Science Review 87: 624-38.

March, James G. and Johan P. Olsen. 1998. “The Institutional Dynamics of  International Political Orders.” International Organization. Vol. 52, No. 4, pp 943-69.

Mayall, James. 1995. “National Identity, and the Revival of Regionalism”. In  Regionalism in World Politics: Regional Organization and International Order.  Louise Fawcett and Andrew Hurrell eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

McDonald, Matt. 2004. “Constructing (In)security n the Contemporary  Australian Context”. Unpublished Conference Paper presented at the OCIS  Conference in Canberra, Australia. July 2004.

Morgenthau, Hans J. 1967. Politics Among Nations: the Struggle for Power and Peace.  New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Morgenthau, Hans J. 1990. “Political Power: A Realist Theory of International  Politics”. In Classics of International Relations, 2nd edn. Ed John A. Vasquez,  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Publishers. Pp 31-35.

Morgenthau, Hans. 1971. Politics in the 20th Century. Chicago: University of  Chicago Press.

National Aeornautics and Space Administration (NASA). ‘Asteroids and Comets  Impact Hazards’ website. http://128.102.38.40/impact/intro_fact.cfm, accessed  24/2/04.

Ogata, Sadako. 1998. "Inclusion or Exclusion: Social Development Challenges For  Asia and Europe." Statement of Mrs. Sadako Ogata United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees at the Asian Development Bank Seminar, 27 April  1998.   08/22/01

Onuf, Nicholas G. 1998. “Constructivism: A Users’ Manual.” In International  Relations in a Constructed World. Vendulka Kubalkova, Nicholas G Onuf and Paul  Kowert eds. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe Publishers, pp 58-78.

Onuf, Nicholas G. 1970. “International Law-in-Action and the Numbers Game: A  Comment”. International Studies Quarterly. Vol. 14, pp. 325-333.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 38



Onuf, Nicholas. 1994.  The Constitution of Int’l Society, European Journal of In’tl  Law Vol 5 pp1-19.

Owen, John. 1994. “How Liberalism Produces Democratic Peace”. In Debating the  Democratic Peace. Eds Michael Brown, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller.  Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, pp. 116-156.

Parekh, Bhikhu. 2000. Rethinking Multiculturalism: Cultural Diversity and Political  Theory. London: MacMillan Press Ltd.

Patomaki, Heikki and Colin Wight 2000. After Postpositivism? The Promises of  Critical Realism. International Studies Quarterly vol 44 no 2 pp 213-237.

Pettiford, Lloyd. 2001. “When Is a Realist Not a Realist?”. Security Dialogue. Vol

32, no 3,pp 369-374.



Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2002  , accessed 2/6/04.

Program on International Policy Attitudes. 2003. "Misperceptions, the Media and  the Iraq War” Oct 2 2003  http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/Iraq/Media_10_02_03_Report.pdf

Ra, Jong Yil. 1996. “Introduction: In Search of Asia”. Democratization and Regional  Cooperation in Asia.  Seoul, Korea: Asia-Pacific Peace Press.

Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University  Press.

Reilly, Benjamin. 2000. “Democracy, Ethnic Fragmentation, and Internal Conflict,  Confused Theories, Faulty Data, and the ‘Crucial Case’: Papua New Guinea  (ethnic division and effects on political stability)”. International Security. Winter,  Vol. 25 No. 3.

Reiter, Dan.1996. Crucible of Beliefs: Learning, Alliances, and World Wars. Ithaca:  Cornell University Press.

Reus-Smit, Christian. 2001. “Constructivism”. in Theories of International Relations,  2nd Edition. NY: Palgrave.

Rodrigue, Christine M. 2002. “Patterns of Media Coverage of the Terrorist  Attacks on the United States in September of 2001. Quick Response Report Paper

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 39

#146.” Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Center,  University of Colorado.  http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/qr/qr146/qr146.html#TB96, accessed  21/3/04.

Rorty, Richard. 1989. Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press.

Russett, Bruce. 1993a. “Why Democratic Peace?”. In Debating the Democratic Peace.  eds Michael Brown, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. Miller. Cambridge, MA:  The MIT Press, pp. 82-115

Russett, Bruce. 1993b. Grasping the Democratic Peace. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton  University Press.

Schweller, Randall. ‘Neorealism’s security bias: What security dilemma?’,  Security Studies 5:3 Spring 1996

Smith, Anthony D. 1991. National Identity. London: Penguin.

Smith, Anthony D. 1998. The Ethnic Origins of Nations. NY: Blackwell Publishers.

Smith, Steve. 2000. “The Increasing Insecurity of Security Studies:  Conceptualizing Security in the Last Twenty Years”. In Critical Reflections on  Security and Change. eds. Stuart Croft and Terry Terriff. London: Frank Cass &  Co.

Suhrke, Astri. 1999. “Human Security and the Interests of States.” Security  Dialogue. 30.3. pp  265-276.

Sidel, John T. 1995. Political Legitimacy in Southeast Asia: The Quest for Moral  Authority. Ed. Muthiah Algappa. Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp 136-169.

Stavenhagen, R.1990. The Ethnic Question: Conflict, Development and Human Rights.  Tokyo: UN University Press.

Steans, Jill. 1998. Gender and International Relations: An Introduction. Cambridge:  Polity Press.

Sun Tzu. The Art of War. 1963. Translated by Sammuel B. Griffith. New York:  Oxford University Press.

Swartz, David. 1997. Culture and Power: The Sociology of Pierre Bourdieu.  Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 40



Tarrow, Sidney. 1998. Power in Movement: Social Movements and Contentious  Politics. 2nd Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Thakur, Ramesh. 1997. “From National to Human Security.” Asia-Pacific Security:  The Economics-Politics Nexus. Eds. Stuart Harris, and Andrew Mack. Sydney:  Allen & Unwin.

Thomas, Caroline and Peter Wilkins (eds.). 1999. Globalization, Human Security  and the African Experience. Boulder, CO: Lynne Reinner Publishers, Inc.

Thomas, Nicholas and William T. Tow. 2002. “Gaining Security by Trashing the  State? A Reply to Bellamy and McDonald”. Security Dialogue. Vol 33, no 3, pp379-382.

Thomas, Nicholas and William T. Tow. 2002. “The Utility of Human Security:  Sovereignty and Humanitarian Intervention”. Security Dialogue. Vol 33, no 2,  pp177-192.

Tickell, Adam and Jamie Peck. 2003. “Making Global Rules: Globalization or  Neoliberatization”. In Remaking the Global Economy: Economic-Geographical  Perspectives. Jamie Peck and Henry Wai-chung Yeung eds. London: Sage  Publications.

Tickner, Ann. 1995. “Re-visioning Security” In International Relations Theory  Today. eds. Ken Booth & Steve Smith. Cambridge: Polity Press.

True, Jacqui. 2001. “Feminism”. Theories of International Relations. Hampshire:  Palgrave.

Tuchman Mathews, Jessica. 1989. “Redefining Security”. Foreign Affairs 68:2.

Ullman, Richard. 1983. ‘Redefining Security’ International Security, vol 8, no 1 pp  129-53

Vaughn, Bruce R. 2004. “Australian’s Strategic Identity Post-September 11 in  Context: Implications for the War Against Terror in Southeast Asia”.  Contemporary Southeast Asia. Vol. 26, No. 1.

Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1999. The End of the World as We Known It: Social Science for  the 21st Century. London: University of Minneapolis Press.

Walt, Stephen W. 1998. “International Relations: One World, Many Theories”.   Foreign Policy. Spring. No.110 pp. 29-45.

Bryn Hughes: Political Violence and Democracy 41



Walt, Stephen M. 1991.“The Renaissance of Security Studies”. International Studies

Quarterly 35:2.



Waltz, Kenneth. 1979. Theory of International Politics. New York: Random House.



Waever, Ole. 1995. “Securitization and Desecuritization”. In On Security. ed.  Ronnie D. Lipschutz. New York: Columbia University Press.

Waever, Ole, Barry Buzan, Morten Kelstrup, and Pierre Lemaitre eds. 1993.  Identity, Migration and the New Security Agenda in Europe. London: Pinter  Publishers Ltd.

Wendt, Alexander. 1992. “Anarchy is what States Make of It: The Social  Construction of Power Politics”. International Organisation. Vol 46 no 2

