

E and OE

17 August 2004

Transcript

Minister for Foreign Affairs

Media Conference, Beijing

Downer: Good morning ladies and  gentlemen. I appreciate the opportunity to  talking to you very briefly and answer any  questions you might have. I am delighted to  be back in Beijing again - I've had very  positive and constructive meetings so far  with Premier Wen, State Counsellor Tang,  and Minister Bo, and I'll be seeing the  Foreign Minister Li during the course of  today before departing for Pyongyang this  evening for meetings there.

In my discussions with Chinese leadership,  we've talked at great length about the  strength of our bilateral relationship - the  bilateral relationship between Australia and  China has never been better. With Premier  Wen we agreed that Australia and China  would build up a bilateral strategic  relationship, that we would strengthen our  economic relationship and we would work  together closely on Asia Pacific issues, be  they economic or security issues.

We, in all of the meetings, spoke at some  length about the prospects of negotiating a  free trade agreement between Australia and  China. We have agreed that we will  conclude a feasibility study on free trade  agreement between our two countries in  March/April of next year. We will make the  decision then on the question of China's  market economy status. And if the  feasibility study is positive and if we make a  positive decision on the market economy  question, then we will move to negotiate a  free trade agreement. A free trade  agreement between Australia and China  would be the first free trade agreement  China had done with a developed economy,

and would be not just important for our two  economies, if we can get it right, but would  be a very important step forward in our  bilateral relationship consolidating the  strategic relationship between our two  countries.

We also - particularly with Premier Wen and  State Counsellor Tang - and of course  further to the meetings with them with  Foreign Minister Li today, we did have and  will have an extensive discussion about the  situation on the Korean peninsular, bearing  in mind I am about to visit North Korea. And  the Chinese leadership was very pleased  with my initiative to visit North Korea and  gave me some good messages and some  good advice.

The last point I make is that I had a very  positive discussion with Vice Chairman  Zhang about the prospects of further  Australian energy sales to China, energy  supplies to China. There are excellent  opportunities now for further sales of LNG  by Australian companies into the Chinese  market and also other energy forms of  energy sources will be considered for the

Chinese market as well. Obviously we also  sell coal and so on.

On the human rights issue, both sides  expressed their satisfaction with the  mechanisms we have established - that is  the bilateral human rights dialogue, and the  technical assistance that have come out of  the dialogue through our aid programme,  and we look forward to a further round of  the bilateral human rights dialogue before  the end of this year. If there are any  questions, I am happy to answer them.

Q: Good morning sir, I am with United Press  International. North Koreans said that it  would not be participating in informal talks  prior to the September preliminary of the  Six Party Talks. I am wondering if in your  mission to the DPRK you have any greater  sense of urgency in taking up where China  leaves off on North Korea, and are you  carrying any messages from China or the  United States to the DPRK? And what is you  sense of China's commitment to the Six  Party Talks?

Downer: The message I had from the  Chinese, and you will have to check this

with them, but the message I had from the  Chinese was that the working group meeting  had no scheduled time, no scheduled time  had been determined for that meeting - not  that the meeting had been cancelled.  Though I see reports today that it had been  cancelled, but that was not the message I  got from Chinese leaders yesterday. So I  think from talking with the Chinese, of  course I would be educated in this by  tomorrow evening, but from what I have  heard from the Chinese, the meeting has not  been scheduled as distinct from the meeting  being cancelled. I have obviously has  discussions with the Chinese in the last 24  hours at great length about North Korea and  I said a bit about that in my introductory  remarks. And I have had discussions with the  Americans in the last couple of weeks, over  the telephone, and prior to that when I was  last in Washington about this issue. So  obviously the representations I would be  able to make in Korea will be substantially  influenced by the discussions I have had  with the Chinese and the Americans, but I  am not anybody's emissary, I am not the  Ambassador for another country, I am the

Foreign Minister for Australia. So I take our  own messages and our own ideas, but of  course I have been substantially informed by  my discussions with the Chinese and the  Americans, but we have also had officials  level discussions with the Japanese, and the  South Koreans, and the Russians, in recent  times as well on this issues. So I have got a  very strong sense of where everybody is at  on the North Korean question.

We appreciate very much the leading role  China has taken in putting together the Six  Party process, and the role China has been  playing in trying to persuade the North  Koreans to abandon their nuclear  programmes. I have been impressed with  what I have heard from the Chinese  leadership about the continuing stance  China is taking on this issue. It is a very  important issue in itself but it is also  important to Australia and the world that  China itself is taking such a constructive  lead on this question. That is very much  noted in our country.

Q: Hi, I am from AP. Following up the earlier  question, is Australia planning to offer aid  separately to North Korea, as a reward if

North Korea would freeze or dismantle its  nuclear weapons programmes? And also, did  you discuss with the Chinese side the status  of two Chinese dissidents -- Yuan Hong Bing  and Zhao Jing -- who are seeking asylum in  Australia, because they say they are  suffering political prosecution here in China?  And what are your comments in general  since one of the dissidents is saying that  Australia cares more about its trading  relationship with China than about standing  up to China on human rights. Thanks.

Downer: They were not raised with me, and  if people, as is the case here, if people seek  asylum in Australia their applications are  considered on the basis of the 1951 United  Nations Refugee Convention. So, these are  matters that will be considered by our  Immigration Department. We have a process  in Australia that can be followed, and  depending on the outcome of the  assessments by the Immigration Department  against the criteria of the 1951 Refugee  Convention.

We already have some limited aid  programmes in North Korea - humanitarian

programmes there. And if North Korea were  to abandon its nuclear programmes then  obviously that would lead to a very  substantial increase in Australia's economic  engagement with North Korea. Not just in  terms of aid, but also in terms of broader  trade and investment activities. So as a  point that I make to the North Koreans -  that there are great opportunities for the  North Korean people if they abandon their  nuclear programmes, because those  opportunities would be borne out of  substantial economic engagement with many  countries but including a significant Asia  Pacific economy like Australia.

Q: Mr Downer, Catherine from The  Australian Newspaper. Could you please  describe the nature of your discussion on  the question of Taiwan? Did you caution the  Chinese against the use of force in that  situation, given recent escalation we hear in  military activities? And could you describe  what you think would be the consequences  of any further escalation in hostile talk  between the two countries? Thank you.

Downer: Well, we had in every meeting,

well every relevant meeting, not with Vice  Chairman Zhang for example, where we  were talking about LNG and other energy  resources, but in every relevant meeting,  the issue of Taiwan was discussed. I made it  clear that Australia has a One China policy. I  said that we had been urging the Taiwanese  not to move down the path of proclaiming  independence - that this would create very  substantial upheaval in the region, and  obviously and especially between China and  Taiwan. But I said that we want to see the  Taiwan question resolved peacefully, and  over time it was my view that the rapid  increase in economic integration between  Taiwan and the mainland and also the  evolution of China itself - which has been so  dramatic over the last 20 to 30 years - made  a peaceful resolution of this problem all the  more possible. But I got positive messages  back from the Chinese leadership, I mean,  they did not say that they were embarking  on some military action against Taiwan but  obviously for the Chinese leadership the  question of Taiwanese independence is a  threshold issue. But other than that, they  seemed comfortable with the idea of moving  towards a reconciliation with Taiwan in a

peaceful way.

My sense is that any military built-up on the  part of China in relation to Taiwan is about  providing a disincentive for Taiwan to  declare independence, not a prelude to  some military expedition over and above  concerns about the possibility that Taiwan  may proclaim independence. And it's  incumbent on a country like Australia, and  active and significant countries in the region  as well as those beyond - the European  Union, the United States - to transmit to the  Taiwanese leadership the message that any  proclamation of independence would be  provocative.

Q: Hamish McDonald, Sydney Morning  Herald. Could you elaborate on the strategic  partnership that you agreed with Mr Wen  should be build up between Australia and  China, and how can that go given that  Australia has obligations under the ANZUS  Treaty which might bring it into the Taiwan  conflict on the other side?

Downer: Well, the ANZUS Treaty is a treaty  which of course is symbolic of the Australian

alliance relationship with United States, but  the ANZUS Treaty is invoked in the event of  one of our two countries, Australia or the  United States, being attacked. So some  other military activity elsewhere in the  world, be it in Iraq or anywhere else for that  matter does not automatically invoke the  ANZUS Treaty. It is important to remember  that we only invoked the ANZUS Treaty  once, that is after the events of 9/11,  because there was an attack on the territory  of the United States. It is very important to  remember that in the context of your  question.

Diplomatic relations between countries, as  you know, rather than change by gigantic  steps - and what we are seeing through what  Premier Wen said to me about building a  strategic relationship between Australia and  China is a significant development, in that I  think China has seen Australia in years gone  by as an important economic partner and a  less important political and strategic  partner, and I think now there is a  recognition by Chinese leadership that the  significant role that Australia plays in the  region, for all sorts of reasons, value for  both of us, not just for one of us, but for

both of us, to work much more closely  together on political and security issues in  the region - rather than just see each other  as, for us, China is a fantastic growing  market, which it definitely is, and China  seeing Australia as an essential part of its  supply chain, above all energy, which  Australia certainly is. But I think we are  seeing the evolution of a much stronger and  much fuller relationship which encompasses  many challenges of the Asia Pacific region of  the political and security nature, not just of  an economic nature. And this is, as I say, is  evolutionary but its something that I think is  profoundly important in Australian foreign  policy over the medium term.

Q: Good morning sir, I come from Beijing  Morning Post. We are all very interested in  Australia's economic relationship with China,  so my question is, can you predict when  Australia will grant China's market economy  status?

Downer: We have now during this visit  settled on a timetable for the completion of  the feasibility study on the free trade  agreement which is in March/April - I think

March rather than April. At that point, when  the feasibility study is concluded - and by  the way, I thought there was a lot of  enthusiasm from the Chinese leadership for  a free trade agreement with Australia - that  would be the point we would have to make  a decision on this question of the market  economy status of China. So, we will not be  making that decision yet, but we will  obviously be having extensive consultations  with Australian industries about it, because  this is in the end an issue about anti-dumping mechanisms. It is fairly technical  but not an unimportant issue. That is if you  like, the (inaudible) may have broader issues  at stake here, but for us the technical issue  is the question of anti-dumping mechanisms,  surrogacy or not surrogacy - these are the  issue in terms of determining whether a  product has been dumped or not. So we  obviously are thinking about this issue  already. I am talking about it so this is not  something that I know nothing about and  have not been thinking about. It is an issue  we are thinking about and we will make  some decision when the feasibility study is  complete, and our consultations with  industries in Australia are complete.

Inquiries: (02) 6277 7500

ENDS

