Joint Media  Release The Hon Julie Bishop MP Minister for Ageing

The Hon Gary Hardgrave  MP Minister for Citizenship  and Multicultural Affairs

Minister Assisting the  Prime Minister



11 May 2004 Budget 2004-2005

New Aged Care Program for Migrants

A new aged care program for the established culturally and linguistically  diverse communities, worth $11.6 million over the next four years, was jointly  announced by the Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, Gary  Hardgrave, and the Minister for Ageing, Julie Bishop today.

This initiative responds to the recommendations of the Report of the Review of  Settlement Services for Migrants and Humanitarian Entrants and the Review of  Pricing Arrangements in Residential Aged Care.

Ms Bishop said culturally appropriate aged care services were essential.

“By 2011 people from culturally and linguistically diverse communities who  were born overseas will comprise 22.5 per cent of all ageing Australians,” Ms  Bishop said.

“This is a very positive initiative to ensure that accessible and appropriate  services are available to older Australians of culturally and linguistically  diverse backgrounds.”

Mr Hardgrave said services for established communities will continue to be  funded under his department’s Community Settlement Services Scheme  (CSSS) until the commencement of the new program within the Department of  Health and Ageing.

“The creation of a dedicated program of aged care for established communities  will allow CSSS funding to be directed to newly arrived migrants and refugees  with the greatest settlement needs.”

Ms Bishop said the new program would build links between established  communities and services, and will help aged care service providers  understand the needs of established migrant communities. The new program  will also absorb the existing Ethnic Aged Care Services Grants (EASG)  Program in the Department of Health and Ageing.

The Department of Health and Ageing will call for applications for these  services in the second half of this year.

Media contacts: Mr Hardgrave’s Office: Anthony Moate 0402 415 167 Ms Bishop’s Office: Rachael Thompson 0417 265 289

