



senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au    www.andrewbartlett.com  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list.

DEMOCRATS  MEDIA 04/937 MONDAY 20 SEPTEMBER 2004 S   ENATOR ANDREW BARTLETT LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS & SPOKESPERSON ON DEFENCE Salamat pagi Indonesia - Democrats welcome regional focus on defence but call for more aid and communication The Democrats have welcomed the focus on Australia's region in the latest initiatives from the Coalition and ALP, as far better than following the United States into wars on the other side of the world. "While we welcome more police resources to combat terrorism in the region we also urge both the major parties to recognise the importance of aid and communication with our neighbours," Democrats Leader Senator Andrew Bartlett said. "As Iraq shows, more firepower won't help if you can't win hearts and minds." "There are few differences between the major parties on military matters with the exception that Latham nominates a Christian holiday to bring the troops home and the Howard Government won't nominate a date. "The Liberals decide to spend half a billion dollars on long range stealth cruise missiles, and the ALP had no real criticism other than the way it was marketed to the region. The Liberals plan to trial flying robots to keep an eye out in the north - which is fine - but then Mr Beazley calls for the flying robots to be armed.  "Neither of the major parties have shown even passing interest in advancing global disarmament initiatives, in which Australia was once a world leader." For the first five years of the Howard Government, Indonesians heard little from Australia but static. Australian radio broadcasts to our region were severely downgraded from 1997 to 2002 with the sale of the Cox peninsula transmitter. In the 1970's and 1980's Radio Australia reached around 20 million people across Indonesia. We are only just beginning to regain that audience currently estimated at 6.5 million in Indonesia. While aid to the region has increased overall - much of it is made up of anti-terrorist initiatives and exercises like our presence in the Solomons (1) and administrative rather than basic aid programs.  One third of the Overseas Development Aid budget for 2004-05 is allocated for projects related to governance, up from 15% in 1999-2000. But expenditure for education and health programs has declined from 27% and 14% respectively in 1999-2000 to 14% and 12 per cent in 2004-05. "Initiatives like a rapid response team of police to fly into the region are good, but cannot be at the expense of basic health and education programs that help prevent poverty and religious extremism breeding anti-Australian sentiment in the first place. PTO

DEMOCRATS    MEDIA



senator.bartlett@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list.



"Australia’s overseas aid program is increasingly being used to fund counter-terrorist and other security  related activities in the region since the 2002 Bali bombings(2). Activities which previously would have come  out of police or defence budgets are now coming from the overseas aid budget.

"Assistance to develop local security structures is important but not at the expense of traditional areas of aid  such as health, education and rural/infrastructure development," Senator Bartlett said.

"We need programs to prevent a culture that creates suicide bombers, in addition to reactive police programs  to respond to terrorist incidents.

"The first line of the Government's Fighting Terrorism policy states that addressing the terrorist threat to  Australia emanating from the Asia Pacific region remains the major priority of the Government, which is at  odds with their record on Iraq. It's a case of look at what we say not what we do.

"Rather than blind acquiescence to US demands, we need to free up our military services to be prepared to  assist our Asian and Melanesian neighbours or to meet any other defence contingencies that may arise in our  region."

Coast Guard

The Democrats in the Senate have committed to supporting Labor's coastguard plan, as long as it does not  continue the practice of turning asylum seekers boats back out to sea. Not one asylum seeker has ever been  found to be a threat to Australian security.

Exercises

Senator Bartlett also questioned the timing of mass military exercises in Far North Queensland, just 3 weeks  out from an election. Exercise Swift Eagle 02 is running from September 19 - 26 using 2,500 soldiers and  using central Queensland civilians in fictional international trouble spot evacuation drill.

Media contact - Daele Healy - 0419 867 649





(1) The planned aid outlay for the Solomon Islands in 2003-04 was $37.4 million. As a result of the Regional Assistance  Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI), the expected outcome is $168.5 million. This includes an expenditure of $79  million by Other Government Departments (OGDs) that qualifies as Overseas Development Aid.



(2) Indonesia: There is a four year $10 million program to help Indonesia build its counter-terrorism capacity in three  areas. $3.5 million is to be spent on improving the Indonesian Police’s capability to combat terrorism including the  establishment of the Transnational Crime Centre. A further $3.5 million will help Indonesia strengthen its anti-money-laundering regime and a $3 million fund has been established to build links between Australian and Indonesian  government departments relating to travel security.

