



THE PERMANENT CAMPAIGN COMES TO AUSTRALIA:   Communication strategies in the 2004 federal election





Peter van Onselen

School of International, Cultural & Community Studies, Edith Cowan University,  Perth, Australia

Wayne Errington

School of Social Sciences & Liberal Studies, Charles Sturt University, Bathurst,  Australia





1

Abstract  Making  his  first  speech  to  Liberal  Party  MPs  after  his  victory  in  the  October  2004   Australian  federal  election,  Prime  Minister  John  Howard  said  that  he  was  “a  great   believer  in  perpetual  campaigning,”  and  that  the  government  campaign  to  win  the   next election had already begun. The concept of the permanent campaign is important  to  understanding  modern  political  communication.  While  an  increasing  number  of   voters are claiming to be making up their mind who to vote for in the last week of the  formal election campaign, they are influenced in their decision by political messages  received well before the formal campaign period. The 2004 election displayed many  features  of  permanent  campaigning;  in  particular  the  advantage  permanent   campaigning affords the government over the opposition. Modern campaign methods  such as focus groups, qualitative polling, voter databases, and strategic use of Senate  resources for House races, are used on a permanent basis to build a communications  strategy.  The  resources  of  the  state,  including  government  advertising,  postal  and   office entitlements of members of parliament, are used to research and communicate  with  the  electorate.  While  many  of  these  techniques  have  been  under  development   while  also  being  in  use  for  some  time,  it  is  only  recently  that  they  have  been   successfully  coordinated  to  the  extent  that  we  can  now  say  that  the  permanent   campaign has reached Australia.

Introduction  The  concept  of  the  permanent  campaign  was  popularised  in  the  United  States  by   Sidney Blumenthal in his 1980 book The Permanent Campaign: Inside the World of  Elite  Political  Operatives.  The  professionalisation  of  political  communication  and   election  campaigns  is  now  a  global  phenomenon,  although  one  led  by  the  US.1  Panebianco  identified  the  rise  of  the  ‘electoral-professional’  party,  with  its  reduced   ideological orientation and increased role for professional campaigners at the expense  of  the  party  membership  (1988,  p.264).  Indeed,  the  professionalisation  of  some   American  campaigns  stretches  to  the  hiring  of  consultants  for  web-site  design  and   database  management  (Shea  and  Burton  2001,  p.208).  Professionalisation  also   impinges upon the relationship between political parties and the state, with governing  parties  relying  heavily  on  publicly-funded  communications  units  involved  in   “packaging”  policy  (Franklin  1994,  p.7),  such  as  Britain’s  Central  Office  of   Information  or  its  Australian  equivalent  the  Government  Members’  Secretariat   (GMS).

The  drive  to  professionalise  political  practice  in  Australia  was  started  by  the   Australian  Labor  Party.  At  the  state  level,  Don  Dunstan’s  1967-68  re-election   campaign  for  Premier  of  South  Australia  was  the  first  to  utilise  advanced  opinion   polling  and  extensive  television  advertising.  Federally,  similar  techniques  were   successfully  used  by  the  then  Opposition  at  the  1972  election  (Mills  1986,  p.2).   Australian  parties  incorporated  techniques  developed  overseas,  particularly  in  the   United  States,  into  their  own  campaigns2.  For  example,  then  NSW  ALP  Secretary   Stephen  Loosley  visited  Canada  to  inspect  the  direct  mail  system  used  by  the  New   Democratic  Party  (Mills  1986,  p.196).  Stephen  Mills’  pioneering  work  on  the



1  See for example ‘Tracing the Worldwide Proliferation of American Campaign Techniques’ (Plasser,  1999).  2

It is generally recognised that the United States has been some years ahead of other countries in the  professionalisation of campaigning, but that co-operation between parties in different countries quickly  closes the gap (see Butler and Ranney (eds), 1992, Lees-Marchment, 2001)



2

professionalisation  of  Australian  campaigns  traced  the  development  of  opinion   polling,  focus  groups,  targeted  advertising  and  direct  mail-outs.3  Sally  Young’s   (2004) recent book on political advertising in Australia has updated and expanded on  a number of Mills’ findings.

Aspects  of  professionalisation  in  Australia,  such  as  the  reliance  on  the  provision  of   resources by the state to maintain the dominance of the major parties is symptomatic  of what Mair and Katz call the cartel party (1997). A logical extension of the notion  of  the  electoral-professional  party,  the  cartel  party  ‘brokers  between  [a  plural]  civil   society  and  the  state’,  but  has  a  distinct  set  of  interests  from  the  electorate  (1997,   p.101).  Cartel  parties  are  integrated  into  the  state  apparatus  and  collude  with   ostensibly competing parties to maintain their position vis-ÃÂ -vis the electorate and to  exclude  new  parties  (1997,  p.107-8).  However,  other  practices,  such  as  the  use  of   government  advertising  for  partisan  purposes,  or  the  use  of  state  resources  in  such   bodies as the Government Members’ Secretariat, give a clear edge to the government  over the opposition in the permanent campaign.

Many of these techniques have been used in Australian politics for some decades. The  permanent campaign refers to the coordination of campaign techniques throughout the  machinery of government, and the ruthless effort to seek partisan advantage at every  opportunity. While the concept of the permanent campaign incorporates the activities  of  interest  groups,  opposition  parties  and  journalists,  it  is  in  the  communication   strategies  of  governments  that  the  technique  is  most  clear.  According  to  Mann  and   Ornstein,  ‘the  line  between  campaigning  and  governing  has  all  but  disappeared’   (2000, p.vii). In Australia, cabinet ministers receive an increasing proportion of their  advice from political staffers rather than bureaucrats.4 The public service has adopted  public  relations  techniques  to  promote  new  policies  (and,  of  course  the  relevant   minister).  The  Howard  government  has  been  the  beneficiary  of  the  culmination  of   these trends to be the first Australian government to be in perpetual campaign mode.

In  the  lead-up  to  the  2004  federal  election  campaign,  the  government  used  tens  of   millions of dollars in government advertising to sell its policies (see figures in Grant,  2004).  Most  importantly,  the  messages  in  that  advertising  were  clearly  coordinated   with the Coalition’s own campaign messages. Measuring the effectiveness of political  campaigns is difficult. Sarah Miskin from the Department of Parliamentary Services  (2005)  has  concisely  reviewed  the  campaign  techniques  used  in  Australia’s  2004   federal election, as well as their effectiveness. Given both the election results and the  preceding  political  messages  the  Coalition  used,  the  prime  minister’s  rhetoric  about   trust appeared to strike a chord with highly geared voters in the mortgage belts of the  capital  cities.  This  was  a  neat  conjuring  trick,  given  the  prime  minister’s  failure  to   name a single economist who agreed with his proposition that interest rates would be  lower  under  the  Coalition  than  under  Labor  (The  Sydney  Morning  Herald,  25   September 2004).

This  paper  outlines  some  of  the  features  of  the  permanent  campaign  in  Australian   politics, including the use of the resources provided by the parliament to Senators in  lower  house  seats.  The  paper  then  compares  the  communication  strategies  of  the

3  For more recent studies on professional political practice (polling and staffing) in Australia, see  Peisley & Ward (2001) and Gibson & Ward (2002).   4

For a detailed summary of increases in political staffing allocations to ministers see Holland, 2002.



3

government  and  opposition  before  and  during  the  formal  campaign  period  for  the   2004  Australian  federal  election.  There  has  been  a  tendency  in  the  media  since  the   government’s  victory  to  paint  Howard  as  an  invincible  leader  and  Latham  as  a   doomed  challenger.  It  is  worth  asking  why  the  election  looked  so  different  with   hindsight  than  in  the  months  after  Mark  Latham’s  elevation  to  the  leadership  of  the   ALP, when the opposition was regularly a clear leader in the opinion polls.

The permanent campaign in Australia  Social  researcher  Hugh  Mackay,  armed  with  the  fact  that  governments  usually  win   elections, and his qualitative polling about attitudes towards the government, made a  bold  prediction  well  before  the  election  that  the  government  would  be  comfortably   returned. ‘Why rock the boat?’ was Mackay’s summary of voters’ attitudes (The Age.  18 September 2004). After the election, Mackay wrote that:

one day it will occur to political party strategists that elections are rarely  won or lost during election campaigns … voters do not change their minds  moment  by  moment,  in  response  to  the  thrust  and  parry  of  an  election   campaign;  they  make  quiet  judgements  in  the  months  -  or  even  years  -   that precede it. (The Age, 11 October 2004)

Of course, the onset of the permanent campaign would suggest that party strategists  have long been aware of this phenomenon. However, even if only a tiny percentage of  the electorate does in fact make up their minds in the final days of the campaign, the  parties  work  in  seats  with  such  fine  margins  that  it  is  worth  their  while  trying  to   influence those people up until the last minute.5

Indeed, a Newspoll survey found that 30% of respondents decided whom to vote for  in  the  final  week  of  the  2004  campaign,  a  number  that  has  been  steadily  increasing   over recent decades. (The Australian. 21 October 2004.). The number of swinging and  weakly identifying voters has also been steadily increasing since the 1960s. In 1967,  only  11%  of  voters  failed  to  identify  with  one  of  the  major  political  parties.  That   number had increased to 30% in 1990 (Chaples 1997, p.358). Clearly, Mackay is only  partly correct. Impressions of the leaders and their parties may well have been formed  well  before  the  campaign  began,  but  those  impressions  need  to  be  solidified  into  a   clear  voting  intention.  Hence  the  large  sums  of  money  spent  during  election   campaigns,  and  the  increasing  sums  spent  between  elections  in  the  permanent   campaign  (for  figures  regarding  election  and  government  advertising  spending  see   Young, 2004: 39, and Grant, 2004).

One  strategy  of  political  parties  to  influence  the  ‘quiet  judgements’  of  electors  is   direct  mail,  which  aims  to  draw  the  attention  of  voters  to  policy  announcements   throughout  the  life  of  the  parliament.  Through  efficient use of their voter databases,  the  parties  can  send  these  messages  only  to  those  voters  likely  to  be  interested  in   them, saving on cost and the risk of over-selling (see van Onselen and Errington 2004  for details on this technique).



5  A cursory look at the electoral pendulum leading up the 2004 election illustrates why. Forty seats of  the Coalition and the ALP were held by margins of 5% of less (24 & 16 respectively), the Australian  Electoral Commission guideline for marginality. Of those 17 were held by 2% or less (11 & 6  respectively).



4

Both  parties  use  direct  mail  extensively,  taking  advantage  of  the  increasingly   generous mail and office allowances parliament awards members of parliament.6 The  parties  have  become  increasingly  professional  in  the  use  of  these  resources,  to  the   extent that Senators now have a much more central campaigning function than in the  past, largely operating out of marginal lower house electorates. They overwhelmingly  locate  their  electorate  offices  in  marginal  seats  or  seats  held  by  the  opposing  major   party within their home state (87% of senatorial offices are located in this way. See  van  Onselen,  2003,  p.8).  Their  electorate  staff  and  parliamentary  entitlements  are   significantly  devoted  towards  the  election  or  re-election  of  candidates  and  MPs  in   marginal seats (van Onselen, 2004: 18). Both of Australia’s major political parties call  this activity “duty senatorship”.

Other  elements  of  the  permanent  campaign  are  available  only  to  governments.  The   massive increases in expenditure on government advertising campaigns have become  a  point  of  contention  between  government  and  opposition.  Spending  increased  from   $61  million  (in  2004  prices)  in  1991-2  to  $103  million  in  1995-6  ($9.4  million  of   which was spent on the ‘Working Nation’ campaign prior to the 1996 election), and  peaked at $240 million in 1999-00 when the Howard government introduced the GST  (or  ‘A  New  Tax  System’  as  the  propaganda  preferred  to  put  it).  Leaving  aside  the   GST campaign, the Howard government has spent over $100 million on advertising  every year since 2000-01, a mark the Hawke and Keating governments reached only  once.  (Grant,  2004).  At  the  time,  then  opposition  leader  John  Howard  declared  the   Working  Nation  campaign  ‘a  disgraceful  sham’  (Media  Watch  ABC  Television,  28/06/04). The Howard government not only increased spending on that ‘disgraceful  sham’,  but  became  adept  at  matching  its  own  messages  with  those  of  the  publicly   funded campaigns, as will be explained below.

The  official  campaign  period,  then,  is  used  by  the  parties  to  reinforce,  rather  than   change, the perceptions about politics that voters have developed over longer periods  of time. For the government, having peppered the airwaves with official information  advertisements,  the  path  is  well  laid  for  a  set  of  political  advertisements  during  the   formal  campaign  period.  In  contrast,  the  opposition  is  required  to  match  its  rhetoric   and  media  releases  during  the  permanent  campaign  period  with  paid  advertising   during  the  official  campaign  in  the  lead  up  to  election  day.  The  role  of  such   permanent  campaign  activities  prior  to  the  paid  advertising  slots  aired  once  the   election  is  called,  is  symptomatic  of  the  PR  state  trend  in  Australian  politics  as   identified by Ward (2003).

In the case of Australia, under a compulsory voting system, major parties are largely  assured of their core supporters’ votes on polling day. The communications strategy is  therefore  based  around  convincing  swinging  voters  to  support  them.  Both  major   parties  in  Australia  therefore  contest  the  middle  ground,  leading  to  the  suggestion   there  is  a  convergence  of  major  party  positioning  in  Australian  politics  (the   ‘Tweedledum  to  Tweedledee’  thesis  was  first  discussed  substantively  by  Catley  &   McFarlane,  1974).  Use  of  party  databases  to  exclude  strong  identifying  voters  from   mail-outs to save on postage is an example of this practice (van Onselen & Errington,  2004, p.359).



6  For example, printing allowances for MHRs have been increased to $125,000pa during the life of the  previous parliament.



5



The government’s permanent campaign  Well before the formal campaign period for the 2004 election, the prime minister was  frequently  seen  on  a  podium  with  the  slogan  ‘protecting,  securing,  building   Australia’s future’ prominently displayed. This language was used at the same time in  multi-million  dollar  advertising  campaigns  for  such  government  policies  as   ‘Strengthening Medicare’ (see Appendix), additional payments to families in the 2004  budget,  anti-terrorism  measures  and  combating  domestic  violence.  Coalition   campaign  material  again  centred  on  these  themes.  It  would  seem  a  high  degree  of   coordination  was  at  work  between  the  Prime  Minister’s  Office,  the  Government   Communications Unit and the Liberal and National Party organisations.

The  Coalition’s  use  of  government  advertising  began  to  attract  negative  comment,   especially  the  ubiquitous  ‘Strengthening  Medicare’  campaign  after  the  May  budget   (The World Today, Radio National, 28 June 2004). The permanent campaign walks a  fine  line  between  carefully  tailored  advertising  (and  links  to  party  messages)  and   political  overkill,  risking  negative  publicity  and  a  voter  backlash  over  the  cost  and   fairness of these practices that outweighs the benefits from the advertising. A leaked  cabinet document reflected government concerns over the ‘danger that if [advertising]  is  perceived  as  a  promotional  campaign  for  the  Government,  it  could  heighten   existing negative views of the system.’ (cited in The Age, 11 May 2004)

To get maximum benefit from the permanent campaign approach, the leader’s office  must  be  in  constant  contact  with  the  party  organisation,  which  controls  the  party   advertising  budget.  Candidates  for  each  seat  tend  to  make  their  own  use  of  the   material  emanating  from  higher  up,  but  are  under  pressure  not  to  contradict  the   messages once decisions have been made. There will always, of course, be individual  candidates who see it in their interest to differentiate themselves from one or two of  the policies of their party. These episodes tend to receive a disproportionate amount of  attention, given the otherwise high level of discipline displayed by the government.

In  spite  of  all  the  resources  they  were  able  to  marshal  in  this  way,  things  were  not   going the government’s way in the lead-up to the campaign, and there was doubt over  when the prime minister would call the election. The prime minister had been under  the hammer for weeks over truth (or lack thereof) in government with regard to the  war  in  Iraq  and  the  children  overboard  affair.7  As  speculation  about  the  date  of  the   election  intensified,  and  opinion  polls  continued  to  show  the  opposition  in  the  lead,   the  eventual  announcement  of  the  election  date for 9 October proved to be a circuit  breaker for the government.

Mr Howard’s press conference (the one that ABC TV was criticised for not covering  live)  on  the  day  he  called  the  election  was  one  of  the  more  deft  exercises  in  media   management in recent memory. Had the prime minister sought to change the subject  completely  from  Iraq  and  children  overboard  to  economic  management  (as  his   advisors  were  likely  recommending),  the  media  would  not  have  been  particularly   accommodating,  particularly  as  Senate  hearings  into  the  Mike  Scrafton  allegations

7  The children overboard affair pertained to video footage of asylum seekers holding their children over  the edge of their boat prior to it ultimately sinking. The rhetoric put out by the government at first  suggested they had evidence the children had been thrown overboard by their parents. The footage and  the testimony of naval officers at the location did not support the government’s original claims.



6

were  to  be  held  during  the  first  week  of  the  campaign.  Instead,  the  prime  minister   emphasised  trust.  Who  do  you  trust  to  manage  the  economy?  Newspapers  obliged   with  headlines  the  next  day  about  trust.  Even  though  it  is  difficult  to  tell  precisely   what effect campaigns have on elections, the mood during the official campaign was  quite  different  to  that  of  the  ‘phoney  campaign’,  which  had  been  in  progress  since   Latham had been elected opposition leader.

Latham Cuts Through  Through  a  combination  of  his  plain-spoken  style  and  Keating-like  turn  of  phrase,   Mark Latham made more impact with his first press conference as opposition leader  than  Simon  Crean  had  managed  in  two  years  in  that  position  (Simons  2004,  p.13).   One of the phrases he used in that press conference, ‘the ladder of opportunity,’ was  to  be  a  constant  theme  of  Latham’s  time  as  leader  (and  a  dream  for  political   cartoonists,  especially  after  Latham’s  demise).  Upward  mobility  was  a  theme  of   Latham’s thinking as a backbencher and shadow minister, although terms such as ‘the  third way’ and ‘social capital,’ common in his writing (Latham, 1998), were missing  from  the  opposition  leader’s  lexicon,  along  with  the  ‘crudity’  that  the  Coalition  had   hoped to exploit.

Latham  simply  had  insufficient  time  to  introduce  himself  to  the  Australian  public,   establish  in  the  mind  of  the  electorate  the  failures  of  the  Howard  government,  and   develop  a  program  for  an  alternative  government.  In  spite  of  this  strategic   disadvantage,  and  perhaps  because  of  the  clarity  he  was  able  to  communicate  by   ignoring the advice of those around him, Latham was remarkably successful in setting  the political news agenda for the six months following his ascension to the leadership.

Latham  spoke  of  a  ‘new  politics.’  Old,  class-based  politics  no  longer  resonated,  he   believed.  He  put  himself  forward  as  an  example  of  what  could  be  achieved  by  any   Australian given hard work and the right opportunity. Latham’s success in changing  the  news  agenda  forced  the  prime  minister  to  depart  from  his  long-term  strategy.   However,  his  promising  beginning  as  opposition  leader,  wrong-footing  the  prime   minister on parliamentary superannuation, forcing amendments to the US Free Trade  Agreement,  and  focussing  on  the  challenge  of  raising  children,  was  strangely   disconnected from Labor’s themes in the formal campaign period. The irony of all of  this  is  that  Latham  was  uniquely  qualified  among  parliamentarians  to  enter  the   discourse  on  economic  policy,  being  trained  in  the  subject  and  having  authored  a   number of books on public policy. His decision to shift the ground on which politics  was conducted away from economic management was a bold step. As Simons noted  hopefully,  ‘if  Latham  wins  this  election,  it  will  signal  an  end  to  the  domination  of   economists, and a revival of a social agenda.’ (2004, p.107).

Latham’s  success  in  the  early  months  of  his  leadership  was  based  on  following  his   own  instincts  about  politics,  the  weaknesses  of  the  government,  and  Labor’s  policy   direction. Much of this came down to Latham and his own temperament.

Mark’s very much his own adviser, his own tactician, his own strategist,  his own media man. There was never a team of people who sat down with  him  to  work  out  what  our  messages  were  and  what  our  strategy  was   leading up to the campaign. It was just all in Mark’s head. (former Latham  staff member cited in The Weekend Australian. 27-28 November, 2004)



7

The  caucus  had  little  choice  but  to  stand  behind  him  and  smile,  regardless  of  what   they  thought  of  his  various  pronouncements.  Decisions  such  as  his  last-minute   announcement  demanding  amendments  to  the  enabling  legislation  for  the  Australia-United  States  Free  Trade  Agreement  confounded  the  doubters  in  the  media  and  the   parliamentary  party.8  However,  an  election  campaign,  while  focussing  on  the  image   of the leader, requires at the very least some degree of coordination with the national  secretariat. Pamela Williams’ book The Victory (1997) highlights this in respect to the  1996  election  campaign,  when  Paul  Keating’s  staff  battled  the  ALP  national   executive.  Advertising,  in  particular,  involves  the  expenditure  of  tens  of  millions  of   dollars.  Latham’s  style  of  minimal  consultation  and  last-minute  changes  of  tactics   inevitably caused headaches for central office. For example, much electronic and print  media advertising involves rebuttal of arguments being put forward by the opposing  party.  This  sort  of  theme  needs  to  be  coordinated  with  the  activities  and   pronouncements of the leader to ensure maximum impact. Latham proved unwilling  to subordinate his campaign timetable to the needs of central office.

Even  with  the  2004  federal  budget  moving  the  spotlight  back  to  economic  matters,   Latham  kept  to  his  strategy.  His  emotional  and  bizarre  press  conference,  where  he   accused journalists of spreading unfounded rumours about his personal life only drew  attention  to  the  bind  in  which  he  had  placed  himself.  With  increasingly  presidential   style  campaigning,  during  a  new  leader’s  honeymoon  period,  a  personal  story  is   appealing and an easy way to help them better relate with a constituency that largely  would  not  have  know  who  he  or  she  was  before  they  assumed  the  leadership.  The   negative effect however, as we saw with Latham, is that it also raises public interest in  any  negative  aspects  of  a  leader’s  personal  past.  Having  opened  the  door  to  public   scrutiny,9  it  is  difficult  for  a  leader  to  then  claim  rights  to  privacy  when  the  media   reporting turns negative.

Another  method  the  opposition  used,  which  would  have  been  difficult  for  the   government to match, was a series of community forums. The sight of Mark Latham  answering questions from locals in various places around the country, with eloquence  and good humour, gained the opposition the kind of positive television coverage that  they had been unable to muster in previous years. Government figures tend to attract  too many protestors for this method to be effective. The last time an opposition tried  the  tactic,  when  John  Hewson  as  Liberal  leader  proposed  the  Fightback  economic   reform package prior to the 1993 election, the result was an atmosphere of division.  Latham  avoided  this  fate  in  part  by  not  releasing  key  policies  until  close  to  the   election. This tactic and his decision (despite the emphasis on his personal story) not  to  do  in-depth  media  interviews  (preferring  direct  contact  with  the  public  at  events   such as the community forums) ensured that the press gallery lost patience with him  long  before  the  public.  This  illustrates  the  difficult  choices  an  opposition  faces  in  a   permanent campaign environment.

David versus Goliath  Latham’s one-man communications strategy makes for an interesting contrast with the  government’s permanent campaign approach. With the resources of the state well and

8  Media coverage of Latham’s handling of the USFTA had been highly critical, with headlines about a  divided ALP, until Latham’s amendments changed the agenda to some less popular aspects of the  agreement, in particular proposed changes to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Fund.   9

For example, Latham invited the media into his home for Father’s Day in 2004.



8

truly exploited by the Coalition, it is remarkable that Latham achieved what he did as  opposition leader. The media’s sense of political balance (within the strictures of the  two-party  system)  gives  the  opposition  plenty  of  time  to  air  its  view.  Latham  also   exploited  the  press  gallery’s  tiredness  with  the  Howard  government  and  with  the   understated approach of Beazley and Crean. Combined with the normal honeymoon  period  that  Australian  voters  afford  leaders  of  the  opposition,  Latham’s   unconventional style and agenda made a Labor victory feasible for the first time since  2001.  Commentators  contrasted  Latham’s  ability  to  ‘cut  through’  to  the  electorate   with Crean’s ineffectual presence.

Much  has  been  written  about  the  turmoil  in  Latham’s  office  before  and  after  the   election  campaign  (his  chief  of  staff  and  media  adviser  were  sidelined,  with   consultants  Hawker-Brittan  advising  on  communication  strategy).  The  consultants’   advice  to  downplay  the  government’s  strengths  of  economic  management  and   national  security  has  been  criticised,  but  Latham  had  simply  failed  to  establish   credentials of his own . In spite of his wonkish background of writing abstruse books  on economics and other policy areas (for example Civilising Global Capitalism: New  Thinking  for  Australian  Labor,  1998  &  From  the  Suburbs:  Building  a  Nation  from   our  Neighbourhoods,  2003),  Latham  drew  very  little  on  this  background  after  he   became  leader,  instead  emphasising  the  empty  concept  of  ‘new  politics.’  In  spite  of   some  attractive  metaphors,  such  as  ‘the  ladder  of  opportunity,’  there  was  very  little   coherence to the ‘new politics’ mantra. Similarly, a slogan such as ‘ease the squeeze’  needs  to  complement  other  themes  of  the  campaign.  It  was  far  from  clear  just  what   squeeze  Labor  was  promising  to  ease.  A  more  professional  campaign  would  have   made the link.

Oppositions  face  a  difficult  balancing  act  between  putting  out  detailed  policies  too   early  and  thereby  subjecting  them  to  close  analysis  by  the  government  (courtesy  of   the resources of government departments), versus not putting them out early enough  and being accused of having no policies and/or putting them out too late to be fully  understood  by  the  public  (particularly  where  the  policy  is  complex).  The  most   expensive policy, Medicare Gold, came out of the blue in the final two weeks of the  campaign  (ABCTV  The  7:30  Report,  30  September  2004).  That,  and  the  family   payment plans of the Labor Party, were detailed major policy changes. Because they  were  not  announced  until  the  campaign  period,  the  public  found  it  difficult  to  fully   absorb  them.  The  government  effectively  ran  negative  media  as  to  the  effect  they   would have on the economy and the budget. Political campaign periods (the 31 day  frame) are planned by parties for daily news announcements etc. The introduction of a  system like Medicare Gold needs to come out earlier to allow expert opinion to fully  scrutinize the proposals to ease the public’s concerns over the implementation of the  policies.  However,  there  are  risks  to  longer  term  announcements  before  a  campaign   period. Governments can absorb the ideas into their own agenda. For example, John  Howard  did  this  with  Latham’s  superannuation  policy  for  MPs  (Dobson  &  Crabb,   Howard’s  shock  move  on  super,  The  Age,  13  February  2004).  Equally  if  they  come   out  too  early,  as  mentioned,  the  government  has  more  time  to  scrutinize  the  figures   and  put  holes  in  the  policy.  John  Hewson’s  1993  GST  policy  is  an  example  of  a   policy that suffered from this.

Latham  spoke  of  politics  as  a  battle  between  ‘insiders  and  outsiders’  (Henderson,   Latham has turned outside in, The Sydney Morning Herald, 28 September 2004), in a



9

way  similar  to  Howard’s  criticism  of  ‘elites.’  The  insiders  versus  outsiders  rhetoric   was  always  a  risk.  Fear  is  a  much  greater  political  motivator  than  hope.  Those  who   Latham  wanted  to  identify  as  outsiders  (the  majority  of  the  population)  with   something to gain from a Labor government were receiving less clear messages than  those  he  identified  as  insiders.  Latham  was  happy  enough  to  let  the  business   community  know  he  considered  them  insiders  whose  privileges  were  on  notice.  As   Labor’s  policies  were  released,  however,  the  losers  made  themselves  known.  The   policy  to  redirect  some  funding  from  ‘wealthy’  private  schools  to  ‘more  needy’   private  schools,  for  example,  caused  much  more  public  consternation  than  was   warranted for the amount of money involved (Schools wonder what Latham learned  from 2001, The Age, 3 April 2004). But Latham wanted the insiders to know who they  were.

Commentators  have  noted  the  way  in  which  fear  triumphed  in  the  2004  campaign.   Mark  Latham,  himself  days  before  the  election,  referred  to  Howard’s  campaign   centring  on  fear  (Howard  campaign  based  on  fear:  Latham,  The  Sydney  Morning   Herald, 6 October 2004). There is nothing new about a successful tactical use of fear  in  a  political  campaign.  Negative  advertising  is regarded by political strategists as a  more effective campaign tool than positive advertising. The party faithful tend to want  their  political  representatives  to  focus  in  on  their  achievements  in  government,   however, the strategy of fear and negativity is the more effective method of appealing  to  swinging  voters  concerned  about  bread  and  butter  issues  of  rising  interest  rates,   unemployment  or  economic  downturn.  (See  Young,  p.2004:  262-266).  The  sort  of   campaign  that  suggests  quality  of  life  will  be  adversely  affected  by  a  change  of   government therefore requires a negative campaign.

The  rise  of  presidential-style  contests  between  party  leaders  has  increased  the   personalisation of such negative attacks, as we saw with the Mark Latham ‘L-Plate’  advertisements  (see  Appendix).   Latham’s  emphasis  on  his  personal  story  invited   scrutiny of his record at Liverpool Council, criticism of which was an important part  of  the  Coalition’s  ‘L-Plate’  advertising.  Advertising  industry  professionals   commented  on  the  effectiveness  of  these  ads  in  highlighting  Latham’s  inexperience   (The Australian. 8 October 2004).

The  ALP  ads,  on  the  other  hand,  assuring  us  that  Latham  was  ‘ready  to  lead’  as   opposed  to  Howard  being  ‘ready  to  leave’  (likely  based  on  survey  data  showing   dislike towards Howard’s likely replacement, Peter Costello) were much less effective  (see  Appendix).  Indeed,  they  probably  only  reinforced,  rather  than  rebutted,  the   implications of the ‘L-plate’ campaign. The Labor advertising campaign recycled too  many ideas from the unsuccessful 2001 effort, suggesting that the national secretariat  believed  that  Beazley  was  robbed  of  victory  only  by  the  arrival  of  the  MV  Tampa   shortly  before  the  campaign  began.10  How  else  to  explain  the  giant  signed  placards   (promising not to sell Testra in 2001 and to keep interest rates down in 2004) and the  emphasis  on  Costello  replacing  Howard.  This  was  a  curious  contrast  to  the  leader’s   ‘new politics’ mantra.

10  The 2001 election will be re-interpreted in light of the 2004 result. While it is clear that the  government benefited from the decline of the One Nation vote in 2001, it is far from clear how much  of that increase related to the asylum seekers issue and how much was related to economic  management issues, most notably a decline in the massive anti-GST vote from 1998.



10



By  the  last  week  of  the  campaign,  when  Latham’s  much-anticipated  forests  policy   was  finally  released  to  an  underwhelming  reception,  it  was  clear  that  Latham  had   fallen  short.  Howard,  with  breathtaking  political  chutzpah,  flew  to  Tasmania  to  be   greeted with cheers from a hall full of blue-collar workers (PM Program, ABC Radio  National, 6 October, 2004). The imagery could not have been worse for Latham. To  cap off a poor week for the opposition leader, a chance meeting between Latham and  Howard outside a radio studio became the most talked-about handshake in Australian  political  history.  The  aggressive  approach  by  Latham  likely  reinforced  voter   perceptions about Latham’s suitability, or lack thereof, as prime minister.

Conclusion  While  professional  campaign  techniques  have  been  practiced  in  Australia  for  some   decades,  it  is  only  recently  that  the  degree  of  coordination  between  government   agencies, the prime minister’s office and the party organisation have been refined to  the extent that we can now say that the Australian public is subjected to a permanent  campaign.  The  permanent  campaign  offers  extensive  political  advantages  to  the   government  over  opposition  parties.  By  coordinating  the  activities  of  government   agencies  and  party  activities  through  the  political  offices  of  the  executive,   governments  can  award  themselves  extensive  resource  advantages  over  the   opposition,  through  government  advertising  and  public  relations  strategies.  The   government’s  communication  strategy  for  the  2004  election  was  to  maximise  these   advantages. This was achieved by directing government advertising to the promotion  of  changes  in  policy  in  areas  considered  weaknesses,  such  as  Medicare.  In  turn,  the   messages carried by this advertising were used in party election material.

This  whole  of  government  approach  marked  a  particularly  strong  contrast  with  the   opposition  communications  strategy,  in  part  because  of  the  inherent  mis-match  in   resources, but also because of the strategy employed by the leader of the opposition.   Mark Latham’s attempt to make his life story the central plank of Labor’s campaign,  at the expense of his credentials in economic policy, was a departure from Australian  political  practice.  Even  charismatic  figures  like  Whitlam  and  Hawke  centred  their   campaigns  on  the  leader’s  record  of  policy  substance  rather  than  their  personal   characteristics. It was, as the Liberal Party pointed out in the context of the USFTA,  an unsuccessful US import.11 American presidential candidates have long pointed to  their  background  and  character  as  reasons  to  vote  for  them.  Similarly,  American   attack  advertising  tends  to  focus  on  character  to  a  larger  extent  than  Australian   election ads (see Young, 2004). Latham’s attempt to sell his own version of the log  cabin  story  proved,  in  the  end,  a  distraction.  His  effort  to  personalise  the  issue  of   interest rates, by pointing to his own background and mortgage, was no more helpful.  Nothing  had  been  done  to  explain  to  the  electorate  how  the  next  Labor  government   would provide lower interest rates than had the previous one.

The government’s campaign strongly linked messages during the campaign period to  the  government’s  longer  term  strategy  and  policies.  Cooperation  between  the  party   leader  and  the  party  organisation  was  also  strong,  allowing  paid  advertising  to   complement  the  daily  activities  of  the  prime  minister.  The  opposition  did  neither  of

11  It is interesting to note that John Kerry, whose compelling personal biography formed the centrepiece  of his campaign for President of the United States in 2004, was no more successful on election day than  Latham.



11

these things, leaving the ALP in a weak position to counter the government’s primary  message on interest rates. Nevertheless, the ALP showed in 2004 the degree to which  an  opposition  can  wrest  the  political  agenda  from  the  government  in  spite  of  the   mismatch  in  communication  resources  available  to  the  two  sides.  Indeed,  the   government’s  use  of  state  resources  in  its  own  communication  strategy  at  one  point   did it more harm than good. However, this problem was outweighed by the generally  more  professional  approach  to  campaigning  that  the  government  displayed.  This   successful introduction of the permanent campaign will likely ensure that its methods  are replicated by state governments and the federal ALP in future.





12

Bibliography

Blumenthal, S. (1980). The Permanent Campaign: Inside the World of Elite Political  Operatives. Boston: Beacon Press.  Butler,  D.  and  Ranney,  A.  (Eds)  (1992).  Electioneering:  A  Comparative  Study  of   Continuity and Change. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  Catley, R. and McFarlane, B. (1974). From Tweedledum to Tweedledee. Sydney: Aust

& NZ Bk Co.   Chaples, E. (1997). The Australian Voters. In R. Smith (Ed), Politics in Australia, 3rd  Edition. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.  Duffy,  M.  (2004).  Latham  and  Abbott:  The  lives  and  rivalries  of  the  two  finest

politicians of their generation, Sydney: Random House.  Franklin, B. (1994). Packaging Politics: Political Communication in Britain's Media  Democracy, London: Edward Arnold.  Grant, R. (2004). Federal government advertising, Research Note. No.62. June 2004.

Parliamentary Library: Department of Parliamentary Services.    Holland,  I.  (2002).  Accountability  of  Ministerial  Staff?,  Information  and  Research   Services, Research  Paper  No.  19,  2001-02.  Department  of  the  Parliamentary

Library.  Latham,  M.  (1998).  Civilising  Global  Capitalism:  New  Thinking  for  Australian   Labor, Sydney: Allen & Unwin.   Latham, M. (2003). From the Suburbs: Building a Nation from our Neighbourhoods,

Sydney: Pluto Press.  Lees-Marchment,  J.  (2001).  Political  Marketing  and  British  Political  Parties:  The   Party’s Just Begun. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   Mair,  P.  and  Katz,  S.  (1997).  Party  Organisation,  Party  Democracy,  and  the

Emergence  of  the  Cartel  Party.  In  P.  Mair  (Ed),  Party  System  Change,  Oxford:   Clarendon Press.  Mann, T. and Ornstein, N. (Eds). (2000). The Permanent Campaign and Its Future.  Washington: AEI Press.  Mill, S. (1986). The New Machine Men. Melbourne: Penguin Books.   Miskin,  S.  (2005).  Campaigning  in  the  2004  federal  election:  innovations  and

traditions, Department of Parliamentary Services, Research Note No.30.  Panebianco,  A.  (1988).  Political  Parties:  Organization  and  Power.  Cambridge:   Cambridge University Press.  Plasser,  F.  (1999).  Tracing  the  Worldwide  Proliferation  of  American  Campaign

Techniques, Center for Applied Political Research, Vienna: Austria.    Shea, D. M. and Burton, M. J. (2001). Campaign Craft: The Strategies, Tactics and  Art of Political Campaign Management. Praeger: Westport.   Simons, M. (2004). Latham’s World: The New Politics of the Outsiders, in Quarterly

Essay. Issue 15. 2004.   van  Onselen,  P.  (2003).  Major  Party  Senatorial  Roles:  Coalition  Advantage  in  the   Senate, Australasian  Political  Studies  Association  Conference,  University  of

Tasmania, 29 September - 1 October, 2003.  van Onselen, P. (2004). Major Party Senators: campaigns, organisation and resource  disposal, Australasian  Political  Studies  Association  Conference,  University  of

Adelaide, September 29 - October 1, 2004.  van  Onselen,  P.  and  Errington,  W.  (2004).  Electoral  Databases:  Big  Brother  or   Democracy  Unbound?  The  Australian  Journal  of  Political  Science,  39  (2),  349-

366.



13

Ward, I. (2003), An Australian PR State? Australian & New Zealand Communications  Association Conference, Brisbane, July 2003.  Williams, P. (1997), The Victory, Allen & Unwin, Sydney.  Wolfers,  J.  and  Leigh,  A.  (2002).  Three  Tools  for  Forecasting  Federal  Elections:

Lessons from 2001, The Australian Journal of Political Science, 37 (2) 223-240.    Young,  S.  (2004).  The  Persuaders:  Inside  the  Hidden  Machine  of  Political   Advertising, Sydney: Pluto Press.







14

Appendix: Government and Party Advertising 2004

Government pamphlet to all households:



Coalition anti-Latham advertisement:





Still from ALP anti-Howard advertisement:



