

John Cobb MP Australian Government Minister for Citizenship and  Multicultural Affairs



Media Centre

607 Continue Queensland’s Proud Citizenship Tradition

16 September 2005

More than 600 people will celebrate Citizenship Day tomorrow when they are conferred citizenship by the Minister for  Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, John Cobb, at Brisbane City Hall.

Among the conferees, celebrating a proud tradition of citizenship in Queensland, are a university lecturer and two  biologists working at the University of Queensland, a family of Sudanese refugees and a theatre director.

Virginia Payne Slaughter, a US citizen arrived in Australia in 1996 under an Employer Nomination Scheme. She works at  the University of Queensland as a lecturer and will become a citizen tomorrow with her 10-year-old daughter, Kathleen.

Maria Gomez Cabera and her partner Juan Ortiz arrived from Venezuela in 2000 and attained permanent residence through  the Independent Skilled visa. They both now work as biologists at the University of Queensland and will also be conferred  tomorrow.

Mrs Phonia Nagua and her husband Younis Adwanga, Sudanese refugees arrived in Queensland under humanitarian visas.  They will become Australian citizens tomorrow with their five children, aged between 6 and 17.

UK-born Phillip Stork, a theatre director, arrived in 1995 with his parents under the Employer Nomination Scheme.

‘The different ways these conferees entered Australia demonstrates the many ways Australia welcomes potential residents,  and also show how our newest citizens enrich Australia,’ Mr Cobb said

‘Citizenship is the unifying force in our culturally diverse society and I encourage all those who are eligible to take the  final step and apply for Australian citizenship.

‘Australian Citizenship represents our shared values - acceptance, equality, freedom of speech and religion, the rule of  law, Parliamentary democracy, our Constitution and English as the national language.

‘The Brisbane candidates make up over half of the 900 permanent residents that will be conferred citizenship in  Queensland alone on Citizenship Day,’ Mr Cobb said.

Minister Cobb said that he encourages all people who are eligible Australia-wide to take the final step and apply to become  Australian citizens.

‘I would also encourage people who are already Australian citizens to take part in the national Citizenship Day  celebrations by participating in an affirmation ceremony,’ Mr Cobb said.

The Brisbane Citizenship Day ceremony will start at 9.30am on 17 September at the Brisbane City Hall with  Minister Cobb as the presiding officer.

MEDIA CONTACT: Ron Kelly - 0417 862 924

