

“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

1

“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”

Stephen Murray-Smith Memorial Lecture  State Library of Victoria  19 October 2005





Today’s world is preoccupied with terrorism.  How we in Democracies

respond is critical to the maintenance of our own values and to the ideals

of liberty.  There is a danger that Islam, which is essentially a peaceful

religion, will be blamed for the actions of terrorists and that we will be

increasingly divided by religion and race.



We need to understand that terrorism is as old as the human race.



The Crusaders from Britain who fought against Islam in the Middle Ages;

the Spanish Inquisition; the IRA and the Protestant militias in Ireland all

practised terrorism; all were Fundamentalist in their beliefs; the

Chechnians wanting independence, are terrorists.  People in some parts of

the Philippines who want independence, were once called Communists,

then Freedom Fighters are now called terrorists.  The Basques in Spain;

the Belgians in the Congo;  the Portuguese and Spaniards in Central and

South America;  the Red Army and the Red Brigades in Germany and

Italy in the late seventies and early eighties were all terrorists.



These groups were mostly fundamental in their attitudes.  They all

practised terrorism.





“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

2

Many in today’s world say Islamic Fundamentalists have no cause and no

purpose but hatred and destruction of the West.  In a major speech to his

own Labour Party last year, Prime Minister Tony Blair made that point

but on the very next page he said that peace between Israel and Palestine

would do more to end terrorism than all the bullets in the world.  Both

statements cannot be true.  The second is true.



Many believe the war in Iraq has provided a new motivation for terrorists,

to end the occupation of an Islamic country by an infidel army.



To understand that there are different causes of terrorism is not to

condone but is essential if we wish to overcome and end terrorism.



Because civilisation as we know it was so nearly destroyed during the

Second World War, in its aftermath, leaders of all major states believed

they must strive and work to achieve a better world.



The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was agreed in 1948.  In the

years since, protocols and conventions established under it were designed

to build a law-based world.  The International Criminal Court finally

came into force on 1 July 2002. This was a further major step in that

direction.



It is more than unfortunate that our response to terrorism has reversed

much of that progress and leaders in too many countries do not seem to

understand that that is happening.



I want to look briefly at the response of Britain, of the United States and

of Australia.



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

3



In Britain, the government had attempted to put asylum seekers

permanently in jail if they were not successful in their claims and if they

could not be returned to their country of origin.  The Law Lords made it

plain that jail of more than a few weeks was inappropriate under British

law.  The detainees had to be charged and tried.  A compromise was

reached which involved judicial and parliamentary oversight.



Since the London bombings the United Kingdom has sharpened some

aspects of its laws against terrorism, especially laws in relation to aliens.

It seems to have done this however, with greater discussion and openness

than we have had in Australia.



In the United States, long before war was declared on Iraq, members of

the Administration, especially from the Justice Department, the Pentagon,

the State Department and the White House, began an involved paper trail

which sought to define how far interrogators could go in “intrusive

questioning”.  Their purpose was to avoid charges of torture under United

States or International Law, or to avoid being in breach of the Geneva

Conventions.



The US Administration published these papers.  They are put together in

a large document called the Torture Papers by the New York University

Center for Law and Security, published by Cambridge Press.  These

papers were before Iraq, designed to define the treatment that could be

metered out to prisoners taken from Afghanistan.  The papers were

intended to place such prisoners beyond the reach of any law and to

provide immunity for the jailers.





“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

4

President Bush came out of it with credit.  He signed a short note which

said “any interrogation must be humane” - he did not elaborate.  Colin

Powell argued that to torture prisoners would place American servicemen

at risk and, on that practical rather than on an ethical ground, he argued

against the practices.



A State Department lawyer, William Taft argued fervently against torture.

Assistant Attorney General Jay Bybee argued that if you caused major

organ failure or death, it would be torture but short of that, it almost

certainly wasn’t.  Former Assistant Attorney-General Bybee is now a

judge.



Attorney-General Gonzales in his confirmation hearings before the

United States Senate, claimed that he was opposed to torture, but he

signed a piece of paper, which appears in the Torture Papers, which many

would construe as endorsing torture.  The Justice Department has most to

be ashamed of in its perversion of both domestic and international law in

relation to torture.



Torture began to be outlawed as reliable evidence by British Courts in the

1500s.  For a long while now domestic jurisdictions and international law

have outlawed torture absolutely.  We cannot take one step along that

path.  To take one leads to many.  To its credit, the Supreme Court of the

State of Israel in 1999 made a judgement that torture was outside the law

in all circumstances.  On practical grounds it is recognised as the most

unreliable means of extracting evidence, but on moral and ethical grounds

it betrays the core belief of our existence.  By acceptance of torture too

many have stepped into a darker past.





“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

5

General Taguba’s report, and the Red Cross report on Guantanemo Bay,

both use careful language, as one would expect.  But it was clear that

abuse was pervasive and substantial.  Long before Abu Ghraib, it was

possible to see how every violation of decent behaviour, later revealed at

Abu Ghraib, had its origins in high level memorandum, passed between

the highest organs of United States Administration.



There was a clear attempt to place prisoners taken by the Northern

Alliance and handed over to the Americans outside the reach of any law

of any human decency.  They were described as “unlawful combatants”.

The Taliban were described as a “failed state” which Colin Powell

pointed out was wrong because the United States had always held all

states and in particular, Afghanistan to their international obligations.



Torture has been further reinforced as a technique by the expanded

Rendition programmes, which most recently brought American

authorities into sharp conflict with the Italian government.



A Canadian citizen had earlier been taken to Egypt and was only released

12 months later, after the most vigorous Canadian protests.  There is no

point in the Rendition Programme unless it is to place prisoners in a

jurisdiction where they can be tortured.



One of the Australians at Guantanamo Bay reportedly spent six months in

Egypt on his way to Guantanamo.  He has since been released without

charge.  The Australian Government claimed that it had approached the

Egyptian authorities who had no record of him entering or leaving the

country.  Egyptian immigration authorities would not be lined up to



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

6

record people who were taken off an American executive jet to an

Egyptian jail under the Rendition programme.



The United States’ response has also involved the establishment of

special Military Tribunals.  There is a body of opinion, which has

condemned those Tribunals as lacking basic justice.  These include Lord

Goldsmith, First Law Officer of Britain, who said that they would not

provide justice required for a British citizen.  As a consequence the

United Kingdom persuaded the United States to return British citizens

held in Guantanamo Bay to Britain.  One of the Federal Courts in the

United States has ruled Military Tribunals unconstitutional on the

grounds that prisoners were not told the evidence against them and on the

grounds that the tribunals accepted evidence taken under torture.



Major Robert Preston and Captain John Carr, both within the United

States system and both Prosecutors, condemned the process as not

providing a reasonable basis for a just trial.  Captain Paul Willey, head of

Australia’s Military Bar and Navy Reservist has also been heavily critical

of the process.  The President of the Law Council of Australia has

described the attitude of the Australian Government as an outrage.

Geoffrey Robertson, QC has joined in the criticism.  He suggested that an

Australian should be required to sit as Judge with the Military Tribunal.

There are two problems with that suggestion.  The United States would

not accept it and secondly, no reputable Australian judge would take part

in the proceedings of those Military Tribunals.  Prof Tim McCormack,

Australian Red Cross Professor of Humanitarian Law at Melbourne

University and one of the drafters of the Statues of the International

Criminal Court, and adviser to the War Crimes Tribunal at the Hague has



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

7

said that at the very least Hicks deserves the same standard of justice that

is being provided for former President Milosevic of Yugoslavia.



The weight of opinion and the weight of evidence is overwhelming.  The

rules for the conduct of the Tribunals, their lack of independence, the lack

of a judicial appeal, deserve condemnation from all of us.



The United States has a Bill of Rights and so their legal system has come

into play.



The courts have ruled that people in Guantanamo Bay must have their

day in court.  Unfortunately it has not yet taken the step of confirming

that the Tribunals are unconstitutional.



Australia has supported the military tribunals.  The Government has said

that Hicks will get justice, but the majority of opinion is against the

Government which unlike the British Government has abandoned its own

citizen.  We have, by implication, supported the Rendition Programme

and therefore have not opposed torture.



The ASIO legislation of 2002 underlines Australia’s official indifference

to “due process” and to what until recently would have been regarded as

universally accepted Rule of Law.



We are the only democratic country, I am advised, to legislate for the

detention of people whom the authorities do not suspect of any wrong

doing or even of any wrong thought.





“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

8

In Australia, any of us can be detained merely because authorities believe

we might know something that we don’t even know we know.  The

authorities do not have to believe we are guilty of any crime, or are

planning any crime, or have consorted with any suspicious persons.  How

could such a law be drafted by the Government and supported by the

Labor opposition?  You can be detained for one week but then on a new

warrant, another and another and another week.  Unless it is approved in

the original warrant, and why would ASIO do that? - you are not allowed

to contact your wife, your husband, your child, your mother, your father

and of course not a lawyer.



If you don’t answer ASIO’s questions satisfactorily, you can be charged

and subject to 5 years in jail.  But the law is reasonable, it goes on to say

that if you don’t know anything, then it’s not an offence not to tell ASIO

anything!!!  But you have to prove you didn’t know anything and so the

“onus of proof” is reversed.



You can be asked to produce a paper and if you don’t, you also go to jail

on prosecution for 5 years but the law goes on to say, being fair-minded

again, if you don’t have such a paper, it’s not an offence not to produce it

but you have to prove that you didn’t have it.  How do you prove that you

do not have something that you do not even know exists!!!  Again, the

“onus of proof” is reversed.



If a journalist heard that you had been detained and sought to report it, he

would go to jail for 5 years.  If a detained person were released and talked

to anyone about his or her experiences, he could go to jail for five years.





“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

9

This seems to be a law for secret behaviour by authorities, for making

somebody disappear.  It is a law that one would expect in tyrannical

countries and not in Australia.  Do we do nothing about it because we

believe it will not apply to ourselves?  Do we believe it is only going to

apply to people of a different religion who look a bit different?



United States authorities and others have, time and again, denigrated

those in Guantanamo Bay.  We have been told they are the worst of the

worst, that they are terrible people, that they do not deserve the normal

protection of the law.



People who make such comments clearly do not understand or believe in

the Rule of Law as it has evolved through the ages.  They have taken such

views because they believe those in Guantanamo Bay and others are not

“people” like ourselves.  In a different day and a different time, but within

the memories of many, we have heard those words before.



In other words the presumption of innocence until proven guilty, the

presumption that all people should have access to “due process” in a

properly constituted legal system is no longer valid in Australia.



It is not reasonable just to blame the Government alone for such laws.

The Labor Party approved such laws.



There was one change of particular significance so I give credit for that.

The original legislation applied to people of any age, even to children,

except that intrusive strip searching should not take place of a girl under

10.  The Labor Party took the view that the legislation should only apply

to adults.  It now applies to those over 18.



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

10



As a consequence of the Government and the Opposition basically

agreeing, Australian law already provides for the abolition of “due

process”, of Habeas Corpus and the presumption of innocence.



All this is already law.



Australian Law or lack of it has already failed many individuals and

groups.  Amongst these we can include:  Aboriginals; people held in the

Department of Immigration detention centres; an Australian citizen

deported; Australian citizens wrongly held in detention centres without

medical attention; a United States citizen deported without “due process”

and an Australian citizen being tried before a Military Tribunal.  By the

detention of the innocent, by the questioning of people known to be

innocent by the authorities, by the right confirmed by the High Court with

a majority of 4 to 3, to keep a failed asylum seeker in jail for the term of

his natural life, if he could not be returned to his land of origin.



Authorities in Australia already have the capacity for the exercise of

extreme and arbitrary power without adequate judicial safeguards.



Much of this involves the gravest failure of administrative and ministerial

responsibilities.  As shown in the Palmer and Comrie Reports the

Department of Immigration has been at the centre of much of it.  Two

Ministers have been in charge, neither Minister is responsible.  As far as

one can tell, nobody has been held accountable.  The people involved

appear not to have mattered to the Administration or to the Government.

Australia now has new proposals in front of it providing even greater

power to the police and to the Government.  Attention should in



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

11

particular be turned to those provisions that allow for “preventative

detention” and the use of “control orders” to arrest and to limit and

monitor the activities of individuals.  No cogent case has been made for

the expansion of these powers, except a general one that it is necessary to

fight terrorism.  It would be reasonable to ask why, it would be

reasonable to expect a considered answer.



The legislation says that a control order may be sought if, on the balance

of probabilities the order would substantially assist in preventing a

terrorist act, or if the person has provided training or received training

from a listed terrorist organisation and furthermore, on the balance of

probabilities that the order is reasonably necessary to protect the public

from a terrorist act.



The intelligence rationale for a “control order” is not easy to grasp.  If

surveillance is thorough why not watch the person, collect more evidence

and then charge the person with an offence?



One consequence of a “control order” would be the immediate

disappearance of all the subject’s contacts and collaborators.  They would

know from their point of view that something was wrong, they would

fade away and disappear.



The terms of the legislation are broad.  One of the grounds for a “control

order” is that a person has provided training to or has received training

from a listed terrorist organisation.  Does the organisation need to be

listed when the training was received?  Does the training have to be

recent, could it have occurred 20 years ago in different times and different

circumstances?



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

12



In one respect more severe problems arise in relation to detention orders.

A person can be detained for a limited period if there are reasonable

grounds to suspect the person will engage in a terrorist act, or has done or

will do an act in preparation for, or planning of a terrorist act.  Again the

terms are broad.



There is no involvement of a court in achieving authority for a

“prevention order”.  An issuing authority is appointed by the Minister.

In the draft legislation an issuing of authority is defined as:  the

Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police,

or a member of the Australian Federal Police above the rank of

Superintendent.  For continued “preventative detention” the issuing

authority is a Federal Magistrate or a Judge but acting in a personal

capacity, not presiding over a court.



The same questions arise once “preventative detention” is applied, a

person’s collaborators, colleagues, will again know from their point of

view that something was seriously wrong and they would fade away.



If there was valid grounds for concern, why not double surveillance,

collect more information, which would enable a charge and a prosecution

to be laid.  The strategy of “control orders” and “preventative detention”

may have some relevance but the case has not been made.  Furthermore

the lack of judicial involvement in the application for “preventative

detention” is a total derogation of justice.



There appears to be no involvement of the judiciary in application of a

“preventative detention” order and secondly, the involvement of legal



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

13

officers in the case of continued “preventative detention” is marginal, and

would be totally ineffective.  No legal officer would in those

circumstances be prepared to second guess the policeman.  In reality,

“preventative detention” and continued “preventative detention” can be

imposed solely on the involvement of ASIO and the police.



Do we really believe these powers will be effective in the fight against

terrorism, or do we believe that the powers themselves are likely to lead

to a sense of grievance of alienation?  These are powers whose breadth

and arbitrary nature, with lack of judicial oversight, should not exist in

any democratic country.  If one says, but they will not be abused, I do not

agree.  If arbitrary powers exist they will be abused.



All this has happened in a country which has not experienced a

significant terrorist incident for many years.  What would be our

Government’s reaction if this great city were tied up and disorganised by

terrorist attacks similar to those which recently occurred in London?



The Government is really saying on these issues, trust us, but no part of

the history of the Coalition’s invasion and occupation of Iraq gives any

member of that coalition the right to say on these issues:  “Trust us”.  We

were told there were weapons of mass destruction.  There weren’t.  The

British were led to believe that weapons of mass destruction could be

dropped on London within 45 minutes.  They could not and the

authorities knew they could not.



More recently published British Cabinet Papers have made it clear that

President Bush had made the decision to go to war seven or eight months

before the American people were told.



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

14



During the time when Dr Hans Blix, Executive Chairman UN

Monitoring, Verification & Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) was

painstakingly revealing the truth about weapons of mass destruction, or

the lack of them in Iraq, the United States had no intention of allowing

that process to continue, to conclude.  They did not indeed want it to

conclude because it would have taken away the primary cause for war - a

decision which had already been made.



More particularly after the Tampa, after the Children Overboard, the

experience and treatment of asylum seekers, the abandonment of Hicks,

all suggest that any right to trust has been long destroyed.  Would

Cornelia Rau trust the Government?  Would Vivian Solon trust the

Government?  Concerning the Tampa and Children Overboard, the

Government knew they were playing to the more fearful and conservative

elements in the Australian community and with great success.  The

Government also knows in relation to terrorism that the public is

concerned, even fearful and can be made more fearful.  These laws again

play to conservative elements in Australian society.



It may be brilliant politics but will such laws make Australia secure?  By

its actions, the Government has long abandoned and lost the middle

ground.  The Rule of Law and “due process” has been set aside.  Has the

Government already created an environment in which people will accept

too much if the Government says it will help in the fight against

terrorism?



These new proposals should be opposed.  No strong case has been made

that these breaches in the Rule of Law will be effective in the fight



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

15

against terrorism.  The London bombings are probably used as a

rationale, but apply these laws to London bombings, and the laws could

not succeed.  The laws should be opposed on the basis of substance.  The

powers are arbitrary altering the quality of ASIO and of the police in

significant ways.  There are no real safe guards, there is no adequate

judicial review.



The laws should be opposed because the process itself is seriously

flawed.  Instead of wide ranging discussion the Government has sought to

nobble the field in secret and to prevent debate.  The laws should be

opposed because they provide arbitrary power which would be dependent

on trust, a trust that has not been earnt.



Western civilisation is again betrayed by the treatment metered out to

prisoners at Abu Ghraib and at Guantanamo Bay.  We are told that this

was the view of a few misguided, low-level troops but Donald Gregg,

former National Security Advisor to the first President Bush, wrote that

the memorandum, published in the Torture Papers: “cleared the way for

the horrors that had been revealed in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo

that make a mockery of Administration assertions that a few misguided

enlisted personnel perpetrated the vile abuse of prisoners.  I can think of

nothing that can more devastatingly undercut America’s standing in the

world or more importantly our view of ourselves than those decisions.”



The Government and the Labor Party have both assumed that we cannot

fight terrorism and adhere to the basic principles of justice and

democracy.  They have assumed that certain people are outside the law

and do not deserve justice.  They are already saying to us “Trust us” on



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

16

the issue.  I suggest they have given us every reason not to trust them on

these issues of peace and war and on security for our people.



From Australia, our Government has constantly said that our participation

in the Coalition in Iraq has not increased the risk of terrorist attacks in

Australia.  But the former head of ASIO, Dennis Richardson, and the

former Chief of the Defence Force Staff, General Cosgrove, have both

suggested the contrary.



Professor Naomi Chazan said, in the recent Gandel Oration in

Melbourne:  “There is one standard and one standard for all, and the

challenge that is posed by terrorism is how to defend the rights of those

that we don’t agree with? ….How can we defend the rights, the basic

human and civil rights, of those whose ideas we simply abhor?”



Unless we do so, the terrorists have already had a significant victory.  It is

not enough to say we believe in justice, in human rights for those who

agree with us, for those whom we classify as honourable and law abiding

citizens.  It is the system, the process, the courts, it is the measurement of

justice that determines the nature of our civilisation.



Churchill put it this way:

He suggested that the great privilege

“of Habeas Corpus, and of trial by jury, which are the supreme protection

invented by the English people for ordinary individuals against the State

- the power of the executive to send a man into prison without

formulating any charge known to the law and particularly to deny him the

judgement of his peers - is, in the highest degree, odious and is the

foundation of all totalitarian governments ….. extraordinary powers



“How Democracies Fight Terrorism”  Rt Hon Malcolm Fraser AC CH

17

assumed by the Executive with the consent of Parliament in emergencies

should be yielded up, when and as, the emergency declines …. This is

really the test of civilisation.”



Thomas Paine said:

“He that would make his own liberty secure must guard even his own

enemy from oppression, for if he violates this duty, he establishes a

precedent that will reach to himself.”



That is succinct and accurate advice.  It is an expression of what has

happened through the course of history.  If we stand silent in the face of

discrimination and in violation of the basic principles of humanity, then

we betray our own principles and our way of life.  We must fight

extremism, fundamentalism, terrorism, whatever its origins, whatever its

objectives.



Fundamentalism has, throughout history, often been represented by an

extreme and arbitrary belief, often without justice and without principles

which make it possible for us to lead our lives as part of a civilised

community.  I regret that many, who almost certainly mean well have so

little faith in our freedom, in our democracy, in our laws, that they believe

they must throw basic rights overboard to defend those same rights.  Such

views are wrong and will make it harder to overcome terrorism.





4386 words

