‘Beyond Australia’s First Bill of Rights: engendering public debate’1



Katharine Gelber

The University of New South Wales





The experience of the ACT Human Rights Act may be salutary for rights proponents

in  Australia  in  many  ways  other  than  the  study  of  its  text,  its  provisions,  its

interpretations  and  its  developing  jurisprudence.  I  want  to  investigate  the  broader

context  within  which  to  consider  the  impact  and  importance  of  the  ACT  Human

Rights Act. More specifically, I want to consider the question of engendering public

support  for  explicit  rights-protection  mechanisms.  This  includes  considering  the

framework  within  which  we  might  be  able  to  have  a  public  debate,  and  existing

sentiments and knowledge within the community which can be drawn upon.



The first element of this debate is clarifying the issue of whether a bill of rights may

lead to better rights protection than currently exists within Australia. To what extent is

it  the  case  that  the  Australian  system  of  government  as  a  whole  is  able  to  protect

rights in the absence of an explicit bill of rights? Is the traditional argument2 that the

doctrines  and  practices  of  responsible  government  and  a  separation  of  powers—in

which  the  former  maintains  accountability  of  the  executive  to  the  parliament  and  in

turn  to  the  people,  and  maintains  a  transparent  legislative  process,  and  the  latter

ensures that the judiciary can act as an independent arbiter of government action—a

viable one?



This  is,  after  all,  the  first  and  primary  argument  that  appears  in  the  federal

government’s National Framework for Human Rights’ National Action Plan, released

in December of last year.3



Considerable evidence exists to suggest that the current system is far from effective.

Some  of  the  reasons  for  this  include  the  increasing  involvement  of  arguably  less

1  Paper presented at ‘Assessing the First Year of the ACT Human Rights Act’, Australian National  University, Canberra, 29 June 2005.  2

Galligan, Brian 1995. A Federal Republic. Cambridge University Press, Melbourne, p. 135.  3  Commonwealth of Australia (CofA) 2004. Australia’s National Framework for Human Rights:  National Action Plan. Attorney-General’s Department, Canberra, p. 5.

1

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

accountable non-government actors in carrying out delivery of public policy4, and an

increased ability for politicians to deceive the public in relation to ethical issues and

even  abuse  their  ministerial  responsibilities  without  being  held  accountable  in  the

forms of a ministerial resignation or an election loss.5



Furthermore,  significant  shortcomings  in  rights  protection  are  evidenced  in  specific

areas in the Australian contemporary environment. These are too numerous to specify,

but  include  restrictions  on  indigenous  land  title  and  consultation  with  indigenous

peoples  over  land,  for  which  the  United  Nations  has  criticised  Australia6;  ongoing

discrimination  against  same-sex  couples  including  recent  amendments  to  the

Marriage  Act;  the  mandatory  detention  of  asylum  seekers  including  children7;  and

government attempts to amend the Sex Discrimination Act to allow discrimination on

a currently prohibited ground, that of marital status.8



In  the  longer  term  if  these  rights  issues  are  to  be  addressed,  better  protections  are

required  including  at  Commonwealth  level.  Furthermore,  the  ACT  model

simultaneously overcomes some other important objections to a bill of rights; namely

that  a  bill  of  rights  would  render  many  decisions  on  important  political  issues  the

prerogative of the courts instead of elected legislatures, and that a bill of rights locks

communities  into  definitions  of  rights  that  may  be  unable  to  change  over  time  to

reflect changing community values. It does so with its preservation of parliamentary

sovereignty, a model which retains flexibility while simultaneously setting a standard

against which governments may be held accountable.





4  Vromen, Ariadne & Gelber, Katharine 2005. Powerscape: Contemporary Australian Political  Practice. Allen & Unwin, Sydney, pp. 130-135.  5

Uhr, John 2005. Terms of Trust: Arguments over Ethics in Australian Government. UNSW Press,  Sydney, pp. 121-122.  6

Vromen & Gelber, Powerscape, p. 167. These are omitted from the National Action Plan’s coverage  of how the Australian legal system recognises native title (CofA, National Action Plan, p. 41).  7

Gelber, Katharine 2005. ‘High Court Review 2004: Limits on the Judicial Protection of Rights’,  Australian Journal of Political Science, Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 311-316. The National Action Plan’s  reference to this, and to the controversy surrounding the powers of indefinite detention of asylum  seekers whose applications have been denied but who cannot be returned to their place of origin, in the  section discussing the robustness of prohibitions on arbitrary arrest and detention, is simply to note that  ‘the High Court has recently found that detention may continue until removal is reasonably practicable’  (CofA, National Action Plan, p. 83).  8

Johnson, Carol 2003. ‘Heteronormative Citizenship: The Howard Government’s Views on Gay and  Lesbian Issues’, Australian Journal of Political Science, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 49-54.

2

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

All  this  lends  itself  to  the  answer  that  a  bill  of  rights—when  qualified  in  particular

ways—might be a better way to protect rights in the Australian system of government,

given the weaknesses that exist in the systems currently in place. If the answer to this

question is at least a qualified yes, then how might the debate be carried forward?



It seems clear that the context in which this debate is to be held in Australia is one of

generally  low  levels  of  public  knowledge  about  the  specificities  of  our  system  of

government. Yet at the same time, there is reason for some optimism regarding public

support for ideals that relate to rights, in particular for Brenton’s notion of ‘democracy

as an ideal’.9



In  1994  the  Civics  Expert  Group  undertook  a  large-scale  survey,  as  an  element  of

their task which was to ‘improve Australians’ knowledge of the system of government

in Australia so that their rights and responsibilities as citizens are understood’.10 Their

survey  showed  that  only  18  per  cent  of  Australians  had  some  understanding  of  the

contents of the Constitution. In terms of how informed people felt about the rights and

responsibilities  of  Australian  citizens,  27  per  cent  felt  moderately  informed,  33  per

cent  felt  a  ‘little  bit’  informed,  and  28  per  cent  had  only  a  vague  idea.  These  are

clearly quite low figures in relation to knowledge of the system.



Yet  the  responses  towards  the  ideal  qualities  people  felt  they  wished  to  see  in  their

community  were  more  positive,  albeit  inconsistent.  26  per  cent  of  people  perceived

that  the  main  rights  and  responsibilities  of  citizens  related  to  civil  rights,  over  a

quarter. Yet nearly as many (21 per cent) said the main rights and responsibilities of

citizens  related  to  obeying  the  law.  A  further  10  per  cent  thought  freedom  was

important (a figure higher than those who thought being patriotic was the main right

and responsibility, at eight per cent).



It  was  interesting  that  in  relation  to  questions  not  obviously  rights-based  but  with

implications  for  rights  issues,  the  response  rate  could  be  quite  high.  For  example,



9  Brenton, Scott 2005. ‘Public Confidence in Australian Democracy’, Democratic Audit of Australia,  May, p. 6. Available http://democratic.audit.anu.edu.au/BrentonConfidenceMay05.pdf   10

Civics Expert Group 1994. Whereas the People: Civics and Citizenship Education. Report of the  Civics Expert Group, AGPS, Canberra, pp. 130, 133, 155, 156.

3

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

38 per cent believed that care and consideration for others was the main attribute of

being a good citizen (in contrast to the higher figure for rights and responsibilities).



Ten  years  later  a  new  survey  was  conducted.  One  might  reasonably  expect  that  the

results of this survey—undertaken ten years later and following seven years of a new

federal  government—might  reveal  quite  different  results.  Yet  in  some  ways  perhaps

they didn’t.



The Australian Survey of Social Attitudes is a new biennial survey beginning in 2003

which provides data on the social attitudes and behaviour of Australians and is based

on a mail survey of 5 000 Australians aged 18 and over.11



Some  results  of  this  study  are  revealing.12  When  asked  what  they  thought  the  main

aims  of  Australia  should  be  for  the  next  ten  years,  and  given  a  choice  between

maintaining  order,  giving  people  more  of  a  say  in  government  decisions,  fighting

rising  prices,  or  protecting  freedom  of  speech,  13.6  per  cent  of  respondents  ranked

freedom of speech first.13



Moreover, respondents in the ACT consistently ranked rights-type issues more highly

than  other  states  in  the  survey.  In  relation  to  this  question,  21  per  cent  of  ACT

residents listed free speech as their first choice, the highest of any state or Territory,

with both Victoria and Queensland having 15 per cent of people who ranked it first.



In  a  related  question,  when  asked  to  choose  between  a  stable  economy,  progress

towards a less impersonal and more humane society, ideas counting more than money

and fighting crime, 21 per cent of people voted the rights-type question first, ranking

moving towards a less impersonal and more humane society highest. This is over one-fifth  of  respondents.  Young  people  were  more  likely  to  rank  it  highest  with  28  per



11  Wilson, Sean & Gibson, Rachel. 2003a. Australian Survey of Social Attitudes, Version A. The  Australian National University, ACSPRI Centre for Social Research. Wilson, Sean & Gibson, Rachel  2003b. Australian Survey of Social Attitudes, Version B. The Australian National University: ACSPRI  Centre for Social Research.  12

I would very much like to thank Ariadne Vromen for her assistance with processing original data  from the Australian Survey of Social Attitudes 2003. The data were derived from questions A9, A11,  C3, D1 in Wilson & Gibson 2003a and question E5 in Wilson & Gibson 2003b.  13

The answers with the highest results were maintaining order (36.5 per cent) and giving people more  say (37.5 per cent), with roughly equal numbers ranking these issues first.

4

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

cent of 18-34 year olds ranking it first, compared with 14 per cent of those aged 65

and over. Again the ACT ranked highest of all states and Territories, with 35 per cent

of  respondents  choosing  progress  towards  a  less  impersonal  and  more  humane

society.



These  questions,  while  not  producing  a  majority,  do  indicate  significant  support  for

the  kinds  of  ideals  associated  with  rights  protection.  Keep  in  mind  also  that

respondents  were  asked  to  rank  these  ideals  against  big-ticket  items  like  a  stable

economy. In this light, the results can be seen as very positive from a rights-protection

point of view. They indicate a latent but strong level of support for placing ideals such

as a more humane society and freedom of speech highly.



Some  questions  in  the  survey  considered  more  specific  rights  issues.  For  example,

respondents  were  asked  to  say  whether  they  agreed  or  disagreed  with  the  statement

that ‘censorship of films and magazines has no place in a free society’. Overall, 23 per

cent  of  respondents  either  agreed  or  strongly  agreed.  Among  18-34  year  olds  this

figure  increased  to  29  per  cent  (among  those  aged  65  and  over  it  was  only  22  per

cent).  Again  the  ACT  was  the  most  liberal,  with  29  per  cent  agreeing  or  strongly

agreeing.



Respondents were asked to say whether they agreed or disagreed that the law should

recognise  same-sex  relationships.  A  total  of  44  per  cent  agreed  or  strongly  agreed

with this proposition. Among 18-34 year olds the figure was 49 per cent (but among

65  year  olds  and  over  it  was  only  19  per  cent).  The  ACT  again  had  the  strongest

result, with 48 per cent agreeing or strongly agreeing.



On these questions which relate to specific human rights issues, then, the results are

(perhaps  surprisingly)  optimistic.  While  still  falling  short  of  absolute  majorities,

significant  numbers  of  Australians  have  clearly  moved  position  on  the  question  of

recognition  of  same  sex  relationships,  and  a  decent  proportion  are  cautious  of

censorship also. This indicates a significant level of support in the community for the

protection of some specific rights.



5

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

Combining  these  results  with  the  knowledge  gained  from  the  ACT  Bill  of  Rights

Deliberative Poll produces even more interesting results. In the ACT Deliberative Poll

it  was  found  that,  given  an  opportunity  to  learn  more  about  the  issues  at  stake,  a

significant number of people moved from being undecided or against a bill of rights to

supporting  the  idea.  Furthermore,  the  deliberative  poll  produced  ‘major

improvements’  in  political  knowledge  amongst  its  participants.14  This  means  that  it

might  be  possible  to  move  from  minority—but  significant—levels  of  support  on

specific issues to a higher level of support, if the context within which information is

provided to Australians about a bill of rights is both well informed and well targeted.



So  the  question  of  targeting  the  information  is  important.  In  terms  of  how  to  target

such information, further information from the Australian Survey of Social Attitudes

again  points  the  way.  Australians  responded  most  positively  of  all  to  ideals-type

questions  in  the  survey.  Fifty-eight  per  cent  of  respondents  felt  very  or  somewhat

proud  of  Australia’s  record  in  fair  and  equal  treatment  of  all  groups  in  society.  In

relation  to  their  pride  in how  democracy  works, the  figure  rose  to  78  per  cent. This

means that there is a 20 point discrepancy between pride in democracy, and pride in

fair and equal treatment. This indicates an  awareness  among  a  significant  section  of

the community—1 in 5 according to this survey—that fair and equal treatment is not

always forthcoming in the Australian system.



Brenton’s  own  analysis  of  the  Australian  Survey  of  Social  Attitudes  dovetails  with

these findings. He has suggested that most of the survey respondents did not express

confidence  in  the  federal  parliament,  defined  in  terms  of  their  evaluation  of  the

effectiveness  of  the  institution  in  performing  its  designated  role.  As  an  institution,

they  found  the  parliament  ineffective,  although  this  analysis  didn’t  clarify  what  an

‘effective’  parliament  might  have  looked  like.  By  contrast,  Brenton  cites  the  same

results I have here—that most respondents were ‘at least ‘somewhat proud’ of the way

democracy  works  in  Australia’.  Brenton  argues  this  indicates  a  differentiation

between the ideals of democracy and its institutions. To the extent that it is possible to

argue  that  protection  of  fundamental  rights  is  an  ideal  towards  which  we  can  work,

14  ACT Bill of Rights Deliberative Poll 2002. The ACT Deliberates an ACT Bill of Rights: A Territory  Deliberative Poll Report, December 11, pp. 2-3. Available  http://www.jcs.act.gov.au/prd/rights/documents/DPFINAL.doc.

6

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

this indicates a possibly relatively high level of support for rights ideals, if not at this

time the institutions which might take action to secure them.



Taken together, what we appear to have is quite a strong level of support for ideals,

combined  with  a  low  level  of  trust  in  existing  institutions  to  maintain  and  embody

those ideals. We also have a significant, although still lower than a majority, support

on  specific  rights  questions  and  simultaneously  an  awareness  that  not  all  people  are

treated fairly and equally in Australian society.



In addition, results are most positive in the ACT. The ASSA survey from which many

of these results have been drawn was undertaken in 2003, the year before the Human

Rights Act 2004 was enacted. These consistently more positive results (from a rights

perspective) in the ACT mean that Australian Capital Territorians already possessed

more beneficent attitudes towards rights issues than other States and Territories before

the  bill  of  rights  came  into  being.  It  is  possible  that  these  attitudes  may  have

contributed to creating a political climate in the ACT within which a bill of rights was

able  to  be  enacted,  although  other  speakers  at  this  conference  have  emphasised  that

the process of enacting the bill of rights was led in this case by the parliament (and in

particular by the Chief Minister). A causal relationship between public attitudes and

the enactment of the bill of rights in the ACT has clearly not been established by these

very limited results, but they do at least indicate that  if one  Territory can produce a

climate  within  which  positive  results  are  achievable,  perhaps  other  States  and

Territories might be able to follow suit.



In  addition  to  this  we  know  that  provision  of  information  to  the  public  can  enhance

the public’s understanding of what a bill of rights entails, its potential pitfalls and its

potential benefits, if that information is accurate. But these survey results indicate that

more  than  just  accuracy  is  needed—they  indicate  that  pitching  the  rights  debate  to

draw on the existing strengths within public opinion in relation rights-type principles

and ideals might be a way of building broader community support for a bill of rights.



These  findings  give  us  indications  about  where  and  how  any  campaign  for  bills  of

rights  in  Australia  could  be  pitched  to  engender  and  create  further  public  support.

Some  people  are  concerned  about  rights  protection,  but  many  are  not  confident  that

7

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

existing  institutions  and  systems  can  deliver  on  their  expectations.  There  is  an

awareness  of  lack  of  rights  protection  in  some  areas,  but  simultaneously  a  desire  to

see Australia as a democratic and ideal place to live. Generating the kind of leadership

required  to  move  the  debate  forward  will  be  complex.  But  building  on  the  idealism

and  critique  of  existing  institutions,  while  promoting  rights  as  central  to  the

democratic  ideals  which  many  Australians  hold  dear  may  be  a  way  forward  in  this

debate.



This framework for pitching the debate to engender public support also links with a

final  point  I  want  to  consider  about  the  context  within  which  bills  of  rights  in

Australia are debated. The federal system in Australia may from some perspectives be

seen as hostile to principles of rights protection, because it allows for inconsistencies

which,  when  read  against  universal  human  rights  principles,  are  not  justifiable,  it

allows  for  responsiveness  to  law-and-order  campaigns  by  state  politicians,  and  it

produces a lack of centralised consistency and control. However federalism can also

be seen as providing advantages for rights protection, due to its institutionalisation of

greater checks and balances on governmental power.15



The  ACT  experience  gives  us  the  ability  to  test  the  waters,  to  experiment  with  the

generation  of  public  support  for  a  bill  of  rights  through  regional  governments,  in

anticipation  of  a  federal  bill  at  some  point  in  the  future.  Federalism  allows  for

diversity and experimentation. This can be used to the advantage of rights advocates

who can point out that the alleged difficulties and constraints which are said to arise

from  a  bill  of  rights  do  not  always  arise,  and  that  where  they  do  these  may  be

addressed  and  thus  be  seen  as  constructive  as  they  assist  in  clarifying  how  a  bill  of

rights  might  work,  and  what  its  implications  might  be.  This  may  assist  in  reducing

fears about the unintended effects of a bill of rights.



This  also  enables  us  to  overcome  the  shortcoming  of  not  having  an  institutional

framework like that enjoyed by, for example, the UK. The UK has had the advantage

for  many  years  of  being  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  European  Court  and  the

European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  which  provided  a  framework  they  could



15  Galligan, A Federal Republic, pp. 158-159.

8

Democratic Audit of Australia—July 2005

easily incorporate. In Australia the closest we come to an international framework is

the  Optional  Protocol  to  the  ICCPR.  However,  experience  has  shown  us  that  even

adverse  findings  against  Australia  within  this  system  lack  enforcement  and  traction

within the Australian governmental processes.16



The Australian federal system and its opportunities for diversity and experimentation

may  provide  us  with  an  institutional  framework  that  allows the  Australian  debate  to

move  forward  in  a  unique  way.  They  may  allow  us  to  build  domestic  support  for

explicit  rights  protection,  within  a  context  that  overcomes  the  lack  of  an  external

institutional  framework  which  we  can  clearly  adopt,  and  which  simultaneously

informs the Australian public around human rights standards. The procedures here are

clearly  different,  but  the  experimentation  allowed  by  federalism  provides  room  for

movement.  Perhaps  the  introduction  of  state  and  territory-based  bills  of  rights  in

Australia  could  provide  an  institutional  framework  within  which  to  develop  the

consciousness of what a bill of rights entails, the gains it may offer, and any potential

pitfalls it may have.



In  sum,  the  context  within  which  debates  on  further  bills  of rights  in  Australia  is  to

move forward is complex but achievable. There is room for political leadership in the

debate  which  points  out  the  areas  in  which  rights  protection  in  Australia  can  be

improved.  Such  leadership  also  needs  to  take  on  board  both  existing  lack  of

information within the community, and concurrent support for democratic ideals and

principles  which  make  people  proud  in  their  own  system  of  government.  The

protection of human rights needs to be seen as integral to this.





16  Williams, George 2004. The Case for an Australian Bill of Rights: Freedom in the War on Terror.  UNSW Press, Sydney, p. 10.

9

