



senator.allison@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list.

DEMOCRATS  MEDIA 05/370 THURSDAY 14 JULY 2005   SENATOR LYN ALLISON AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS LEADER  MENTAL ANGUISH WILL CONTINUE FOR DETAINEES    The Australian Democrats said the Government's mental health action plan resulting from the damaging Palmer report was unlikely to lessen the long-term psychological damage caused by the Howard Government's inhumane policy of mandatory detention. Australian Democrats Leader, Senator Lyn Allison said for far too long asylum seekers have suffered severe depression and other serious mental health conditions, yet have received inadequate treatment.  "It was only when the embarrassing bungle over Cornelia Rau's case became so public, that the Government was forced to admit the inherent problems in the system," Senator Allison said.  "We are encouraged the Government is finally paying attention to the problems, but while they retain a policy of incarcerating people who legally seek asylum in our country, we will continue to hear these types of complaints." Senator Allison said Mick Palmer's scathing assessment of inadequate mental health treatment provided to immigration detainees has been highlighted in numerous submissions to the current Senate Inquiry into Mental Health. The Forum of Australian Services for Survivors of Torture and Trauma states in its submission that the "isolation and indefinite nature of detention under the constant threat of forced deportation is highly corrosive of mental health". "We asked the Government in May to provide more details on how many detainees have sought treatment for mental health problems; what services were provided them; the qualifications of those providing treatment; and protocol and policies of screening in detention centres. Two months later, we have still not received a response," Senator Allison said.  A study reported in the Medical Journal of Australia found that all but one of the detained asylum seekers who participated in the study displayed symptoms of psychological distress, 85% reported chronic depression, 65% had pronounced suicidal ideation and 20% exhibited signs of psychosis. "We have known for years the mental heath impact on detainees," Senator Allison said. "Research shows that detention contributes to high levels of anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, self-harm and suicidal behaviour, and it is only now that the Government has been forced to pay attention." Senator Allison is chairing the National Mental Health Inquiry, the terms of reference of which include the overrepresentation of people with mental illness in detention and in the criminal justice system.   Media contact Katrina McGrath 0408 056 167

