Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AND INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS

Media Centre

Bakhtiyari Family

VPS 001/2005

Minister for Immigration, Amanda Vanstone, confirmed that the removal of the Bakhtiyari family from Australia had been completed with the  family now in Pakistan.

‘After a delayed arrival in Pakistan caused by changed airline timetables, the family arrived in Pakistan early yesterday (Sunday) Australian time.  However, due to an attempt by one member of the family to disrupt the entry, processing took most of the day,’ the Minister said.

‘The family were flown out of Port Augusta last Thursday on a charter flight, transferring to commercial flights from Bangkok.’

The Minister said the Government would not discuss details of the family’s final destination in Pakistan, which was discussed with the family.

‘This concludes the process for the Bakhtiyari family,’ the Minister said.

‘The family’s claim to be Afghani refugees was found not to be valid in primary decision, through the Refugee Review Tribunal and a succession  of court hearings.

‘These processes have been a costly one for Australian taxpayers. In addition to almost $600,000 in legal costs, detention centre costs in excess of  $1 million and removal expenses, the total cost to taxpayers is likely to exceed $3 million.’

The Minister said the Australian Government had written confirmation from Pakistan that the Bakhtiyari’s are nationals of Pakistan and  appropriate travel documentation was provided by Pakistani authorities for the removal process.

The Minister said it was a measure of Australian society that people seeking asylum, regardless of how they arrive in Australia, had the opportunity  to test and re-test their claims.

‘It should equally be a measure of our society that when such an opportunity is provided, the outcome is accepted,’ the Minister said.

‘I would encourage those agencies and individuals that gave their support to the Bakhtiyari family during their time in Australia, to now turn their  attention to the thousands of genuine refugees being resettled to Australia, particularly from refugee camps in Africa.

‘I am sure all of these genuine refugees would welcome the same support and opportunities that were provided to the Bakhtiyari family.’

1 January 2005

See: Index of Media Releases

