LAURIE FERGUSON MP       SHADOW MINISTER FORIMMIGRATION        FEDERAL MEMBER FOR REID

Electorate Office: Level 3, Granville Towers, 10 Bridge St, Granville NSW 2142  Ph (02) 9637 4713 Fax (02) 9682 6320





SKILLS CRISIS - NEED FOR BROADER REFORM

The  Government’s  increase  of  20,000  skilled  migrants  is  not  a  reflection  of  what  the   Minister  calls  “the  benefits  of  well  managed  immigration  arrangements”,  stated  Labor   Shadow Minister for Immigration, Laurie Ferguson.

“In  fact  what  it  demonstrates  is  the  Government’s  total  failure  and  bungling  of   Australia’s economic, labour, immigration, and education policies. This increase signifies  the  Government’s  recognition  of  the  skills  shortage  and  their  ineptness  in  foreseeing   these  problems.  The  abolition  of  the  Bureau  of  Immigration  Research  and  a  failure  to   undertake requisite modelling has reduced debate and lead to this panic response. Clearly,  the Government should have seen this coming.”

“Labour  firmly  believes  in  adequate  training  and  education.  The  next  generation  of   workers  should  rise  from  opportunities  for  young  Australians.  Do  we  forego  the   abundance of untapped talent in Australia for a gold rush of global recruits?

Similarly actions, not words are needed on incentives and mechanisms to bring back into  the work force competent middle aged Australians.”

“Under a Labor Government, resources would be utilised on training Australians young  and old, including the Indigenous community who currently have an 85% unemployment  rate.”

“The  Minister’s  proclamations  that  this  increase  will  “complement  measures  the   Government  is  taking  to  expand  the  training  of  Australians”  are  ludicrous.  What   measures - the Government’s earlier policies of slashing University and TAFE places and  funding,  and  its  studied  disinterest  in  the  decline  of  apprentices?  In  fact  the  privatised   government  utilities-  the  largest  work  places  -   are  guilty  of  diminishing  their   commitment to adequate training programs from 1.7% to 1.5%.”

“The Minister’s promise to “help employers” must be read with caution. The Minister has  conveniently turned a blind eye to employers when it comes to rules, checks and balances  in  sponsoring  short  and  long  stay  work  visas.  Six  years  after  promises  of  action  by

Minister Ruddock, nothing has been done to facilitate prosecution of employers for using  illegal workers in Australia’s labour ‘black market’.   Vanstone  should  advocate  a  greater  push  towards  employer  training  and  to  ensure   Australian working conditions are to be guaranteed and protected.”

“Minister  Ruddock  also  stated  a  few  years  ago  that  if  skilled  migration  is  drastically   increased, the benchmark would have to be lowered to the point of diminishing the skill  level and degrading the effectiveness of the skilled migration program. Labor  raised this  query articulated by Ruddock then, and asks the same question now.

How are skills entry standards retained with such a massive increase in the skills intake?  The  other  reality  is  that  in  normal  processing,  most  of  the  people  will  not  enter  for   another  year  and  the  only  way  they  can  gain  swift  entry  is  by  further  degrading  the   Immigration entry requirements.”

“On  the  broader  immigration  front  balance  has  been  lost  in  recent  years.  The  refugee   humanitarian intake, despite international crises has dramatically fallen from 18% to 9.3-10%.  Similarly  there  has  been  a  major  assault  on  family  migration,  particularly  on  the   parent front with waiting lists of up to 8 years. Parents can provide vital child care and  household assistance liberating qualified migrants who seek to upgrade their credentials  and to become valuable Australian employees.”

“This  whole  crisis  goes  deeper  than  just  a  skills  shortage,  demonstrating  a  need  for  a   much  broader  response  and  reform.  It’s  about  time  that  the  Government  wakes  up  and   adequately  addresses  the  real  problems  with  a  proactive  attitude  rather  than  reactively   dealing with the issues when things go wrong”, Laurie Ferguson concluded.





For further information, please contact Laurie Ferguson on  02 9637 4717  or Aisha Amjad on 0413 511 666.







