Media Release SENATOR THE HON. CHRISTOPHER ELLISON Minister for Justice and Customs

Manager of Government Business in the Senate                                                   Senator for Western Australia

E070 /05 8 June  2005

Government welcomes Siev -X people smuggler conviction

The Minister for Justice and Customs, Senator Chris Ellison, has welcomed the conviction today of  people smuggler Khaleed Shnayf Daoed in the Su preme Court of Queensland.

Daoed was convicted on the charge of people smuggling in relation to Siev -X under Section 232A of  the Migration Act 1958 by virtue of Section 5, Crimes Act 1914.

“This conviction sends a clear message to people smugglers that t he Australian government is  determined to bring to justice those involved in this reprehensible criminal activity,” Senator Ellison  said.

In October 2001, the vessel known as Siev -X (Suspected Illegal Entry Vessel -Unknown) sank en -route  to Australia from Indonesia in international waters, resulting in the death of 353 people. A total of 45  people survived the incident.

The  c onviction of people smuggler Mr Daoed is as a result of a joint investigation involving AFP and  Department of Immigration Multicultur al and Indigenous Affairs (People Smuggling Strike Team).

This conviction follows the Australian Government's successful extradition of Daoed from Sweden to  face  these proceedings in Australia.

Daoed  has been remanded in custody until his sentencing he aring on Friday 24 June 2005.

Th e offence carries a maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment.

Daoed is the second person to be convicted of offences stemming from the SIEV -X investigation.

In 2003, the AFP assisted Egyptian authorities in the prosecu tion of Egyptian -born Abu Quassey for  organising the vessel Siev -X. Quassey  was convicted and  is presently serving a 5 year 3 month prison  sentence after being convicted of negligently causing death, and migration offences.

Further enquiries:  Brad Burk e (02) 6277 7260 / 0417 749 711

http://www.ag.gov.au/www/justiceministerHome.nsf

