

Bob Sercombe MP  Federal Labor Shadow Minister for  Overseas Aid   and Pacific Island Affairs

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  13  SEPTEMBER 2005

SUBJECTS: UN SUMMIT, MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

SERCOMBE: A couple of months ago, there was a great deal of optimism and hope  that significant progress could be made in realising the Millennium Development  Goals and tackling the problems of the world’s poor. We had the G8 concerts, we had  great achievements at the G8 summit, but we now seem to be in a stalemate.

The Prime Minister is in New York and according to media reports today, not much  progress is being made on this crucial issue of global poverty.

The Prime Minister should play a key role in getting the international community  refocussed and revitalized.

It is very important that he uses his influence in getting the Americans back on track  and other international leaders back on track also.

At the G8 meeting we saw that Tony Blair and other members of the international  community are prepared to make substantial increases in aid commitments to assist  the world’s poor.

It is vitally important that the Australian Government also commits to achieving  development assistance of 0.5% of Gross National Income, in line with other world  leaders. This is vital to give hope to the poor of the world, and it is also in Australia’s  interest.

The Australian people are immensely generous. We saw the generosity of the  Australian people at the time of the Boxing Day tsunami. We saw the tremendous  response of Australians. It is the right thing to do for Australia to catch up now with  other developed countries in terms of our commitments. It is the right thing to do  because the hopes and aspirations of over a billion poor people in the world depend  on the international community addressing these issues.



At the G8, we saw a lot of attention being given to Africa, which is obviously  important. But the Asia Pacific is vitally important to Australia and there are many  more poor people in the Asia Pacific region than there are in Africa. So it is vital that  the Prime Minister take the opportunity presented by this meeting of world leaders to  revitalise the process, to put Australia at the forefront, to reflect the generosity of the  Australian community and to make a substantial commitment to tackling world  poverty, and stabilising poor countries in the process.

Journalist: There is speculation that the Prime Minister will announce an extra billion  dollars in the fight against poverty. Do you think that that will be enough?

SERCOMBE:  That will obviously be welcome, but it is still well below what others are  committing. That will represent less than 0.4% of Australia’s Gross National Income.  That still puts us well down the pecking order. The other problem is that our  Government is not being transparent in the way it spends aid. We have the strange  example of asylum seekers in Nauru, for heaven’s sake, being paid for out of the aid  budget. That shouldn’t be part of the aid budget.

ENDS.

Tuesday 13 September 2005  Contact Dave Peebles 0432 449 071



