



senator.allison@democrats.org.au     www.democrats.org.au  News releases can also be sent by email. Please advise us if you want to join the email distribution list.

DEMOCRATS  MEDIA 05/002 THURSDAY 6 JANUARY 2005   SENATOR LYN ALLISON AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS LEADER DEMOCRATS WELCOME AID PACKAGE AND URGE DONATIONS The Australian Democrats have welcomed the Government's $1billion Asia assistance package, but said the real needs of the tsunami-devastated nations would not be known until the UN completed its current assessment. Democrats Leader, Senator Lyn Allison said at this stage it is difficult to know how much the Government's contribution will provide and it is also important to clarify the conditions attached to the Government's loan. Senator Allison said the Democrats encourage the Government to work more closely with the UN and Aid agencies in making sure the money goes where it is most needed. "We are also urging people to continue to give money to assist Southeast Asian communities and give support to Australian families who continue to wait for news of loved ones." Following a briefing yesterday with Australian Government agencies Senator Allison said it could be a long time before remains of all Australians were identified and some bodies would never be found.  Democrat volunteers are collecting for UNICEF in every state, and covering tennis tournaments including the Gold Coast on Friday where Queensland Senator Andrew Bartlett will take part. Since New Year's eve the Democrat's website has included a button for donations to UNICEF and Democrats Leader Senator Allison emailed thousands of members over New Year encouraging them to assist with donations. Senator Allison who serves on the Parliamentarians for UNICEF committee said the Democrats were supporting UNICEF as a respected, established NGO that focused on children. Senator Allison welcomed the fact that the major banks are either waiving fees from donations altogether or donating collected fees to the charities, and urged them to make this a permanent arrangement for charity donations. Senator Allison called on the Government to rule out deporting Sri Lankan asylum seekers currently in the Australian community and in detention, and to consider using the Safe Haven visa for victims of the crisis where needed.   For media inquiries contact Katrina McGrath 0408 056 167

