1





“From Other to Us:  Transforming Disability in Australia”

Public Lecture given at the Centre for Public Policy,  University of Melbourne, 8 November 2005  By  Christopher Newell, AM

Associate Professor  School of Medicine,  University of Tasmania

----



Abstract

Disability is often conceptualised as a specialised, technical issue, the subject of policies to do with  inclusion, special accommodations and government strategies that suggest “we care”.  Yet in order to  transform disability in Australia we need to tackle our deep-seated fears, moral convictions and  relationships.  We need to seek to transform people with disability from “other” outside of the moral  community, to part of “us”, the nice, normal and even natural.  Such a project requires us to draw upon the

largely rejected wisdom of people with disability, their families and carers.  It requires us to address the  power relations of disability and the way in which disability serves and reinforces dominant institutions and  even our narration of the nation itself.  The transformation of disability in Australia will not occur via  jingoistic campaigns which take the "dis" out of dis-ability, or by a re-jigging of labour market and other

social policies, while the meta-narratives of disability continue unchecked.  Transformation requires the  fostering of purposeful and mundane relationships which are based upon, and help us to explore, the  inherent worth and contribution of people with disability to Australian society. Out of these relationships  flow policy initiatives vital to social change.  In so doing we will find that it is not just disability that we are

transforming, but Australia itself.1





In  beginning  I  want  to  recognise  the  traditional  owners  of  this  land  and  the  continuing   dispossessed nature of and treatment of Australian indigenous peoples, and to thank the  University  of Melbourne for this invitation. I also want to dedicate this lecture to those  generations  of  people  with  disability  who  have  gone  before  us  struggling  for  human   rights.

Tonight  I  want  to  attempt  something  extraordinary,  provocative  and  possibly  even   obscene - to explore the central role of disability in Australian society and its institutions  and yet to point to the marginal situation of people with disabilities.  In so doing I shall  cover a significant amount of academic ground, and touch upon a variety of areas which  should  ensure  that  at  least  in  giving  offence,  I  am  non-discriminatory  in  offending   everyone.   Because  I  want  to  suggest  that  the  situations  of  Australians  with  disability   constitutes  a  hidden  form  of  social  apartheid  in  Australia  -  the  routine,  daily  and



1  I acknowledge my deep indebtedness to work undertaken with Dr Gerard Goggin and  published in Goggin, G & Newell, C. Disability in Australia: Exposing a Social  Apartheid, UNSW Press, 2005.

2

oppression treatment of people with disabilities.  All the more extraordinary because one  in five of the Australian population according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics has a  disability.   Indeed,  you  are  no  doubt  here  tonight  because  in  a  variety  of  intimate  and   everyday  ways the lives of every Australian are routinely touched by  the experience of  disability.

In this lecture we explore the largely subterranean world of disability which largely only  appears when there is another account of a tragic individual is flashed across our screens,  or  on  the  front  page  of  the  newspaper  and  largely  we  fund,  legislate,  or  the  minister   intervenes  to  deal  with  the  problem,  without  attending  to  the  structural  nature  of   disability.  For those of you who have not left in disgust, I then want to suggest that the  solution to this profoundly disturbing situation is to be found in purposeful and mundane  relationships  which  provide  the  opportunity  for  us  to  move  people  with  disability  from   other to us.

So where are we with disability in Australia? In the last few hours in travelling on a plane  I  learnt  a  great  deal.  In  such  routine  activity  I  become  the  “special  needs”,  the   “wheelchair in 4C”, objectified over the squawking walkie talkie, the “med assist” who  needs  to  be  interrogated  at  the  security  screening  at  the  airport  and  then  escorted  by  a   security  officer  to  the  gate  because  somehow  my  oxygen  cylinder  is  indicative  of  just   how  dangerous  the  disabled  body  really  is,  and  I  became  someone  who  automatically   loses any claim to a title.  Everywhere I go, people have not needed to ask how I define  myself, it is all done for me.  These routine categorisations and discourse on an airline are  not  some  anomaly;  because  they  occur  in  the  name  of  quality  and  safety,  customer   service, risk management.  Discourses that are highly prevalent in the managerial society.  Frankly, just another day.



Victorian disability activist Kathleen Ball puts it well:

We have made some legitimate gains in terms of physical access but the real  problem is yet to be fully addressed. Negative attitudes towards people with  disabilities are rife in the community. If we are to achieve any sense of true  emancipation,  we  must  fight  attitudinal  barriers  to  equal  participation  in  all   aspects of community life. Nothing is really going to change until we do …  Our  lives  are  governed  by  legislation.  Carers  refuse  to  handle  our  bodies   without  the  protection  of  latex  …  our  bodies  remain  the  property  of  those   who  lift,  dress  and  wipe.  Women  with  disabilities  continue  to  be  sterilised   and when we do reproduce, over one third of our children are removed from  our care. Quite often, our pregnancies are terminated against our will. We are  raped by institutional staff and yet forbidden to engage in consensual sex. Our  finances are managed and our lifestyles are regulated by duty of care.2





2  K Ball, ‘We don’t live in our homes, we live in our carers’ workplace’, Link Magazine, vol. 10,  no. 4, 2001, p. 14.

3

If we are to believe the headlines, then the solution for Australians with disabilities is just  around  the  corner:  the  latest  medical  advance,  the  miracle  found  in  technology,  the   funding  program  which  will  assuage  our  collective  consciences,  better  prevention  of   disability. Why, then, would we need a lecture about disability in Australia? After all, in  the last twenty years we have built in a lot of curb cuts, installed accessible public toilets,  and  learnt  to  speak  nicely  to  the  people  formerly  known  as  handicapped.  What  more   could be needed? Perhaps the best answer lies in the everyday lives of Australians with  disabilities,  their  families,  friends  and  carers.  We  are  deviants  routinely  given  special

housing, special taxis, special transport, special education, special accommodations. We  are so special, how could anyone complain?



Apartheid? … Australia?

These are so many untold narratives, the unsung, often shameful realities of the everyday  lives of those Australians we identify as having disability. Sadly, they reflect taken-for-granted attitudes to  the extent that some may  not even recognise the devastating values  inherent in such daily realities.

Did  not  we  as  members  of  Australian  society  ‘deal’  with  disability  back  in  1981,  the   International  Year  of  Disabled  Persons,  the  year  when  we  supposedly  broke  down  the   barriers? Yes, this was a watershed for understanding of disability in Australian society;  yet a little over twenty years later not much has changed. Whatever the activity or realm  of social life, people with disability endure a certain form of apartheid - and one that no-one will name.

Many  people  with  disabilities  are  isolated  from  mainstream  society.  We  face   discrimination in public and private life. We experience great difficulty finding paid work  and  advancing  our  careers.  Our  bodies,  identities  and  sexualities  are  controlled  by   welfare,  health  and  law.  We  are  on  the  margins  of  cultural  life,  under-represented  in   theatre,  film  and  media  industries,  rarely  portrayed  in  diverse  ways  in  newspapers,   television sit-coms and soapies, and have difficulty gaining access to the Internet and new  media technologies. And, yes, we still find that lack of wheelchair access is an everyday  issue.

Tonight  I  want  to  suggest  that  the  fundamental  injustice,  exclusion  and  marginalisation   we  daily  experience,  is  a  form  of  ‘apartheid’  -  an  apartheid  that  knows  no  name.  The   experience of apartheid in South Africa was very much about the denial of identity and  community. Dehumanisation was central to this, and normalised. It was grounded in and  orchestrated  across  social,  cultural,  legislative,  educational,  economic,  and  legal   contexts.3

There is a sense in which  apartheid does usefully  indicate the systematic exclusion, the  profound and disturbing oppression and the lack of freedom and equality that Australians  with disability experience in the early twenty-first century. Compared with the rest of the



3  Thanks to Baden Offord for his suggestive thoughts on apartheid.

4

Australian  population,  as  Australians  with  disability,  we  are  more  likely  to  live  in   poverty. We are more likely to  be physically, emotionally and  sexually abused. We are  more likely to be dependent on paid carers to carry out basic tasks. We are more likely to  experience  difficulty  in  obtaining  education  and  employment,  and  more  likely  to   experience  difficulty  in  acquiring  affordable  accommodation.11  We  are  more  likely  to   have problems accessing public buildings, basic information in ways we can understand,  and public transport. We are less likely to own our own homes. We are less likely to get  married  and  have  children,  and  often  face  discrimination  in  our  choice  of  partners.   Women with disabilities face particular disadvantage and marginalisation.

In this country predominately we are defined in accordance with medical and charitable  discourse.  We  are  the  deficit-ridden  bodies  who  rely  upon  handouts  as  pathetic,  tragic   entities that are a burden on society. Our lives are defined by our impairments until when  we die people earnestly pronounce “well it was a merciful passing”

In this lecture, we  come  to  see  the peculiar and powerful exclusion of Australians with  disability  in  social,  political  and  cultural  terms,  seeking  to  add  to  a  fragile,  new   conversation emerging regarding disability in Australian society. As Alison Davis writes:

If I lived in a society where being in  a wheelchair was no more remarkable  than  wearing  glasses  and  if  the  community  was  completely  accepting  and   accessible, my disability would not be an inconvenience and not much more  than that. It is society which handicaps me, far more seriously and completely  than the fact that I have spina bifida.4

The challenge posed by Davis’ story is one we take up in this lecture. To understand how  we  encounter  disability  in  society,  we  need  to  redirect  our  gaze  away  from  the  person   with  disability  to  scrutinise  society  itself  as  the  site  where  disability  is  located  and   reproduced. In levying  such  a critical gaze at  the  places  where  disability  is  located  and   reproduced, we also come face -to-face with an apartheid of disability.



Disability and rights

Throughout  the  Western  world,  a  significant  response  by  legislators  to  some  of  the   experience  of  otherness  experienced  by  a  variety  of  marginalised  population  groupings   has been found in anti-discrimination legislation and an invocation of rights. In Australia  legislation  has  included  the  Disability  Discrimination  Act.  The  1992  Australian   legislation  provides  a  good  case  study  in  how  such  legislation  actually  can  be   significantly  disabling,  in  addition  to  the  clear  ways  in  which  it  can  enable  and  outlaw   particular  forms  of  discrimination.  In  the  peroration  to  his  second  reading  speech,  then   Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services, the Hon. Brian Howe declared:

Our vision is a fairer Australia where people with disabilities are regarded as  equals, with the same rights as all other citizens, with recourse to systems that  redress  any  infringements  of  their  rights;  where  people  with  disabilities  can



4  A Davis, From where I sit, Triangle, London, 1989, p. 19.

5

participate in the life of the community in which they live, to the degree that  they  wish;  where  people  with  disabilities  can  gain  and  hold  meaningful   employment  that  provides  wages  and  career  opportunities  that  reflect   performance; where control by people with disabilities over their own bodies,  lives  and  future  is  assumed  and  ensured;  where  difference  is  accepted,  and   where public instrumentalities, communities and individuals act to ensure that  society accommodates such difference. Only then will we be able to say that  justice has been achieved.5

In Australia the definition of disability used in the Disability Discrimination Act is quite  extensive. However, it is most significant that key aspects of the lives of Australians with  disabilities are excluded, including migration, social security and insurance (where there  are actuarial tables in existence to support discrimination).

There  has  also  been  a  steady  undermining  of  HREOC  and  its  power  by  the  Coalition   government  since  it  took  office.  The  government  has  refused  to  appoint  a  permanent   commissioner  since  inaugural  Disability  Discrimination  Commissioner  Elizabeth   Hastings retired in 1997. Further, while each of these three commissioners has provided  important  leadership,  none  of  them  has  been  a  member  of  the  Australian  disability   community

There is a growing critical literature with regard to significant problems with people with  disabilities  actually  being  able  to  afford  to  gain  access  to  using  such  legislation.  An   action under the Disability Discrimination Act is an  action where you could potentially  lose your house in the Federal Court. This is particularly the case given that so often in  legal matters notions of ‘reasonable’ revolve around non-disabled accounts of reasonable  and unreasonable.

It is also notable that even the standards used under such legislation can help to entrench  accounts  of  otherness.  An  example  is  the  much-vaunted  Transport  Standard  recently   introduced,  which  is  supposed  to  make  Australia’s  public  transport  accessible  over  a   period  of  twenty  years.  Yet,  such  standards  tend  to  reinforce  dominant  accounts  of   disability:  stereotypes  of  people  with  disability  as  people  with  obvious  physical   disabilities,  such  as  users  of  wheelchairs.  Narrowly  conceived  standards  do  not  address   the needs of people with a wide range of other impairments, such as chemical sensitivity  or even intellectual disability. Inadequate standards are of great concern given that their  approval and adoption then provides a significant defence for bus operators against any  claim of discrimination by people with disability.

Health, welfare and disability

Few  people  involved  in  planning  and  managing  health  and  welfare  services  have  an   adequate  idea  of  what  it  is  like  to  be  a  person  with  disability  using  such  services.  The   knowledge of what it is like to be in receipt of care hardly figures in the discourses to do



5  B Howe, second reading speech on Disability Discrimination Bill, 26 May 1992, House of  Representatives, Hansard, Parliament House, Canberra.

6

with  health,  welfare  and  medicine.  My  point  here  is  the  importance  of  people  with   disabilities  being  involved  in  the  planning  and  management  of  health  and  welfare,   including  adequate  mechanisms  for  participation  by  people  with  disabilities  in  the   development,  planning,  delivery  and  evaluation  of  services.  Issues  for  people  with   disabilities in health and welfare systems go far deeper than inadequate notions of ‘access  and equity’



A further problem is the way in which medical knowledge is used to predict and define  our lives, without a reflection on the social dimension of disability. Medical knowledge is  used  in  everyday  accounts of  our lives, and  in  ethical  pronouncements by  non-disabled  ethicists along  utilitarian lines.13 Indeed we see the increasing  role of  health systems in  defining  whether  or  not  we  live  with  disability,  especially  in  the  increasing  number  of   non-specific syndromes. Many of these helpfully raise important issues as to what should  constitute disability and how we should respond.14



Sterilisation: medicine and social control



The way that medicine, its concepts, practices and terms, can directly shape the lives of  people  with  disabilities  is  evidenced  in  an  important  but  often  overlooked  episode  in   Australian health and welfare: the forced sterilisation of women and girls with intellectual  disability. This horrific and ongoing oppression is not only a testament to the spectacular  failure of our social institutions - guardianship, police, courts and health systems - it is  also a disturbing example of how disability is created and controlled in the most intimate  parts  of  people’s  everyday  lives.  Disability  support,  systems  and  services  fail  all   concerned,  since  the  decision  to  sterilise  is  made  in  the  light  of  a  family  or  service   provider already overwhelmed with, and under supported in providing for, the care needs  of the person. Often the process includes a lack of support in menstrual management. In  the  light  of  these  stresses  menstrual  management  is  construed  as  an  extra  part  of  the   ‘burden  of  care’  rather  than  considered  in  terms  of  a  woman's  right  to  bodily  integrity.   Such cases raise real questions about how ‘best interest’ is defined. Sterilisation of people  with intellectual disabilities is an ongoing practice to this day, and it has been aimed at  women and girls in particular:

This  is  a  practice  with  direct  links  to  eugenic  doctrine.  For  many  decades,  women  and   girls with intellectual disabilities, especially in institutions, have been routinely sterilised  so that they would not conceive a child, something at one time supported openly by the  medical profession.

Welfare

I  know  turn  to  the  difficult  topic  of  welfare,  central  to  disability  in  Australia,  and  a   particularly  important  recent  policy  moment.  Like  all  other  countries  in  the  Western   world,  Australian  governments  have  been  concerned  about  what  is  perceived  as  the   growing cost of people as a burden  on the state: ‘passive’ recipients of welfare. People

7

with  disabilities  have  been  a  preoccupation  of  welfare  state  policies  ever  since  their   inception.

Current  welfare  debates  and  the  threat  to  the  Disability  Support  Pension  (DSP)  raise   fundamental issues:

Firstly, in the government’s framing of people with disabilities as a burden on society and  the  state,  I  am  reminded  of  the  portrayal  of  people  with  disabilities  as  ‘useless  eaters’,   something most starkly seen in  the attitude of Nazi Germany towards disabled citizens.  Such  negative  attitudes  see  us  as  a  burden,  rather  than  recognising  the  many  ways  in   which society effectively disables us, preventing us from full participation.

Secondly, the government, as with previous governments, failed to address how society  can  ensure  the  financial  security  of  Australians  with  disability.  It  further  stigmatised   people with hidden disability and chronic pain, and failed to acknowledge that rigorous  eligibility criteria already exist.

Thirdly,  the  2003  Budget  and  further  “reform”  measures  have  failed  to  explore  how   governments  can  assist  Australians  with  disability  to  achieve  their  full  potential.   Successive reports -  written by those without disability I might add-  have talked about  the welfare trap. Yet, as a society, we have failed to acknowledge how the extra costs of  disability preclude those of us with disability from being all that we can be. There is an  irony  in  the  present  situation  whereby  a  businessperson’s  BMW  enjoys  greater  tax   deductibility than the wheelchair that many people with disabilities use for work.

Fourthly,  for  many  years  governments  have  successfully  avoided  a  profound  internal   contradiction in their treatment of disability pensioners. Those who are blind continue to  receive  a  pension  without  a  means  test;  yet,  other  pensioners  are  subject  to  a  stringent   means test. A person with quadriplegia, for example, has a need for significant assistance  in meeting the costs of disability, but no guaranteed minimum income. There is much to  be said for extending the blind pension provisions to other people with disability.



Privatising pity: charity in Australia



In Australia, as in many other countries, welfare responsibilities are increasingly seen as  the  responsibilities  not  of  governments  but  of  the  non-government  sector,  particularly   those  providers  auspiced  by  religious  bodies.  The  intensification  of  control  of  people   receiving welfare entitlements has been justified under a rhetoric of ‘mutual obligation’.  A much more obscene contradiction also emerges when we look at the Australian charity  ‘club’. This is no better articulated than by the well-intentioned words of the Executive  Director  of  Anglicare  Australia  as  he  sought  to  uphold  the  importance  of  political   advocacy  in  charity  work.  In  an  article  entitled  ‘If  charity  is  silent,  who  speaks  for  the   dispossessed?’, Russell Rollason writes:

Strong  advocacy  from  charities  in  the  International  Year  of  the  Disabled   began  a  process  of  change  for  the  disabled  around  the  cities  and  towns  of

8

Australia.  This  advocacy  sought  to  change  public  attitudes  and  government   policies and we are all better for its success.6

Yet for all that I would agree on the importance of charitable organisations engaging in  political  advocacy  for  justice,  I  am  not  sure  where  these  idyllic  cities  and  towns  were   located.  Indeed  his  piece  in  itself  identifies  the  very  problem.  Rather  than  charities   dominated  by  people  without  disabilities  speaking  for  us,  the  message  conveyed  by   disability advocates way back in 1981, and ever since, has been that part of the problem  is  when  others  speak  for  us.  Indeed,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  whether  charities  are silent  or   noisy,  but  rather  the  politics  of  how  when  non-disabled  charity  voices  speak  for  us  we   become the dispossessed.

Where,  I  wonder,  are  the  many  examples  of  consumers  with  disabilities  becoming   members  and  even  chairs  of  boards  of  management,  let  alone  workers  in  and  chief   executive officers (CEOs) in such organizations and disability services in general? These  things are about moving people beyond dependency.



Confronting power, transforming relationships

The  buzz  words  in  health  and  welfare,  such  as  ‘ethics’,  ‘quality’,  ‘complaints   mechanisms’,  ‘communication’,  ‘information’,  even  ‘autonomy’,  all  raise  the  issue  of   fostering right relationships. When we talk about those relationships, inherently we need  to ask the dangerous question: ‘Whose knowledge counts, and whose doesn’t?’

Predominantly defined in accordance with medical and charitable discourses, people with  disabilities have been the objectified and acted-upon ‘other’. We cannot be fixed quickly.  Our needs transcend the healthcare system. We are too slow to get back to work. We are  in the cross-category and cross-funding basket, and that makes us difficult to pigeonhole.

The implication of this analysis is that power makes all the difference. Not only are those  we  regard  as  having  a  disability  systemically  and  economically  disadvantaged,  our   situation is in part created by the very healthcare system which is supposed to nurture us.  We are certified as to what we can and cannot do.

We also need to address the difficult issue of the connections between disability support  and  health  care.  The  disability  movement  has  historically  objected  to  the  casting  of   disability within a health system, preferring designated disability services. Yet it is clear  that the realities of people being discharged quicker and sicker into the community, and  the  rise  of  chronic  disease  with  its disabling  dimensions,  means  that  we  will  inevitably   need a client-focused mix of services

This  issue  of  diversity,  and  how  disability  is  incorporated  or  excluded  from  social   institutions, is the topic of my next topic - sport.



6  R Rollason, ‘If charity is silent, who speaks for the dispossessed?’, Australian Financial  Review, 31 July 2003, p. 63.

9



Handicapping sport

A  funny  thing  happened  on  the  road  to  the  triumphal  Opening  Ceremony  of  the  2000   Olympics in Sydney. We forgot about people with disability, something which might be  risible — except, of course, that it is quite normal. The opening ceremony recycled an all-important Australian myth: a triumphant country where egalitarianism and mateship are  truly celebrated. Anyone is welcome, and all can make it. The ceremony perpetuated the  myth  reignited  on  the  front pages  of our daily  newspapers  and  television  screens  when   the Torch landed in Australia, some three months before that. A special moment for all  Australians  we  were  told.  As  it  travelled  across  the  country,  the  Torch  time  and  time   again  was  portrayed  as  healing  the  rifts  in  Australian  society  —  one  Australia,  one   people.  Nowhere  in  the  narration  of the  Olympics,  and  the  accompanying  creation  of a   special separate event — the Paralympics, with its own special, small ‘t’, torch relay was  the  obscenity  of  having  a  special  segregated  event  almost  3  weeks  after  the  Olympics   commented upon, even recognised.

While clearly not intended to do so, the Olympics and near total exclusion of people with  disability from it, shows how far society has not come regarding disability.  For some of  us,  the  Opening  Ceremony  was  not  a  jewel  in  the  crown  of  a  ‘relaxed’,  cosmopolitan   Australian, efficient, friendly and creative all in the same spectacle; rather it constituted a  painful reminder of inequity and injustice. The Opening Ceremony made it plain  in the  supposedly democratising discourse of one of the largest global media events of all time  that the artificial divide between the Olympics and Paralympics perpetuates the discourse  of  ‘special  needs’  and  ‘special  events’  —  excluding  people  with  disabilities  from  full   membership of the moral community. The implications are disturbing and clear- except  to the several people who rang re the issue when I was discussing it on talk back at the  time. “What about the special toilets? Where would you get them from” they asked! It is  amazing  how  discussions  of  disability  quickly  turn  to  that  social  fixture  -  the  disabled   toilet!!

From  sport,  I  now  turn  my  attention  to  biotechnology,  at  the  cutting  edge  of  debates   regarding our bodies, and increasingly touching upon the lives of individuals. Society and  the future of disability.

Biotechnology and designer disability



As  an  integral  part  of  modern  medicine  in  Western  countries,  emerging  biotechnology   promises better health, better living and longer lives. Like other forms of ‘hi-tech’, ‘bio-tech’ is often hailed as a boon. More often than not it is the lives and bodies of people  with  disabilities  which  underwrite  not  just  the  claims  about  the  potential  of  biotech  to   make our lives healthier and longer but also provide a warrant for its business potential.

A classic example is found in the 2002 stem cell debate where in Australian parliament  politicians wept as they informed us of the situations of their constituents with disability.   We  were  informed  that  embryonic  stem  cells  would  provide  the  solution,  the  iconic   image of Christopher Reeve as the catastrophe of disability swept across our TV screens,

10

and  he  flew  in  a  specially  modified  747  to  inform  us  of  how  horrible  disability  is  and   what the technical solution is, and after the legislation was secured the same politicians  who  had  been  weeping  for  their  constituents,  firmly  believed  that  disability  had  been   dealt with, as they went back to a discourse of welfare reform, and the important task of  casting people with bad backs off pensions.  Nowhere was the social or structural nature  of disability attended to, or the breadth of the problem.

Indeed  when  a  few  of  us  sought  to  do  so  we  saw  a  very  carefully  orchestrated  media   strategy which reinforced the tragedy of disability, perhaps most notably in the actions of  Bob Carr who within 48 hours of the one newspaper article by a person with disability in  the  whole  debate  appearing  and  the  NSW  Commissioner  for  Community  services   speaking  of Dickensian  institutions and  powerful vested  interests, Carr had  organised a  media opportunity outside a spinal cord unit, later writing:



A 19-year-old woman lies paralysed from the neck down as a result of a  car smash. I leave the spinal unit after meeting her, my mind racing. How  many years before there is a cure? Before she can walk out of hospital?7



As is ever the case, it was unremarked that Carr did not seek to use such an opportunity  to move from talking about to listening to. In many of these developments, and narration  of disability-as-catastrophe, allow me to offer the following take-home recipe:  1.  The  tragic  life  of  an  individual  or  several  devalued  individuals  is

portrayed in a way designed to elicit maximum affect and pathos;  2.  A  technology  is  portrayed  as  delivering  a  person  from  disability,   provided that society embrace, fund or legitimate such a solution;  3.   securing  the  technology  means  that  disability  has  then  been  ‘dealt

with’;  after  deploying  such  rhetoric  there  is  to  be  no  more  appeal  to   emotion, and  the  solution  lies in  the  rational pursuit of the technology  identified  in  step  2  (effectively  there  is  only  one,  inexorable  logical   step);  4. Disability as a political issue goes away until next time it is needed in

the powerful politics of media representation.



Opening up the black box of biotechnology

In  the  politics  of  biotechnology,  we  find  exemplified  the  ongoing  apartheid  of  people   with  disability.  The  hope  for  a  cure  in  medical  research  placates  our  society’s  fear  of   disability,  and  ignores  difficult  questions  regarding  disability.  Public  discussion  of   biotechnology  is  symbolically  important  for  nation  building,  as  the  stem  cell  debates



7  B Carr, ‘No time to waste in the search for embryonic stem cells secrets’, Sydney Morning

Herald, 4 April 2002.



11

reveal. Yet such discussion, in a range of forms, including the media we have examined,  is premised on the objectified disabled body and its remorseless tragedy. While images of  suffering people with  disability circulate widely, people with disabilities  as a group are  not encouraged, or licensed, to speak in debates over their health and bodies.

To  counter  this  situation  I  call  for  the  whole  area  of  biotechnology,  and  science  and   technology  generally,  to  be  opened  up  for  genuine  discussion  and  democratic  decision-making.  We  need  to  foster  an  ethics  of  listening  which  allows  for  media  to  represent   disability  in  its  complexity,  to  present  the  diversity  of  narratives  about  disability.  We   need to assist Australians to exercise their citizenship in these and so many other arenas.



Reinstitutionalising disability



Tasmania  is  the  first  state  ever  to  totally  deinstitutionalise public  care  of   people with intellectual disability.   Judy  Jackson.8



Well, finally, you say, a good news story. The same week in 2000 in which Tasmanian  Minister  for  Health  and  Community  Services  Judy  Jackson  proudly  announced  that   Tasmania’s  institutions  had  been  closed,  consumers  with  disabilities  in  that  state  were   extremely  concerned  about  problems  associated  with  people  who  were  suicidal  and   extremely unwell being unable to gain access to hospital care. Staff members were also  complaining  about  facilities  and  systems  that  were  inadequate  for  ensuring  adequate   safety for them in caring for sick people. And church agencies were desperately seeking  to place and house people with a variety of forms of disabilities, who had no fixed place  of  abode  and  were  homeless,  the  rejects  of  society.  Perhaps  Tasmania  has  not  really   achieved  deinstituionalisation  without  significant  detriment-  and  indeed  this  highlight  a   new form of problem -reinstitutionalisation.



It is as if the closing down and renovations, the white-washing over of the many decades  of  institutions  formerly  devoted  to  practices  without  scant  acknowledgment  of  the   oppression  that  occurred,  stand  as  testimony  to  current  Australian  practice.  As  we   deinstitutionalise,  Australia  is  in  the  process  of  painting  over  the  oppression  of  people   with  disabilities  and  is  failing  to  acknowledge  and  learn  from  the  horrendous  practices   which occurred in these places. It is rarely, if ever, on these sites is there even a memorial  plaque that acknowledges the oppression of people with disabilities. Mostly the histories  of these institutions are written by non-disabled people. What of the largely unrecorded  voices of people with  disability  that talk  about oppression, rape, violence, urine-soaked   days, physical and chemical restraint, physical, emotional and spiritual abuse?3



The history of institutionalisation is not as remote as it seems. It becomes clear that the  power  of  institutions  persists,  albeit  in  new  ways  -  shaping,  creating  and  perpetuating

8  Judy Jackson quoted in S Bevilacqua, ‘Disabled services at breaking point’, Sunday Tasmanian,  16 February 2003, p. 6. Then Minister for Health in a Tasmanian Labor government,

12

disability. Such social institutions still very much oppress - all in the name of a ‘fair go’,  ‘care’,  and  all  the  other  reassuring  words  that  we  use  which  make  us  far  more   comfortable about putting people with disabilities somewhere over there, out of sight and  out of mind.

One  result  of  deinstitutionalisation  has  been,  therefore,  that  people  with  a  variety  of   disabilities are living in poorly resourced small institutions. Rather than institutions with  large number of people in  custodial  care, we  now  have  group  homes  with  a  significant   degree  of  support  by  untrained  support  workers.  We  largely  still  have  institutional   arrangements.  There  is  also  the  institutionalisation  inherent  in  new  care  regimes  and   management practices.

In many circumstances, what counts as an institution? True, there is no longer any sign;  indeed a lack of signing for a facility can itself be rather indicative of the new breed of  institution. Staff may go through ‘handover’, institutional style security, talk of ‘duty of  care’, and clients in single rooms may be ‘admitted’ and ‘discharged’. In contrast with the  presence  of  larger  institutions,  which  are  more  noticeable  and  newsworthy,  the  small   integrated settings post-deinstitutionalisation are only  newsworthy  when the neighbours  complain  (the  phenomenon  of  ‘nimby’,  or  ‘not  in  my  backyard’).  Ironically,   deinstitutionalisation  was  premised  on  people  with  disabilities  being  full  and  valued   members of the community. Yet, so often we see that these quasi-institutions have little  to do with their next-door neighbours, and that residents are too often excluded from the  local community. The new forms of institutionalisation and accommodation support rest  on  social  institutions  which  perpetuate  disability  as  other  and  people  with  disability  as   being burdens as opposed to contributors to the community.



Political life and a disabled republic



Power  is  a  central  theme  of  this  lecture.  People  with  disability  have  had  a  troubled   relationship with the realm of politics since the times of the ancient Greeks. The notion of  the  citizen  as  having  a  certain  sort  of  body  and  capabilities  is  embedded  deep  in  the   history  of  Western  political  philosophy.  Possession  of  an  abnormal  body,  one  that  is   ‘deformed’  in  Aristotle’s  usage,  has  often  radically  disqualified  a  person  from   legitimately  exercising  power  in  the  polity  -  something  that  continues  today.   In  the

twenty-first century, we cultivate an enlightened self-image of our society as one at the  zenith  of  progress,  relaxed,  comfortable,  and  unselfconsciously  inclusive  of  people  for   whom  old  prejudices  about  participation  do  not  apply.  Yet  very  little,  if  any,  of  our   discussion about nationhood has considered the place of disability in imagining a nation.  Yet  such  a  question  is  very  important.  Even  when  formally  enfranchised  by  Australian   laws to vote, a significant number with people with disabilities have found the electoral  process inaccessible. An ongoing problem which reflects our norms.

People  with  disabilities  have  been  fundamentally  on  the  margins  of  Australian  political   life.  Our  present  democratic  arrangements  effectively  disable  so  many  people;  yet  we   have  little  formal  or  informal  say  in  the  institutions  central  to  our  polity.  People  with

13

disabilities, for instance, are not often elected to represent citizens in  Australian federal  and  state  parliaments.  People  with  disabilities  remain  the  governed  (if  often   ungovernable), not to figure among the governing or even chattering classes.

At  the  risk  of  singling  out  one  particular  politician,  I  have  long  been  intrigued  by  the   muscular, vernacular approach adopted by the former Member for Werriwa in the Federal  Parliament,  Mark  Latham,  who  in  2003  was  elected  Leader  of  Australian  Labor  Party.   Latham  styles  himself  as  a  man  of  ideas  and  as  someone  with  strong  social  justice   convictions.  Yet,  in  the  case  describe  below,  it  seems  that  disablism  is  present  in  the   terms in which he couches abuse. Witness a recent case, in which Latham dubbed leading  Liberal  party  figure,  Tony  Staley,  a  ‘deformed  character’,  received  national  media   attention and some public outrage. In a debate on the ABC TV program ‘Lateline’, with  regular sparring partner, Liberal Member of Parliament Christopher Pyne, Latham spoke  of “ that deformed character Tony Staley …”



As  insults  were  traded  later  in  the  interview,  Latham  said  to  Pyne:  ‘You’re  one  of  the   midget  wrestlers  and  we  see  you  running  around  the  ring’.  The  name-calling  and   recriminations continued, with Latham objecting to Tony  Abbott insulting Labor leader  Simon  Crean  by  calling  him  ‘genetically  modified’  (that  is,  from  a  Labor  family   dynasty). Pyne retorted in disbelief:

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: You just described Tony Staley as deformed.

MARK LATHAM: And I’m that angry about Tony Abbott …

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: I don’t know how you can sit there and not laugh at  yourself.

MARK LATHAM: Well, without being interrupted by this fellow in Adelaide  who can’t get his facts straight …

CHRISTOPHER  PYNE:  You  just  called  Tony  Staley  deformed  on  national   television  and  now  you’re  being  all  precious  about  the  words  ‘genetically   modified’.

MARK LATHAM: He is deformed in his views, he is deformed in his views  because he’s in the garbage bin of Australian politics.

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: No, I think you’re referring to something else.

MARK LATHAM: He’s deformed in his views and  actions because he’s in   the  garbage  bin  of  Australian  politics,  an  obsession  with  Paul  Keating  after   his  prime  ministerial  career,  rummaging  around  all  Keating’s  affairs,  shady   meetings … all this sort of subterfuge - [Staley] is deformed in every sense  and so too is Abbott.9





9  ‘Friday Forum’, ‘Lateline’, ABC TV, 3 May 2002, transcript, 22 August 2003,  .

14

There  was  considerable  public  outcry  following  this  interview.  Staley  himself  -  in  an   astute move- did not deign to comment. Latham later claimed that ‘he was talking about  Staley’s  politics  and  not  his  crippling  leg.”  This  episode  is  an  example  of  the  deeply   embedded,  naturalised  assumptions  that  underlie  political  language,  and  so  constitute   political  life  in  Australia.  This  political  language  is  shaped  by  metaphors  of  disablism.

Such  language  is  routinely  used,  and  frames  the  values  and  shapes  the  assumptions   underlying political judgment. I would wish to stress that I here seek to name and explore  issues rather than suggesting any political party is superior in this matter.



‘We, the people’



The end of the twentieth century in Australia saw much debate about power and how it  can be exercised and shared. Australians debated their political destiny, considering the  question  of  whether  their  country  should  become  a  republic.  The  culmination  of  this   debate  came  with  the  1998  Constitutional  Convention.  Throughout  the  Constitutional   Convention, and  virtually  the  entire  debate  which  continues  unabated,  the  republic  was   examined  from  every  conceivable  standpoint  -  highlighting  class,  gender,  indigenous   Australians, multiculturalism, and sexuality.

However, the Constitutional Convention was held in a physically inaccessible venue, and  disability  was  only  mentioned  on  a  handful  of  occasions.  The  lack  of  participation  of   people  with  disabilities  in  debates  on  the  republic  is  a  great  loss,  because  here  is  an   opportunity for Australia to genuinely incorporate disability into political life. Consider,  for  instance,  the  question  of  who  shall  determine  the  head  of  state  and  the  republican   proposal that this position be elected by the people. Thinking about the realities of life for  people with disability, why should we restrict this position to just one incumbent? ‘Why  not allow for two people in a job share arrangement?’ I asked a republican activist who  supported job sharing arrangements for women caregivers in the workforce. I pointed out  to  him  that  many  of  us  with  disability  might  wish  to  become  a  head  of  state,  and  be   suitably qualified, but may not be able to hold down a full-time job. ‘I’ll get back to you  on that,’ said this prominent republican, rapidly sidling away; He never did.

The assumption that countries or organisations or companies must only be governed by  one  person  reflects  much  about  our  taken-for-granted  able-bodied  norms.  Many  people   who  live  with  disability  do  not  have  the  time  or  the  energy,  let  alone  the  resources,  to   entertain any hope of becoming a head of state. It is difficult enough for many of us with  disability to survive or work part-time, let alone participate in a too demanding political  world. Here the republican movement has done little more than perpetuate the status quo,  when  it  proposes  changing  the  formula  but  not  the  powerful  political  practices  that   exclude  participation  of  those  of  us  with  disability.  The  so-called  “splendid  deception”   adopted  by  US  President  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt  helps  to  make  the  point  that   disability is still not an acceptable attribute for a leader, signifying incapacity or senility  rather than just difference.66

15

Political  debates  such  as  the  debate  about  a  republic  are  an  opportunity  for  us  all  to   discuss the deepest issues of our society, and how we can become a genuinely democratic  and  just  society,  extending  power,  participation  and  rights  to  all.  We  need  a  truly   egalitarian  vision  of  governance,  which  means  decision-making  and  positions  of   governance  can  be  filled  by  people  from  all  parts  of  life  regardless  of  their  abilities,   disabilities or social standing.



Refugees and the flight from human rights



The question of who may enter our country and for what reason has become one of the  fiercest  debates  of  our  times.  At  stake  in  migration  and  refugee  policy  are  the  very   deepest  issues  about  how  we  define  citizenship:  whom  we  value  and  embrace  as  a   member of our community, about whom we demur, whom we reject, whom we cast out -  and how we do all this. Australia’s treatment of refugees has become something widely  deplored  by  many6  and  defended  by  others.7  Let  me  be  clear  here-  I  deplore  the   concentration  camps  in  the  deserts  and  cities  in  which  refugees  are  held.  What  has   received  little  mention  in  these  debates  is  the  fate  of  asylum  seekers,  refugees  and   migrants with disability.

An important case study about disability and refugees with disability is found in the story  of  Shahraz  Kiane,  who  set  himself  on  fire  in  front  of  Australia’s  Parliament  House  in   1998 because of the government’s refusal to grant a visa to his daughter, Anum Shahraz  Kiane, a girl with cerebral palsy, because of the cost of her disability. The prime reason  why the Australian government would not grant his application was because one of the  daughters, Anum, had a disability. This is a case of how citizenship in this case pivots on  the unexamined category of disability. Shahraz Kiane may qualify as a refugee, because  of  his  demonstrated  fear  of  persecution.  His  wife  and  other  two  daughters  may  also   immigrate  to  Australia  and  become  citizens  if  they  survive  the  vagaries  of  Australian   migration  policy  and  decision-making.  Anum  Shahraz  Kiane,  eight  years  old  in  1998,   was judged not to qualify because of the perceived costs of her disability.

With  this  denial  of  the  other,  systematic  exclusion  reaches  new  depths,  and  our   government is overcome with the fear of the other within and without. Here Australia is  but  one  country  in  an  international  community  for  which  disability  is  excluded.  In  our   world,  the  norm  is  international  laws  and  customs  that  do  not  permit  people  with   disabilities free movement across borders, or the right to settle wheresoever they wish, on  equal terms with others.

Sadly  there  is  demonstrated  bipartisan  consensus  on  disability  as  grounds  of  exclusion.    So  why  DO  our  parliamentary  representatives  feel  relaxed  and  comfortable  in  the   assumption that it is reasonable to discriminate against people with disabilities?

16

Disability in detention

The  incarceration  of  refugees  in  detention  centres  by  the  Australian  Government  has   become a cause cÃÂ©lÃÂ¨bre worldwide. Health professionals, government bodies, media, non-government  organisations,  activist  groups,  academics,  concerned  citizens  and   parliamentarians  have  produced  evidence  of  widespread  neglect  and  abuse  in  the   institutions in which refugees are detained. In this process, evidence has come to light of  poor  and  unjust  treatment  of  people  with  disabilities  in  detention,  most  notably  in  the   mid-May  2004  report  by  HREOC  entitle  entitled  A  last  resort?  The  report  found  that   Australian  immigration  detention  laws  ‘create  a  detention  system  that  is  fundamentally   inconsistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC)”It is also clear that in  these  barbaric  circumstances  we  are  creating  long-term  psychiatric  and  physical   disability.



Reclaiming a Just, Civilising and Enabling society

So far in this lecture I have argued that people with disability living in Australia endure  an  insidious,  oppressive  and  deeply  rooted  system  of  being  placed  apart  in  society.  In   every  sector  of  society,  people  with  disabilities  face  discrimination,  exclusion  and   ‘othering’  Disability  discrimination  and  exclusion  in  Australia  is  akin  to  a  system  of   otherness  -  an  apartheid.  So  why  is  genuine  social  change  so  slow?  And  what  can  be   done by those who have an interest in or commitment to dismantling this apartheid?



The implication of this analysis is that the struggle for a just and civil society - the search  for  a  world  in  which  all  belong,  participate  and  receive  their  share  of  resources  and   recognition  -  will  have  people  with  disability  at  its  heart.  In  recognising  the  power   relations of disability, including its structural dimensions, and seeking to address this, I  am not just engaging in special pleading for a minority group - we are calling for society  itself to change to embrace all.

Hence while disability is often conceptualised as a specialised, technical issue, the subject  of policies to do with inclusion, special accommodations and government strategies that  suggest “we care”.  Yet in order to transform disability in Australia we need to tackle our

deep-seated  fears,  moral  convictions  and  relationships.   We  need  to  seek  to  transform   people with disability from “other” outside of the moral community, to part of “us”, the  nice,  normal  and  even  natural.   Such  a  project  requires  us  to  draw  upon  the  largely   rejected  wisdom  of  people  with  disability,  their  families  and  carers.   It  requires  us  to   address  the  power  relations  of  disability  and  the  way  in  which  disability  serves  and   reinforces dominant institutions and even our narration of the nation itself.

The  transformation  of  disability  in  Australia  will  not  occur  via  jingoistic  campaigns   which take the "dis" out of dis-ability, or by a re-jigging of labour market and other social  policies,  while  the  meta-narratives  of  disability  continue  unchecked.   Transformation   requires the fostering of purposeful and mundane relationships which are based upon, and  help  us  to  explore,  the  inherent  worth  and  contribution  of  people  with  disability  to   Australian society. Out of these relationships flow policy initiatives vital to social change.

17

In so doing we will find that it is not just disability that we are transforming, but Australia  itself.

In reconceptualising disability as an ethical concern we would do well to draw upon the  insights of indigenous knowledge. We might well learn from Miriam-Rose Ungunmerr-Baumann, an Aboriginal Elder from Daly River:

What I want  to  talk  about is a special quality of my  people.  I believe it is the  most important.  It is our most unique gift.  It is perhaps the greatest gift we can  give to our fellow Australians. In our language this quality is called Dadirri.

Dadirri is an  inner, deep listening and quiet, still  awareness. Dadirri  recognises  the deep spring that is inside us. We call on it and it calls to us. This is the gift  that Australia is thirsting for. It is something like what you call ‘contemplation’.  A big part of Dadirri is listening …

In our Aboriginal way, we learned to listen from our earliest days. We could not  live good or useful lives unless we listened. This was the normal way for us to  learn—  not  by  asking  questions.  We  learnt  by  watching  and  listening,  waiting   and then acting.10

Most  importantly,  it  is  through  listening  to  the  stories  of  people  with  disabilities,  their   families and carers that we are inevitably called into relationship. It’s hard to create the  space in our lives and in our hearts, whereby we are open and receptive to stories, without  feeling moved to do something about those experiences. In this way the use of story can  be seen to be as a vital way of connecting us as human beings. It is via those relationships  that we are called as educators and fellow human beings to move from listening to doing.  It  is  also  via  relationships  that  we  both  start  to  think  about  our  lived  ethics—what  we   do—as  well  as  re-conceptualising  the  world  in  different  ways.  Right  around  Australia   there is

Such relationships will mean for example a transformation from the Minister who calls a  media conference to announce a grand new policy with a carefully crafted media moment  with  strangers  with  disability,  to   PWD  being  involved  in  writing  policy  and  in  having   BBQs as friends of the minister. Then when the Minister calls a media conference it is  with her friends with disability, where she allows them to speak as experts.

It will mean that types like me become more than dangerous exotic dangerous beasts to  have roles as members of corporation boards.

It will mean so many opportunities for transforming relationships



Embracing disability

10  Cited in Crotty, E. (1998). Spirituality and Justice, Ministry, Society & Theology,  12(  2), 64-78, p 65.

18





It may be objected that for our society it is too difficult to achieve such a transformation,  or that we are being unrealistic. Here are some possible responses:

It will cost too much.

They don’t deserve it.

Does he really need it?

It’s  not  fair!  Fairness  means  giving  everyone  the  same  go,  not  special   treatment.

Be realistic - things change slowly.

But everyone wants to have good health - who would want a disability?

How could you say that about technology?

They were only trying to help.

These  and  so  many  other  objections  are  one  of  the  reasons  why  this  lecture  was   necessary. It is so easy to find ways of justifying the status quo and our taken-for-granted  notions of what is ‘nice’, ‘normal’, ‘natural’ and ‘healthy’. This lecture will have served  its purpose if we move beyond stock responses to the complex issues involved when we  encounter disability. I am not suggesting that life with disability is so wonderful that you  should  rush  out  and  get  one  immediately!  I  am  want  to  affirm  the  importance  of  new   technologies  and  new  practices  in  keeping  people  with  disabilities  alive,  and  fostering   quality  of  life.  Many  of  us  with  disability  are  alive  because  of  medical  practice.  Yet,   paradoxically, it is those medical understandings of the world that serve to limit our full  potential as people who are able to transcend such narrow understandings. All of us as  human beings need help, yet we yearn for a society where we do not just ‘help’ people  with  disabilities  -  we  enable  them  as  fellow  human  beings  to  help  us.  In  this  way,  we   move  beyond  whether  particular  groups  of  people  deserve  particular  or  even  special   treatment to asking what we as a society need to do to bring about justice and fulfilment  for all.

A  vision  of  a  just  society  rests  upon  a  fundamental  ethical  question:  Who  are  the   members of our moral community and whom do we routinely exclude?  So what do we  need to do individually and as a society to achieve the lived experience of a just society  for Australians with disability?

First,  we  need  to  genuinely  incorporate  disability  in  our  political  and  governance   frameworks.

Secondly,  I  call  for  an  international,  cosmopolitan  approach  to  disability  as  an  integral   part of citizenship.

19

Thirdly, we need a shift in the way in which Australia engages with political discussion  and the formulation of public policy so that people with disabilities and their families are  routinely part of the exercise, sharing and distribution of power.

Fourthly, there is an urgent need for those involved in economics as a discipline, and its  appropriation  in  policy  discourses,  to  adequately  understand  disability.  The  stubbornly   embedded myths of the person with disability as burden, costly, unproductive and passive  welfare recipient or consumer need to be challenged.

Fifthly,  educational  institutions  have  a  strategically  important  role  in  opening  up   knowledge formation to people with disabilities One index of this situation is that in 2005  I are not aware of anyone who is a part of the Australian disability community occupying  a  Chair  in  disability  studies  in  an  Australian  university  -  a  marked  contrast  with  other   countries such as the United States and United Kingdom.

Finally, those involved in strategically important positions and institutions in civil society  need to genuinely incorporate and consider disability as part of their agenda.

Whatever  you  think  of  this  lecture,  as  I  conclude  I  invite  you  to  join  in  a  conscious   political  process  of  interrogating  our  lived  social  practices  with  regard  to  people  with   disability. It is not just the lives of people with disabilities that demand this; ultimately,  this  forms  an  essential  test  of  our  claims  to  a  just  society.  I  invite  people  who  do  not   identify as having disabilities to join Australians with disabilities in the everyday project  of reclaiming a civil and fair society. Together we can encounter the social and political  dimension of disability in Australia as we transform disability from other to us.

Further Reading:

Goggin, G & Newell, C. Disability in Australia: Exposing a Social Apartheid, UNSW  Press, 2005. http://www.unswpress.com.au/isbn/0868407194.htm





Contact details:

School of Medicine,   University of Tasmania,  Private Bag 73,  Hobart, Tasmania,7001, Australia.  Ph: +61 3 62264854          Fax: +61 3 62236174  Mobile Ph: 0418545611  Email: Christopher.Newell@utas.edu.au

