

MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER

FA128                     11 October 2005





VISIT TO INDONESIA





I will be visiting Bali and Jakarta from 11 to13 October following the tragic bombings which  occurred in Bali on the evening of Saturday 1 October. The Australian Government condemns  these tragic bombings in the strongest possible terms and is working closely with the  Indonesian authorities to track down the perpetrators and bring them to justice.

I will visit Bali for the third commemoration of the 2002 Bali bombings on 12 October, which  will, sadly, also be an occasion to mourn those who died and pray for the recovery of those  who were injured in the bombings of 1 October 2005.

My visit to Jakarta will be a timely opportunity to meet with key Ministers to discuss a range  of counter-terrorism issues including closer cooperation in the wake of the recent bombings. I  will urge the government to take all measures possible to constrain Jemaah Islamiyah and  their fellow travellers, including proscribing terrorist groups and strengthening Indonesia’s  terrorism law.

I will be underlining Australia’s strong view that sentence remissions for convicted terrorists  under Indonesian law are unwarranted and unwelcome. I will urge Indonesia to revise its law  to ensure justice is fully served by terrorists for their heinous crimes and they receive no  further sentence remissions.

In Jakarta I will also discuss with Ministerial counterparts next steps in combating the threat  of avian influenza.  My discussions will draw on the report from the high-level Australian  mission on avian influenza that travelled to Indonesia last week to assess the avian influenza  threat and identify specific areas of further assistance.



Media inquiries:  Chris Kenny (Ministerial)  0419 206 890                   Matt Anderson (Departmental)  02 6261 1555



Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/

