

1

NSW JEWISH BOARD OF DEPUTIES  60th Anniversary Annual Meeting

Address by The Right Hon. Malcolm Fraser, AC, CH   Sydney, Tuesday, 16 August 2005



I am honoured to be asked to speak at this 60th Anniversary of the Foundation of the  Jewish Board of Deputies.  Over the years, notable work has been done.  You have  fought discrimination and worked for a just society.  In today’s world your dedication  and commitment is all the more necessary.  Too many people are coming to accept  that there are some who are not like us and who therefore do not deserve the  protection of the law.

Today’s world is concerned about Islamic Fundamentalism.  There is a danger that  Islam, which is essentially a peaceful religion, will be blamed for the actions of  terrorists.

We must avoid that outcome.  We need to understand, however, that Fundamentalism,  and terrorism which in today’s world go together, are both as old as the human race.

The Crusaders from Britain who fought against Islam in the Middle Ages; the Spanish  Inquisition; the IRA and the Protestant militias in Ireland all practised terrorism; all  were Fundamentalist in their beliefs; the Chechnians wanting independence, are  terrorists.  People in some parts of the Philippines who want independence, were once  called Communists, then Freedom Fighters and now they are called terrorists.  The  Basques in Spain;  the Belgians in the Congo;  the Portuguese and Spaniards in  Central and South America;  the Red Army and the Red Brigades in Germany and  Italy in the late seventies and early eighties and of course Nazi Germany:

These groups were mostly fundamental in their attitudes.  They all practised terrorism.

Many in today’s world say Islamic Fundamentalists have no cause and no purpose but  hatred and destruction of the West.  In a major speech to his own Labour Party last  year, Tony Blair implied that that was so but on the very next page he said that peace  between Israel and Palestine would do more to end terrorism than all the bullets in the  world.  Both statements cannot be true.  The second is true.  Although the war in Iraq  has made that a new and significant cause for terrorism.

To understand that there are different causes of terrorism is not to condone but is  essential if we wish to overcome and end terrorism.

Because civilisation as we know it was so nearly destroyed during the Second World  War, in its aftermath, leaders of all major states believed they must strive and work to  achieve a better world.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was agreed in 1948.  In the years since,  protocols and conventions established under it were designed to build a law-based



2

world.  The International Criminal Court finally came into force on 1 July 2002 which  was a further major step in that direction.

It is more than unfortunate that our response to terrorism has reversed much of that  progress and leaders in too many countries do not seem to understand that that is  happening.

I want to look briefly at the response of Britain, of the United States and of Australia.

In Britain, the government had attempted to put asylum seekers permanently in jail if  they were not successful in their claims and if they could not be returned to their  country of origin.  The Law Lords made it plain that jail of more than a few weeks  was inappropriate under British law unless the detainees were charged and tried.  A  compromise was reached which involved judicial and parliamentary oversight.

Now, I am advised that Britain is seeking to outlaw “indirect advocacy” of a terrorist  act.  It will be interesting to see how that is defined.  It is already a criminal offence to  advocate a terrorist act or to speak in ways that lead to religious or racial vilification.   A definition of “indirect advocacy” will carry many dangers with it.  The possibility  of limiting legitimate free debate will be real.

In the United States, long before war was declared on Iraq, members of the  Administration, especially from the Justice Department, the Pentagon, the State  Department and the White House, began an involved paper trail which sought to

define how far interrogators could go in “intrusive questioning”.  Their purpose was  to avoid charges of torture under United States or International Law, or to avoid being  in breach of the Geneva Conventions.

The US Administration published these papers.  They are put together in a large  document called the Torture Papers by the New York University Center for Law and  Security, published by Cambridge Press.  These papers were before Iraq, designed to  define the treatment that could be metered out to prisoners taken from Afghanistan.   The papers were intended to place such prisoners beyond the reach of any law.

President Bush came out of it with credit.  He signed a short note which said “any  interrogation must be humane” - he did not elaborate.  Colin Powell argued that to  torture prisoners would place American servicemen at risk and, on that practical rather  than on an ethical ground, he argued against the practices.

A State Department lawyer, William Taft argued fervently against torture.  Assistant  Attorney General Jay Bybee argued that if you caused major organ failure or death, it  would be torture but short of that, it almost certainly wasn’t.  Former Assistant  Attorney-General Bybee is now a judge.

Attorney-General Gonzales, who, in his confirmation hearings before the United  States Senate, claimed that he was opposed to torture, but he signed a piece of paper,  which appears in the Torture Papers, which many would construe as endorsing  torture.  The Justice Department has most to be ashamed of in its perversion of both  domestic and international law in relation to torture.



3

Torture began to be outlawed as reliable evidence by British Courts in the 1500s.  For  a long while now domestic jurisdictions and international law have outlawed torture  absolutely.  We cannot take one step along that path.  To take one leads to many.  To

its credit, the Supreme Court of the State of Israel in 1999 made a judgement that  torture was outside the law in all circumstances.  On practical grounds it is recognised  as the most unreliable means of extracting evidence but on moral and ethical grounds  it betrays the core belief of our existence.  By acceptance of torture too many have  stepped into a darker past.

General Taguba’s report, and the Red Cross report on Guantanemo Bay, both use  careful language, as one would expect.  But it was clear that abuse was pervasive and  substantial.  Long before Abu Ghraib, it was possible to see how every violation of  decent behaviour, later revealed at Abu Ghraib, had its origins in high level  memorandum, passed between the highest organs of United States Administration.

There was a clear attempt to place prisoners taken by the Northern Alliance and  handed over to the Americans outside the reach of any law of any human decency.   They were described as “unlawful combatants”.  The Taliban were described as a  “failed state” which Colin Powell pointed out was wrong because the United States  had always held all states to their international obligations.  Torture has been further  reinforced as a technique by the expanded Rendition programmes, which most  recently brought American authorities into sharp conflict with the Italian government.

A Canadian citizen had earlier been taken to Egypt and was only released 12 months  later, after the most vigorous Canadian protests.  There is no point in the Rendition  Programme unless it is to place prisoners in a jurisdiction where they can be tortured.



One of the Australians at Guantanamo Bay reportedly spent six months in Egypt on  his way to Guantanamo.  He has since been released without charge.  The Australian  Government claimed that it had approached the Egyptian authorities who had no  record of him entering or leaving the country.  Egyptian immigration authorities  would not be lined up to record people who were taken off an American executive jet  to an Egyptian jail under the Rendition programme.

The United States’ response has also involved the establishment of special Military  Tribunals.  There is a substantial body of opinion, which has condemned those  Tribunals as lacking basic justice.  These include Lord Goldsmith, First Law Officer  of Britain, who said that they would not provide justice required for a British citizen.   One of the Federal Courts in the United States has ruled Military Tribunals  unconstitutional on the grounds that prisoners were not told the evidence against them

and on the grounds that the tribunals accepted evidence taken under torture.

Major Robert Preston and Captain John Carr, both within the United States system  and both Prosecutors, condemned the process as not providing a reasonable basis for a  just trial.  Captain Paul Willey, head of Australia’s Military Bar and Navy Reservist  has also been heavily critical of the process.  The President of the Law Council of  Australia has described the attitude of the Australian Government as an outrage.   Geoffrey Robertson, QC has joined in the criticism.  He suggested that an Australian  should be required to sit as Judge with the Military Tribunal.  There are two problems



4

with that suggestion.  The United States would not accept it and secondly, no  reputable Australian judge would take part in the proceedings of those Military  Tribunals.  Prof Tim McCormack, Australian Red Cross Professor of Humanitarian  Law at Melbourne University and one of the drafters of the Statues of the  International Criminal Court, and adviser to the War Crimes Tribunal at the Hague  has said that at the very least Hicks deserves the same standard of justice that is being  provided for former President Milosevic of Yugoslavia.

The weight of opinion and the weight of evidence is overwhelming.  The rules for the  conduct of the Tribunals, their lack of independence, the lack of a judicial appeal,  deserve condemnation from all of us.



The United States has a Bill of Rights and so their legal system has come into play.

The courts have ruled that people in Guantanamo Bay must have their day in court.   Unfortunately it has not yet taken the step of confirming that the Tribunals are  unconstitutional.



Australia has supported the military tribunals.  The Government has said that Hicks  will get justice, but the majority of opinion is against the Government.  We have, by  implication, supported the Rendition Programme and therefore have not opposed  torture.

The ASIO legislation of 2002 underlines Australia’s official indifference to “due  process” and to what until recently would have been regarded as universally accepted  Rule of Law.

We are the only democratic country, I am advised, to legislate for the detention of  people whom the authorities do not suspect of any wrong doing or even of any wrong  thought.

In Australia, any of us can be detained because authorities believe we might know  something that we don’t even know we know.  How could such a law be drafted by  the Government and supported by the Labor opposition?  You can be detained for one  week but then on a new warrant, another and another and another week.  Unless it is  approved in the original warrant, and why would ASIO do that? - you are not allowed

to contact your wife, your husband, your child, your mother, your father and of course  not a lawyer.

If you don’t answer ASIO’s questions satisfactorily, you can be charged and subject  to 5 years in jail.  But the law is reasonable, it goes on to say that if you don’t know  anything, then it’s not an offence not to tell ASIO anything!!!  But you have to prove  you didn’t know anything.

You can be asked to produce a paper and if you don’t, you also go to jail on  prosecution for 5 years but the law goes on to say, being fair-minded again, if you  don’t have such a paper, it’s not an offence not to produce it but you have to prove  that you didn’t have it.  How do you prove that you do not have something that you  do not even know exists!!!



5

If a journalist heard that you had been detained and sought to report it, he would go to  jail for 5 years.  If a detained person were released and talked to anyone about his or  her experiences, subject to prosecution, five years in jail.

This seems to be to be a law for secret behaviour by authorities, for making somebody  disappear.  It is a law that one would expect in tyrannical countries and not in  Australia.  Do we do nothing about it because we believe it will not apply to  ourselves?  Do we believe it is only going to apply to people of a different religion

who look a bit different?  United States authorities and others have, time and again,  denigrated those in Guantanamo Bay.  We have been told they are the worst of the  worst, that they are terrible people, that they do not deserve the normal protection of  the law.

People who make such comments clearly do not understand or believe in the Rule of  Law as it has evolved through the ages.  They have taken such views because they  believe those in Guantanamo Bay and others are not “people” like ourselves.  In a

different day and a different time, but within the memories of many people in this  room, we have heard those words before.

In other words the presumption of innocence until proven guilty, the presumption that  all people should have access to “due process” in a properly constituted legal system  is no longer valid in Australia.

It is not reasonable just to blame the Government for such laws.  The Labor Party  approved such laws.  There was one change of particular significance so I give credit  for that.  The original legislation applied to people of any age, even to children, except  that intrusive strip searching should not take place of a girl under 10.  The Labor Party  took the view that the legislation should only apply to adults.  It now applies to those  over 18.  As a consequence of the Government and the Opposition basically agreeing,  Australian law already provides for the abolition of “due process”, of Habeas Corpus  and the presumption of innocence.

This has happened in a country which has not experienced a significant terrorist  incident for many many years.  What would be our Government’s reaction if this great  city were tied up and disorganised by terrorist attacks similar to those which recently  occurred in London?

We are told that it is likely there will be new legislation.  Will we follow the British  and seek to legislate against “indirect advocacy” of terrorism?  If such an attempt is  made, when does straight opposition to a policy become advocacy of violent  opposition?  We are reminded constantly that to win the fight on terrorism we will  have to give up some part of our freedom.  We have already given up more than we  know.  What more will we be asked to give up?

No part of the history of the Coalition’s invasion and occupation of Iraq gives any  member of that coalition the right to say on these issues:  Trust us.  We were told  there were weapons of mass destruction.  There weren’t.  The British were led to  believe that weapons of mass destruction could  be dropped on London with in 45  minutes.  They could not and the authorities knew they could not.



6

More recently published British Cabinet Papers have made it clear that President Bush  had made the decision to go to war seven or eight months before the American people  were told.

During the time when Dr Hans Blix, Executive Chairman UN Monitoring,  Verification & Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) was painstakingly revealing the  truth about weapons of mass destruction, or the lack of them in Iraq, the United States  had no intention of allowing that process to continue, to conclude.  They did not  indeed want it to conclude because it would have taken away the primary cause for  war - a decision which had already been made.

Western civilisation is again betrayed by the treatment metered out to prisoners at  Abu Ghraib and at Guantanamo Bay.  We are told that this was the view of a few  misguided, low-level troops but Donald Gregg, former National Security Advisor to  the first President Bush, wrote that the memorandum, published in the Torture Papers:  “cleared the way for the horrors that had been revealed in Iraq, Afghanistan and  Guantanamo that make a mockery of Administration assertions that a few misguided  enlisted personnel perpetrated the vile abuse of prisoners.  I can think of nothing that  can more devastatingly undercut America’s standing in the world or more importantly  our view of ourselves than those decisions.”

The Government and the Labor Party have both assumed that we cannot fight  terrorism and adhere to the basic principles of justice and democracy.  They have  assumed that certain people are outside the law and do not deserve justice.  They are  already saying to us “Trust us” on the issue.  I suggest they have given us every  reason not to trust them on these issues of peace and war and on security for our  people.

From Australia, our Government has constantly said that our participation in the  Coalition in Iraq has not increased the risk of terrorist attacks in Australia.  But the  former head of ASIO, Dennis Richardson, and the former Chief of the Defence Force  Staff, General Cosgrove, have both suggested the contrary.



Professor Naomi Chazan said, in the recent Gandel Oration in Melbourne:  “There is  one standard and one standard for all, and the challenge that is posed by terrorism is  how to defend the rights of those that we don’t agree with?  It’s easy to defend the  rights of those we do agree with.  Well I would like to argue this evening, but not only  this evening, that to date the western world has done very poorly in meeting this  challenge.  When I say very poorly - understatements are not something that Israelis  are used to - but nevertheless I would say very poorly indeed.”

“The challenge is how do you confront terrorism and fundamentalism without losing  your human face?  How can we tackle the fear and the emotions that terrorists arouse  in us without lashing out against them with their own tools, not with ours?  I think that  this is a major challenge in Israel today, but not only in Israel.  How can we defend  the rights, the basic human and civil rights, of those whose ideas we simply abhor?”

Unless we do so, the terrorists have already had a significant victory.  It is not enough  to say we believe in justice, in human rights for those who agree with us, for those  whom we classify as honourable and law abiding citizens.  It is the system, the



7

process, the courts, it is the measurement of justice that determines the nature of our  civilisation.

Churchill put it this way:  He suggested that the great privilege   “of Habeas Corpus, and of trial by jury, which are the supreme protection invented by  the English people for ordinary individuals against the State - the power of the  executive to send a man into prison without formulating any charge known to the law  and particularly to deny him the judgement of his peers - is, in the highest degree,  odious and is the foundation of all totalitarian governments….. extraordinary powers  assumed by the Executive with the consent of Parliament in emergencies should be  yielded up, when and as, the emergency declines…. This is really the test of  civilisation.”

Thomas Paine said:  “He that would make his own liberty secure must guard even his own enemy from  oppression, for if he violates this duty, he establishes a precedent that will reach to  himself.”

That is succinct and accurate advice.  It is an expression of what has happened  through the course of history.  If we stand silent in the face of discrimination and in  violation of the basic principles of humanity, then we betray our own principles and  our way of life.  We must fight extremism, fundamentalism, terrorism, whatever its  origins, whatever its objectives.

The Jewish Board of Deputies is celebrating its 60th Anniversary.  It is an organisation  that has fought discrimination from its inception.  It has understood from its inception  that to fight discrimination, one must fight all discrimination.  If one group, for  whatever reason is placed outside the reach of law, then discrimination will grow.

Fundamentalism has, throughout history, often been represented by an extreme and  arbitrary belief, often without justice and without principles which make it possible  for us to lead our lives as part of a civilised community.  I regret that many, who  almost certainly mean well, but who have so little faith in our freedom, in our  democracy, in our laws, that they believe they must throw basic rights overboard to  defend those same rights.  Such views are wrong and will make it harder to overcome  terrorism.

Our beliefs in our justice system must be strong enough to overcome terrorism, the  extremes of fundamentalism, whether it be from Islam, Fundamentalist Protestant  Churches, or from hateful and racist regimes out of the past.  If we cannot understand  that, we have already lost.





