







MEDIA RELEASE

Anthony Albanese MP  Shadow Minister for the Environment and Heritage  Shadow Minister for Water  Federal Member for Grayndler

14 February 2006

Climate of fear clouds Howard Government climate  policy

The Australian Government’s policy on climate change must be motivated by a  desire to shift energy use and production to clean and efficient sources.   Australia’s national interest must always come first, not vested interests.

Last night’s Four Corners raised serious allegations that senior CSIRO  scientists are being silenced on climate change issues when it does not  suit the Howard Government’s political message.



It is scandalous that Australia’s top scientists are being gagged from  saying we need greenhouse gas emission targets or that environment  refugees will be an issue when Pacific Islands flood because of climate  change.

CSIRO scientists are operating in a climate of fear where anything that  indicates they “disagreed with current government policy” is censored.

Australians need to hear the advice and views of Australia’s top scientists  and the Government should give them a forum, not silence them.   Government needs reasoned knowledge-based argument from scientists,  not fearful compromised advice clouded by Howard Government ideology.

This is behaviour consistent with an arrogant Government that is hiding from  scrutiny over the wheat-for-weapons scandal.

Last night’s Four Corners also raised serious allegations that the Howard  Government’s climate change policy is driven by a select group of lobbyists with  vested interests.



Direct testimony from Guy Pearse (former senior staff member for Environment  Minister and Government Senate Leader Robert Hill) on Four Corners strongly  suggests the Howard Government’s decision to back-flip on support for Kyoto  followed unreasonable influence by a select group of lobbyists with vested  interests.



Mr Pearse’s serious allegation that lobbyists have infiltrated the inner workings of  the Howard Government, with easy access to and even writing confidential  Cabinet papers, must be fully and promptly answered by the Government.

In December 1997, John Howard said the Kyoto Protocol was a “stunning  diplomatic success” and “a win for the environment and a win for Australian jobs”.   Yet, in June 2002, John Howard decided his Government was against ratifying  Kyoto.

In 1997 John Howard was right about the Kyoto Protocol, but he’s wrong now.



Tuesday, 14 February 2006

For further information/comment: Antony Sachs    0417 493 485











