SPEECH FOR AUSTRALIAN DEMOCRATS  NATIONAL CONFERENCE MAY 2006  By The Honourable Don Chipp A 0

On the 29th of June 1986 I completed 26 years as a member of the Federal Parliament. I had  many highs and a few . . . very few really.. . lows during that time.

By far the greatest moment of my career was May 9, 1977 when over six thousand people  came out in Melbourne’s bitter cold and rain to overflow the Melbourne Town Hall. They  went there in atrocious conditions because they were persuaded by two things:

Firstly that the two party system with its high discipline, secret donations and being subject  to outside influences was not operating for the benefit of ordinary Australians. Secondly  they came in hope that a fresh lively new party would be formed for which they could vote.

This Party would be based on honesty, tolerance and compassion, would disclose any  donations over $ 500 and be vigorously anti-nuclear and pro environment. It would press for  the necessity to achieve a sustainable economy and society.

The party was to hate nobody but was to allow its elected members of Parliament to vote at  all times in accordance with their conscience or what they perceived to be the wishes of their  electorate.

Most of the media and press gallery showed their lack of judgement by not even attending  one of the most extraordinary events in Australian political history. Some even sneered at  the noble concepts we adopted.

They lampooned that strange man called Don Chipp who was talking about a third political  party to exercise the balance of power in the Parliament.

People like you, ordinary people, proved me correct, and the media terribly wrong

History recorded that not only was a new Party formed but also within two years it controlled  the Parliament and the country by having the balance of power and continued in that position  for the next 10 year.

But that was twenty years ago.

Today the Party is not only in a low position in the public esteem but it seems to in a  continuous downward spiral.

My profound observation of the current political scene is as follows:

The voter’s disgust and resentment of the two major parties is infinitely greater than thirty  years ago. The desire to change is as popular as ever. But the electorate does not have a  viable option from which to choose

One has to ask two questions:

(1) Why has this wonderful creation by good people like you deteriorated to such an  extent that almost all political commentators forecast its death at the election to be  held next year?

(2) What can be done to be a winner again and to occupy the only check and balance  position to prevent the excesses of Parliament and it’s rampant incursions into the  Australian way of life?

First, it is too painful to dwell on (1) but lack of unity, personality clashes have not helped.

Let me talk about (2). What can we do now to get it back?

I make two suggestions.

First, one of the best-kept secrets in Australia is the magnificent achievement of the Party in  its 29 years of existence. Some of them are quite remarkable. In an enormously long list of  achievements three of them stand out.

(1)

(2)

We and we alone stood firm in demanding amendments to Paul Keating’s tax

The Hawke government’s Medicare legislation. That fantastic woman Janine Haines  reforms  should be thanked by all Australians for the improvements she demanded from the  Medicare legi slation.  (3) We also saved the Franklin River.

This record has been due to the indefatigable work of the Senators in particular our present  day ones to which I now pay this tribute.

I will now break my habit of being non-controversial and make some suggestions as to how  we might survive this time. It’s now down to that.. . ..our very survival will be determined at  the next election.

Perhaps all the current senators should ask themselves whether they think they can personally  retain their seat at the next election. If they believe they cannot win or if they decide they will  not stand for re-election, they should give consideration to resigning from the senate now to  allow their successor time to develop a public profile.

I am pleased with the wisdom of the National Executive in authorizing early pre-selection.  The procedure could operate as follows: If the sitting senator contests and wins the pre-  selection they would be in a much stronger position. They could then expect the full support  of the party and some sections of our electorate that catapulted us into office in the 70,s

If they didn’t win or if they have no intention of standing again, they might consider  resigning from the senate immediately. They can then be replaced by someone who thinks  they can win.

Their successor, who could be a high profile person, would have a chance of making a name  for themselves and the party before the next election.

The Democrats are a fragile institution with few members and limited resources. One must  ask “Is it moral that a senator be allowed to sit out their term in comfort while the party  disintegrates around them? The alternative is to go to the next election where we lose all  senators and Australia loses the only truly independent political party in the parliament.

2

Brilliant records in the past do not by themselves win election campaigns, but publicizing  them does. This is one of the two keys to enable us to get back. It is a thought that I  expressed at every Democrat function that I have attended in the last twenty years, none of  which was headed.

The press and publicity officer must be the best and the highest paid person in the party.  Second we must command headlines on current issues by abiding by the following  principles:  (1)

(2)

(3)

Although we must contest every seat in the Lower House our urgent and only aim  should be to elect Senators.  Keep the Bastards Honest has to be our main philosophy and maybe the Party’s  slogan.

A few examples of where we could gain prominence and where we have not are :

(a) The children overboard scandal

(b) We inflict the most appalling, inhuman conditions on refugees and asylum seekers  and subject them to lengthy legal processes (that can mean up to 4 years in prison without  being charged). The only crime some of these unfortunate human beings have committed is  to flee a dictator or regime in their own land where he and his family feel threatened.

(c) Why have we not shouted our demands for a Royal Commission into the petrol  industry.. . . not only at their prices and super profits but on the naked and obvious collusion  that is taking place. Are we stupid enough to believe that at any given day all petrol service  stations in Australia move their prices at precisely the same level as each other?

Again, why has virtually no work been done by governments or the oil industry to substitute  petrol with ethanol?

On behalf of this party I announced this plan thirty years ago and was ridiculed for such a  crazy suggestion by the oil companies, by the sugar cane growers and by the governments

Brazil has virtually removed its need for imported petroleum and can totally rely on its  ethanol to fuel its cars.

Car users of ethanol claim that they are not disadvantaged by changing from petrol.

What has held it up?. . . . Stupidity?. . . no. Was it proposed by the oil companies and agreed  to by the governments? A colluding oil industry has been created.

Only a Royal Commission could answer such questions

(d) Protection of whistle blowers. Australia is one of the few developed countries in  the world which has refused to pass the appropriate legislation to bring this about.

(e) No doubt the new open slather on exploiting materials which could decimate this  planet, such as the burning of fossil fuels like oil, coal and gas causing pollution and global  warming. Also sending uranium to countries that could make nuclear weapons. I do not  exclude the United States in this list.

(f) The ruthless introduction of the new ID card and its possible implications to  ordinary people have not been canvassed and should be.

3

CONCLUSION:

As I leave you today take heart and get us back to where we were.. . .. where the country  needs us. It should not be too impossible. Firsly get yourselves highly respected by the  press gallery again. Your press officer should be able to have your Senators on television to  tell about our record and to point out why the country needs the Australian Democrats . . .  particularly now.

Since my retirement twenty years ago the one statement said to me by people I meet goes  like this: " I never voted for you but we desperately need your lot back there".

Get out there and may good luck be on your side.. . . . .

4

