Media Centre

Guide Encourages People to Become a Volunteer

17 May 2006

National Volunteer Week is an opportunity to recognise the valuable contribution volunteers  make to the settlement of newly-arrived refugees in Australia.

The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs, Amanda Vanstone said settling into a  new home in a strange country was not easy, especially for people coming from refugee camps  or other harsh environments.

‘Many of the refugees the Australian Government assisted in the past year have been living in  desperate situations in camps without running water or electricity,’ Senator Vanstone said.

‘On average they had spent eight years in camps.

‘As a result of the experiences they have had to endure, they need the support of the  Australian Government and all Australians to ensure the transition to their new lives is a  success.’

‘A new booklet, How You Can Help Migrants and Humanitarian Entrants - A Volunteer’s Guide,  which was recently launched by the Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council, targets current  volunteers as well as potential volunteers, demonstrating the positive contribution volunteering  can make to the settlement experiences of Australia’s newest arrivals.

The guide highlights the important role that volunteers play in the settlement process and the  opportunities for volunteer involvement.

‘Volunteers make lifetime friendships and learn so much about new people, places and cultures.

‘Such interaction builds friendships and encourages community understanding and cohesion,  and of course is extremely rewarding.

‘I hope it encourages people from all walks of life to volunteer to help migrants and refugees to  settle into the Australian community,’ she added.

***Copies of photographs and profiles contained in the attached Volunteer’s Guide can be  obtained by phoning DIMA National Communications Branch on (02) 6264 2244.***

Minister’s media contact: 0419 445 886

Senator Amanda Vanstone  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

Border Protection Migration Program Humanitarian Program Multicultural Affairs Home Minister's Profile Contact the Minister Media Centre

