Australian Democrats Press  Releases

Senator Natasha Stott Despoja Democrats Senator for South Australia Australian Democrats spokesperson for Foreign Affairs

Dated: 23 January 2006 Press Release Number: tvlybzlk Portfolio: Foreign Affairs

Grant West Papuans asylum

The Australian Democrats today called on the Foreign Affairs Minister, Alexander Downer, to  intervene in the cases of the 43 West Papuans detained on Christmas Island, and grant political  asylum if the Department of Immigration denies a claim for refugee status.

"The case for political asylum for these people is clear. Grave human rights abuses have taken  place against the West Papuan people over a number of decades, at the hands of the  Indonesian military, and these asylum seekers are identifiable activists within the West Papuan  movement," Democrats' Foreign Affairs Spokesperson Senator Natasha Stott Despoja said.

"There is evidence that at least 100,000 West Papuans have been murdered some by the  Indonesian army in addition to widespread reports of wrongful imprisonment, torture and  general intimidation.

"Backing their claim for asylum, these asylum seekers arrived by boat displaying a banner  claiming genocide, intimidation and terrorism by Indonesian forces and expressing a desire for  freedom, peace and justice.

"The idea that these West Papuan activists are not claiming political asylum is offensive. It was  evident that they were claiming political asylum through these actions.

"If there is a chance that the legitimacy of the claims of these West Papuans for asylum is in  question, the Foreign Affairs Minister must use the mechanism within his power to prevent them  being handed over to the Indonesian Government.

"The Federal Government's decision on this issue must not be influenced by the Indonesian  Government's threats. The Government must not cower in the face of claims of harm to our  bilateral relationship with Indonesia if Australia grants asylum to these West Papuans.

"A strong relationship should be characterised by honest and open exchanges," Senator Stott  Despoja said.



