

TRANSCRIPT



TONY BURKE MP  Member for Watson  Shadow Minister for Immigration

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW :  KINGSGROVE,  SYDNEY  TUESDAY 18 APRIL 2006

Subject:  INDONESIA, WEST PAPUA, IMMIGRATION LAWS

E& OE PROOF ONLY

TONY BURKE: On Thursday of last week, John Howard made an appalling mistake.  He decided to give Jakarta the impression that they could be in control of Australia’s  immigration laws. Now he finds he’s gone down that path and can’t turn back.

Why is it that Jakarta thinks they can demand that Australia apologise simply for having  our own immigration laws? Why is it that an apology is on the table in the first place?

The answer is simple. An apology is on the table because John Howard decided to go  down the road of appeasement. He decided to tell Jakarta that they can have a say in who  comes to this country and the circumstances in which they come.

It was always the wrong path. Australia’s immigration laws should be made from  Canberra, not from Jakarta.

John Howard opened a terrible can of worms when he went down that path and there’s no  turning back for him now.

It only took a few days before Jakarta sent the message back loud and clear that what  Canberra had already done was not enough for them. That’s what happens when you try a  policy of appeasement. The demands keep going further and further.

Australia is a country that has always been willing to meet its international obligations  and it’s been willing to do that with its own Australian law. Any path away from that will  always be the wrong path. And to think that we’ve raised expectations to the stage where  another country thinks that we should apologise to them just for having our own set of  laws - this is a stage that every Australian never should have seen a government take  them to.



JOURNALIST: Does pandering to this thankless government - the Indonesian one that  is - does it make us look like a joke?

TONY BURKE: I don’t know of any country in the world that offers to solve a  diplomatic crisis by changing its own laws. We should have dealt with Indonesia the way  Indonesia deals with Australia. And that is, when we didn’t like how their laws operated,  Indonesia said to us, ‘well, we have our own legal system and you have to respect that’.

But when Indonesia doesn’t like Australia’s laws, Australia offers to change them. No  decent country behaves in that way, but that’s exactly the path John Howard is taking us  down.

JOURNALIST: But Mr Howard has said today that he is not going to apologise.

TONY BURKE: He’s said he’s not going to apologise - he’s already been willing to  change the law! Why is an apology being requested in the first place?

I believe that if we had gone down the path that Indonesia goes down with us, if we’d  gone down the path of diplomatic channels and explained that immigration decisions are  made at arms length, explained the exact process in dealing with West Papuan asylum  seekers, explained how Australian law works, then we wouldn’t be at the stage we are at  now where apologies are being demanded.

Apologies are being demanded because we’ve gone down a path of appeasement and all  that’s going to happen there is that Indonesia will increase their demands.

JOURNALIST: Is it enough for Michael L’Estrange to be heading over to Indonesia to  meet with the government or should Mr Howard or Mr Downer be going?

TONY BURKE: The problem that we have now is that by dealing with it the way we  have, the diplomatic crisis is worse than it was previously. I don’t know what level of  credibility either Amanda Vanstone or Alexander Downer would have if they went over  there. But I’ve got to say, what will happen, I expect, is that they will end up sending  senior ministers and what we’ll see when they get there will be more appeasement.

All of these extra demands, all of these extra problems, have only come about because  the government has created an environment of false hope. None of these demands were  on the table prior to last Thursday’s announcement.



JOURNALIST: Should the Australian Government be doing more to help the mother of  the little West Papuan girl whose father’s got asylum now?

TONY BURKE: I’ve read those reports in the paper. I imagine that there’s more  information still to come out. Certainly from what’s being reported at the moment, it’s a  deeply disturbing situation and something where Papua New Guinea, the country in

which that lady now finds herself, may well want to look at offering further levels of  protection. But I’m sure that there’s more information to come out on that.

JOURNALIST: And Philip Ruddock has told government backbenchers to keep quiet  about the changes to the asylum seeker policies. What do you say to the backbenchers?  What should they be doing?

TONY BURKE: The backbenchers should stand up for what they believe. And if the  backbenchers believe that the immigration changes we had last year were worth having,  if they believe getting children out of detention was worth doing, if they believe getting

the oversight of the Ombudsman and ending indefinite detention were changes worth  making, then they have to defend them now. Because all the government’s doing is  looking at relocating future asylum seekers to other countries. It’s a simple way of  dodging all of those changes.



Everything that was delivered last year is on the line if John Howard goes ahead with the  plan he announced last Thursday.





ENDS.







Media Contact: Bayne McKissock (02) 9554 3808 (Electorate Office)



