





ATTORNEY-GENERAL  THE HON PHILIP RUDDOCK MP



TRANSCRIPT

Parliament House, Canberra  ACT  2600  Telephone (02) 6277 7300  Fax (02) 6273 4102  www.law.gov.au/ag

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

FOLLOWING

FAMILY RELATIONSHIP CENTRES

ANNOUNCEMENT OF TENDER NEGOTIATIONS



MAIN COMMITTEE ROOM,

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA



TUESDAY, APRIL 4, 2006



Subject:  Family Relationship Centres; Indonesian relations; prisoner transfer  agreements; Mr ‘X’



JOURNALIST: Minister, how much will you expect these Family Centres to take the

temperature, so to speak, out of conflicts between parents and their children?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well  I  hope  many  of  the  organisations  who  are  here  to

listen  to  me  speak  today  because  the  point  is  these  changes  are  reinforced  by

amendments  to  the  Family  Law  Act  that  has  been  the  subject  of  successful  passage

through the House of Representatives and the Senate.  We have put in place primary

obligations for courts in dealing with issues, we’ve put children first.  And the right

of  a  child  to  know  both  parents  is  a  fundamental  right  to  be  enshrined  in  law.   Of

course,  a  child’s  right  to  be  safe  and  secure  is  a  proper  issue  to  be  addressed,  and

equally important, and there are a range of other issues that can be addressed.

But this underlines a very significant change in culture which those people who will

be in Family Relationship Centres dealing with people before they get into courts to

dispute  over  what  might  be  best  for  children  and  their  future,  and  will  have

knowledge,  experience  and  background.   Their  skills  and  capacities  in  mediation,

Attorney-General Transcript  2

dispute  resolution  should  mean  that  many  more  people  will  develop  a  parenting

plan  which  in  the  end  can  be  endorsed  by  way  of  agreement  before  the  courts,  if

necessary.

And  that  will  be,  in  our  view,  a  unique  opportunity  to  resolve  issues  in  less

adversarial ways without people thinking that you have to go and see a lawyer first

to find out how you’re going to be able to get the best out of a litigated involvement.

I  often  say  to  people  that  the  only  group  of  people  who  profit  from  family

breakdown are the lawyers who sometimes will spend to your last dollar if you give

them encouragement.

JOURNALIST: Is there any compulsion for couples to take up these services?  How

are you going to encourage them to use them?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well  there  is  compulsion  to  this  extent  -  we  can’t  force

people  to  reach  agreement  but  we  can  require  them  to  try.   And  unless  you  have

tried,  you  will  not  be  able  to  commence  proceedings  in  relation  to  children  in  a

Family Court.  Now there are circumstances where if there is violence, for instance,

you  may  be  able  to  get  earlier access;  if  one  party  doesn’t  cooperate  and  you’ve  at

least tried, you’ll still be able to get access to the courts.  But it is one of the threshold

questions that will have to be asked by the courts: have you tried at mediation, have

you tried to settle a parenting plan?  And if you’ve made a reasonable attempt and

failed, well, then you can go on with the litigation.

JOURNALIST: Will same sex couples with children be able to access these services?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  It’s  possible  for  children  of  a  same  sex  partner  from  a

previous  relationship  to  have  children  in  that  new  relationship.   The  issues  are

somewhat different because the child is not the natural child of both of the parents.  I

would suspect that the demand would not be there in a significant number of cases,

I’m not prescriptive about it…

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]?

Attorney-General Transcript  3

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well  the  point  is  would  you  be  looking  at  a  parenting

plan that would exclude a natural parent in favour of a person who is not?  I think

the issues would be of a very different character, but can people settle those issues?

At  the moment  they’re not  matters that  are dealt  with in the Family Courts and  so

the area in which any resolution in relation to custody issues would be dealt with in

relation to children in that circumstance would be in the state court system.  Whether

the  state  courts  would  be  looking  at  parenting  plans  or  not,  I  wouldn’t  know?   I

think  it’s  a  matter  we  would  have  to  look  and  see  how  those  issues  would  be

resolved if there is any request or demand for it.

JOURNALIST:  So they could use the services?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: I’m simply saying it’s an issue you would have to look at

if there was a demand for it.

JOURNALIST: Minister, Indonesia - the Indonesian President has said…

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Have we finished questions on any other issue related to

the Family Relationship Centres?  No other questions?  Okay.

JOURNALIST:  Sorry,  the  Indonesian  President  has  hinted  quite  strongly  that

Indonesia  will  end  its  cooperation  on  certain  bilateral  matters  including  people

smuggling.   How  concerned  are  you  about  that  and  will  you  be  talking  to  your

Indonesian counterpart about that?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Cooperation  between  Australia  and  Indonesia  occurs  in

many areas where it is in the interests of both Australia and Indonesia that we have

cooperation.   We  understand  the  sensitivity  that  Indonesia  has  about  any

circumstance  which  may  suggest  that  their  territorial  integrity  is  at  risk,  and  we

want to work those matters through.  The Foreign Minister will continue to speak on

those  issues  as  is  appropriate.  But  so  far  as  bilateral  cooperation  is  concerned

Australian  ministers  would  want  to  continue  to  work  very  closely  with  Indonesia.

It’s in their interests and it’s ours, but we do understand the concern that they have

about issues relating to territorial integrity.

Attorney-General Transcript  4

JOURNALIST: What  about  working towards a  regional  security  agreement, is that

in danger at the moment because of this?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well,  look,  I  make  the  point  that  without  being  too

prescriptive  about  these  issues  where  terrorism  is  concerned,  Indonesians  have

suffered  far  more  on  their  soil  than  we  have  on  our  soil  although  tragically

Australians  along  with  Indonesians  have  died  as  a  result  of  terrorist  events  in

Indonesia.  I don’t think Indonesia would want in any way to see that high level of

cooperation  in  dealing  with  terrorism  put  at  risk  on  that  point.   It’s  not  in  their

interests  and  it’s  not  in  our  interests  and  we  will  continue  to  work  positively  in

relation to all of the areas in which collaboration is possible.

JOURNALIST: Do you  see  yourself visiting Indonesia in the  near future to try and

clarify some matters?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well  I  wouldn’t  be  seeking  to  go  to  Indonesia  to  engage

myself in relation to the broader bilateral relationship, that’s a matter for the Foreign

Minister.  I  will  continue  to  be  involved, as  you  would  expect,  in issues relating  to

national  security  and,  at  appropriate  times,  I  will  visit  and  I  will  meet  my

counterparts here.  And I think that will continue to be possible.  Equally I am sure

in  due  course  we  will  continue  the  bilateral  ministerial  consultations  which  have

occurred on a regular basis.  That is not to say there won’t be some sensitivity about

the  issues  but  we  are  conscious  of  that  sensitivity  and  want  to  work  those  matters

through collaboratively.

JOURNALIST:  Minister,  there  are  three  young  Australians  who  have  been

sentenced in Hong Kong to drugs charges, are there any moves to try and get those

sentences brought back to Australia so they can serve their time in Australian gaols?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well, the important point we make about drug offences is

that if you engage in trafficking of drugs or are found in possession of drugs, there

are  a  range  of  possible  penalties  in  jurisdictions  abroad  which  can  be  very

significant.

Attorney-General Transcript  5

Of  course  we  are  seeking  worldwide  to  implement  arrangements  whereby  foreign

nationals serving out penalties in Australia might serve them out at home, closer to

their families; and equally to negotiate arrangements where Australians convicted of

offences  abroad  can  serve  those  penalties  out  in  Australia.   To  cover  something  of

the  order  of  whatever  it  is,  200  nation  states,  with  bilateral  treaty  arrangements

requires an enormous amount of effort.  Our focus is on where, of course Australians

are held and we’re endeavouring to progress those matters as quickly as possible.

In  some  jurisdictions  they  haven’t  had  experience  with  agreements  of  this  sort.  I

mean that’s the case with Indonesia, they haven’t yet negotiated such an agreement

with  any  country.   They’re  in  discussions  with  others  besides  Australia  but  it

requires  a  good  deal  of  work and  effort  to  get  to  a  point  where  agreements  can  be

concluded.   But  we  are  anxious  to  do  so  and  Hong  Kong  is  another  one  of  those

countries  or  areas  in  which  we  are  having  discussions  about  implementing  such

arrangements.

JOURNALIST: So it could be some time before an agreement is made?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well,  look,  I  don’t  diminish  in  any  way  the  difficulty  of

concluding agreements.  And when you have to have officers - and there are only a

limited number of officers in a department - negotiating with countries around the

world, it’s a very demanding exercise.

JOURNALIST: The case of Mr ‘X’ the asylum-seeker, do you bear any responsibility

at all in that case?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  It’s  more  appropriate  that  the  Minister  speak  about  the

matter because she’s considering it now.  But I simply make the point that there has

been some gilding of the lily - if I might call it that - in the way in which the issue is

presented.  I’ve always taken the view in relation to matters where the media is used

to  advance  claims  which  are  deleterious  to  the  department  that  the  broader  facts

sometimes  have  to  be  in  the  public  arena.   And  it’s  more  appropriate  the  Minister

deal with those issues than me, but I would simply say it is not safe to assume that

there  weren’t  countervailing  circumstances  against  decisions  that  would  have

provided for intervention of a character sort that might have been involved.

Attorney-General Transcript  6

And if people’s  claims for an  intervention  have  been  rejected  on character grounds

then  all  that  remains  is  removal,  and  removal  sometimes  is  very  difficult.   If  -  as

appears  to  be  in  this  particular  case,  and  in  others  from  time  to  time  -  there  are

difficulties in establishing clearly that the  person who has come  to Australia and is

not Australian has, in fact, citizenship rights of another country; and if you’re going

to  remove  somebody,  that  has  to  occur.   The  time  in  which  you  can  do  so  often

includes  periods  of  time  in  which  the  party  that  you  are  seeking  to  remove  is

required to cooperate and, if they don’t, the detention is often longer.

Now you asked me about culpability? I simply say yes, there are reasons why after a

long period of time one might be concerned.  But to suggest that the blame only ever

exists  with  the  department  sometimes  ignores  the  reality  that  cooperation  of  the

individual involved sometimes delays decisions that might be taken at earlier points

in time. But if you want to get to the point of whether or not in this particular case

those issues are germane, you should talk to the Minister, not to me.  I’ve spoken in

generic terms.  Anything else?  No?  All right.

ENDS

