



1





7th Vincent Lingiari  Memorial Lecture





‘Into the Light’





I wish to thank all those who have assisted me in the writing of this paper, in particular  I thank Nigel Parbury, a good mate.





Linda Burney, MP  Wiradjuri







2

Ballumb Ambol Larrakia and Gurindji yindamarra.

Ngudu-yirra bang marang.



I  pay  my  respect  to  the  ancient  Larrakia  and  Gurindji.  I  say

this to you. Greetings.



I honour your custodianship and care of country.



I also pay my respect to the many senior Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people here this evening.



In  observing  the  protocol  of  acknowledging  country,  we  are

reminded of three things.



Firstly,  that  Australia  is  a  country  of  many  layers.  The  most

ancient  layer  is  that  of  Aboriginal  Australia.  Hundreds  of

nation  states.  The  Larrakia,  Gurindji,  Wiradjuri,  Kitja,  Yorta

Yorta,  Waka  Waka,  Pitjantjara,  Barkandji,  Warlpri  and

Paredarerme and all of the others. This is a map that should be

as  familiar  to  Australians  as  the  eight  states  and  territories.

Sadly it is not.





3

Secondly, acknowledging country reminds us of the great gift

Aboriginal culture and survival bestows on us as a nation.



Thirdly and most urgently, acknowledging country reminds us

of  unfinished  business.  This  relates  to  the  rights  and  social

justice outcomes - or lack of them - of the first Australians.



I  wish  to  thank  the  Charles  Darwin  University  for  the

invitation  to  present  the  2006  Vincent  Lingiari  Memorial

Lecture. I am very conscious of the calibre of the people who

have  spoken  in  previous  years.  Sir  William  Deane,  Gough

Whitlam,  Malcolm  Fraser,  Patrick  Dodson,  Galarrwuy

Yunupingu  and  Brian  Manning.  However  I  did  note  there

were  no  girls  on  the  list.  There  will  be  now.  I  am

extraordinarily humbled by the invitation.



I am of the Wiradjuri nation of southwestern NSW. Wiradjuri

territory is shaped like a fan. It sweeps across the catchments

of  the  Lachlan,  Macquarie  and  the  Murrumbidgee  Rivers.  In

the  language  of  the  Wiradjuri  these  three  rivers  are  called

Galari, Wambuul and Marrambidya. I am of the Marrambidya

Wiradjuri.





4



The  Wiradjuri  were  the  first  inland  nation  to  experience  the

brutality of British colonisation. The so-called ‘first crossing’

of  the  Blue  Mountains  by  Blaxland,  Wentworth  and  Lawson

in  1813  may  have  provided  the  expanding  colony  with  rich

grazing land, but it spelt a litany of horrors for the Wiradjuri.



The  resistance  of  the  mighty  Wiradjuri  leader  Windradyne

and his warriors was so strong that martial law was declared

in  Bathurst  in  1823  -  two  thirds  of  the  Wiradjuri  around

Bathurst  were  murdered  during  the  four  months  of  martial

law.  To  compound  the  damage  even  further,  gold  was

discovered at Bathurst in 1851.



I tell this story so you can place me. It underpins, as does the

story  of  Vincent  Lingiari,  the  essence  of  Aboriginality.  That

is,  connection  to  country  and  where  you  stand  in  it.  It  also

reminds us of the injustices perpetrated on the First Peoples in

the so-called building of our nation. It is the telling of truth.



Tonight is about truth telling. Vincent Lingiari and his people

forged  a  shining  chapter  in  the  narrative  of  our  nation.  This





5

chapter was fired by connection to country and the pursuit of

justice  and  decency.  The  steely  determination  of  ‘that  old

man’ and his mob to ‘stay out’ for eight years until justice was

served is humbling and inspiring.



Gathered  here  this  evening,  we  participate  in  the  further

forging of that story. This year we celebrate the Gurindji story

40  years  on.  I  was  very  much  reminded  of  this  in  a  recent

article  in  the  Sydney  Morning  Herald.  The  headline  was

‘Stockmen  mark  long  walk  to  freedom  and  land  rights’.  It

quoted  Billy  Bunter  Jampijinpa,  one  of  the  few  remaining

stockmen  who  took  that  long  walk.  He  said:  “It  was  the  day

we  walked  out  of  the  darkness  into  the  light.”  In  1966  the

Gurindji,  like  other  Aboriginal  people  all  across  this  land,

were not yet citizens. In 1966 I was nine years old. Friends, it

was not such a long time ago.



How  well  we  know  the  photograph  taken  in  1975  by  Merv

Bishop,  of  those  two  men,  one  black  and  one  white,

symbolically exchanging the red dirt of Gurindji country. It is

a powerful image and has come to represent a great moment

in  our  history  -  recognition  in  Australian  law  of  Aboriginal





6

people’s  right  to  country.  My  heart  surges  when  I  hear  the

words  of  the  Paul  Kelly-Kev  Carmody  song  ‘From  Little

Things Big Things Grow’:



That was the story of Vincent Lingiari

But this is a story of something much more.

How power and privilege cannot move a people

Who know where they stand and stand in the law.



Tonight  we  honour  that  old  man  and  all  of  those,  across  the

country, who stood with him.



In  the  context  of  honouring  people,  there  are  three  other

Australian men who meant an enormous amount to me. Much

of  what  I  share  with  you  this  evening  has  been  fashioned  by

them. I loved them all very much. Like Vincent, they too have

passed  from  our  presence.  And,  like  Vincent  Lingiari,  they

have  left  us  richer  for  them  being  here.   My  heart  has  been

heavy  of  late.  It  is  difficult  for  me  to  explain,  but  as  I  was

preparing  this  paper  for  tonight’s  lecture  I  realised  it  had

become part of my own healing. I thank you for allowing me

to mention their names.





7



Judge  Bob  Bellear,  Noonuccal/Vanuatu,  1944-2003.  His

grandfather  was  ‘blackbirded’  -  stolen  -  and  brought  to  this

country  as  a  slave.  Bob  joined  the  Navy  and  put  himself

through  matriculation  and  law  school  to  rise  to  be  the  first,

and  still  the  only  Aboriginal  Judge.  Bob  was  humble  and

honest.  He  sought  no  accolades  but  dispensed  justice

intelligently  and  with  complete  fairness.  He,  and  his  family,

were accorded the honour of a State funeral. His wife Kaye is

with us this evening. Thank you, Kaye, for travelling with me

to  Darwin.  I  needed  a  strong  hand  to  hold.  Bob  died  from

asbestos-related cancer contracted while he served this nation

in the Royal Australian Navy.



Michael  Alan  Riley,  Wiradjuri/Kamilaroy,  1960-2004.

World-renowned photographer and filmmaker, and one of the

leaders  of  the  ‘Koori  Art’  movement  of  urban  Aboriginal

artists in the 1980s. Michael’s work is currently featured in a

major  retrospective  at  the  National  Gallery  of  Australia.  I’d

known  Michael  for  over  half  my  life.  He  was  my  dearest

friend. Michael died of end-stage renal failure at the age of 44.







8

Rick  Farley,  1952-2006.  My  husband,  a  brave,  foresighted

Australian. Rick saw the issues clearly and was able to bring

people  together.  He  was  one  of  the  architects  of  the  first

Native  Title  Act.  He  was  proud  of  the  role  he  played  in

brokering  a  regional  land  agreement  between  Aboriginal

people and cattlemen and conservationists in Cape York. Rick

put  decency  and  honesty  before  everything  else.  Farley  was

the  love  of  my  life.  His  death  was  a  great  personal  tragedy,

but, like the others, also a tragedy for this nation.



These  men  made  enormous  contributions  to  this  country  and

have left great legacies.



I understand there has been sorry business here as well.   My

deep  condolences  to  the  Lingiari  family.  Your  legacy  is

stitched firmly into the blanket of our nation.



Many  people  here  this  evening  will  know  what  it  means  to

carry  so  much  grief.  I  will  never  forget  a  meeting  I  chaired

when I was the Director-General of DAA in NSW. The room

was  full  of  senior  Government  officials  discussing  what

performance indicators should be used in Aboriginal Affairs.





9

The  Health  Department  representative,  one  of  the  few

Aboriginal  people  in  the  room,  indicated  he  wanted  to  say

something. He said, and I paraphrase: “Listen, I have been to

5 funerals of close relatives this year and it’s only April. How

do  you  think  we  feel?  We  feel  sad  and  angry.  I  am  sick  of

going  to  funerals.  How  do  you  develop  a  performance

indicator for that?”



I want to focus on four things:



1. the  power  of  narrative  and  the  importance  of  truth  in

telling the Australian story



2. the  ‘back-to-the-future’  state  of  Aboriginal  Affairs  in

Australia today.  This country is sitting on a time bomb.

If  you  can’t  hear  the  ticking,  you  are  not  paying

attention.



3. the quiet strength of real leadership



4. the  failure  of  Australians  to  value  Aboriginal  Australia

and to live up to the promise of great events of the past





10



The  story  of  Vincent  Lingiari  and  his  people’s  long  struggle

for simple justice embraces all of these points.



Next  year  will  be  the  fortieth  anniversary  of  the  1967

Referendum,  which  at  last  counted  Aboriginal  people  in  the

Australian  census.  It  seemed  at  last  that  we  were  all  citizens

together, all equal.



And thirty-one years ago this year, that great old man Vincent

Lingiari received a symbolic handful of earth from the Prime

Minister  of  Australia  Gough  Whitlam.   He  said  ‘Thank  you.

We are all mates now.’



But the truth, my friends, is this. We are not all equal. And we

are not all mates.



Five  weeks  ago  I  was  in  Athens.  I  walked  with  awe  around

the  Acropolis,  the  ancient  Agora  and  the  Temple  of

Olympians.  I  saw  the  reverence,  effort  and  respect  paid  by

Greek people to their history. In the National Archaeological

Museum  of  Athens,  I  found  myself  standing  in  front  of  a





11

white marble bust of Homer. As I stood looking at Homer, the

story  of  Vincent  Lingiari  and  his  people  came  to  mind.  I

thought,  ‘Well  old  man,  our  mob’s  been  around  a  lot  longer

than  these  fellas’.  It  begs  the  question.  We  live  in  a  country

whose real human history spans back longer than any other -

yet  as  a  nation  this  is  not  respected,  not  revered  and  not

collectively celebrated.



Why is it such effort and care has been taken in Australia to

betray, blur and deny the truth. I have often used the analogy

that growing up as an Aboriginal child looking into the mirror

of  our  country  was  difficult  and  alienating.  Your  reflection

was  at  best  distorted  and  at  worst  non-existent.  How  often

have  you  heard  Australia  described  as  a  young  country?  The

conspiracy of silence to my way of thinking was racist in its

origin.  I  vividly  recall  a  moment  at  the  NSW  Reconciliation

Convention in 1999, the then Premier of NSW, Bob Carr said:

“We are now seeing the first generation of Australian children

growing  up  being  taught  the  truth.”  This  statement  made  me

catch my breath. I had spent so many years of my life working

in the education arena. Fighting for the truth to be told.







12

As  Alex  Boraine,  the  Deputy  Chair  of  South  Africa’s  Truth

and  Reconciliation  Commission,  said  at  the  Reconciliation

Convention in Melbourne in 1997:



‘Reconciliation … is a vision. But a vision must be grounded

in reality…. There are three anchors which can keep us on the

ground…The  first  of  these  anchors  …  is  the  exercise,  the

experience  of  truth…of  telling,  of  coming  to  terms  with  the

truth  of  our  past,  and  the  truth  understood  in  this  way

transcends lies … It rejects denial and helps to come clean in

order to build, to heal.’



Pepe  Zalaquett,  a  South  African  human  rights  lawyer  jailed

and  exiled  by  his  own  country,  has  said:  ‘Society  cannot

simply black out a chapter of its history. The unity of a nation

depends  on  a  shared  identity.  Which  in  turn  depends  largely

on a shared memory. The truth also brings a measure of social

catharsis and helps to prevent the past from reoccurring.’



I  think  of  Australia  as  this  amazing  mosaic  of  many  tiles,

different  colours,  different  sizes.  Each  tile  is  the  story  of  an

individual.   If  a  tile  is  missing  the  mosaic  is  incomplete  and





13

unbalanced. Each individual story creates the whole narrative

and each individual story is amazing.



I have often recounted my own experience as a thirteen-year-old  schoolgirl  sitting  in  a  classroom  being  taught  that  my

people  were  savages  and  the  closest  example  to  Stone  Age

man  living  today.  I  felt  ashamed  and  embarrassed.  I  vividly

recall  wanting  to  turn  into  a  piece  of  paper  and  slip  quietly

through the crack in the floor.



I mentioned earlier my encounter with Homer.  In Book VI, of

the Iliad he writes:



‘Urge him with truth to frame his fair replies;

And sure he will: For Wisdom never lies’



Forty years on you marvel at the course of events that led up

to  that  time  and  the  course  of  history  that  flowed  from  that

day in August when Vincent Lingiari gathered up his people

and ‘walked into the light’.







14

It  was  a  time  in  our  history  when,  as  Brian  Manning  said  in

his  Lingiari  Lecture,  ‘Aborigines  were  arbitrarily  bound  to

employers by a system of institutionalised poverty’. In March

1966  the  Northern  Territory  Workers  Union  took  the  Cattle

Industry  Award  to  the  Arbitration  Commission.  Equal  pay

was granted to Aboriginal stockmen. The catch being that the

pastoralists  were  given  three  years  to  get  used  to  the  idea.

Tom  Fisher,  Lord  Vestey’s  manager  at  Wave  Hill,  said  no

way  to  Vincent  when  he  asked  for  full  wages  for  the

stockmen.  The  flow-on  from  this  is  well  captured  by  Patrick

Dodson’s  words  in  the  foreword  of  Sir  William  Deane’s

‘Signposts from Daguragu’, the first Lingiari Lecture:



‘But what was apparently an industrial dispute over appalling

working  and  living  conditions  soon  revealed  itself  as  a

demand  by  the  Gurindji  people  for  the  return  of  their

traditional lands’.



Those words of Vincent when Lord Vestey tried to induce the

Gurindji away from Daguragu back to Wave Hill - ‘You can

keep  your  gold,  we  just  want  our  land  back’  -  clearly





15

demonstrated that the walk-off and strike had indeed become

something much more.



The  stars  were  in  line.  The  strike  coincided  with  the

beginnings of a concerted Aboriginal rights movement. It was

the  time  when  the  successful  YES  campaign  was  in  full

swing,  arguing  that  the  First  Australians  be  included  in  the

census.  That  old  man  and  his  mob,  and  all  their  supporters,

were  main  actors  in  a  renaissance  in  Aboriginal  self-determination,  pride  and  identity.  They  built  the  foundations

of the Land Rights movement. But they did something else as

well.  They  provided  a  point  for  Aboriginal  and  non-Aboriginal  people  to  join  hands.  Trade  unions  and  churches,

artists  and  activists,  politicians  and  so  many  ordinary  decent

Australians.



How on earth can we grow up as a country if we cannot own

our  history?  When  you  think  about  it,  Captain  Cook’s  claim

over  the  whole  east  coast  in  1770  was  based  on  the  lie  of

Terra  Nullius.  It  wasn’t  till  1992  that  our  legal  system

recognised that this was a lie. Over 200 years of living a lie.







16

Much  has  been  done  over  the  last  15  to  20  years  to  tell  all

Australians  the  truth.  Groundbreaking  research  by  historians.

Years of curriculum reform. Sixteen years of publicity by the

Reconciliation  Council  and  Reconciliation  Australia.  All  the

work by the dedicated people at the grassroots of the people’s

movement.



Yet  in  2006  we  have  the  federal  Minister  for  education

launching  a  paper  by  the  Menzies  Research  Centre  that  calls

for Aboriginal culture to be taken out of schools.



I view the so-called history wars as a backlash against telling

the truth - and against decency. Starting with the ‘relaxed and

comfortable’  landslide  in  1996  and  continuing  through  the

years  of  Hansonism.  The  history  wars  are  about  some

Australians  wanting  to  re-invent  Australia  behind  the  white

picket fence of monoculture. Consider the war of ridicule on

‘political  correctness’.  The  targeting  of  the  so-called  ‘black

armband’  history.  The  rubbishing  of  intellectuals;  the  brutal

mockery  of  ‘chardonnay  human  rights’.  Many  of  you  here

tonight would fit this description. I say to the perpetuators of

this deceit, Margaret River chardy is a pretty good drop.





17



Think of the demonising of asylum seekers.



What we have seen, my friends, is the reduction of debate on

the  whole  range  of  human  issues  to  the  lowest  common

denominator.



Nothing has been more distasteful than the debate on whether

the  Aboriginal  children  who  were  taken  from  their  families

were stolen or removed for their own good. Hard as this was

for  decent  thinking  Australians  to  stomach  -  how  must  it

affect the people who have been the victims and still suffer?



As Professor Larissa Behrendt wrote recently in the National

Indigenous Times:



‘…  those  debates  are  not  about  Aboriginal  history.  They  are

about  white  identity.  These  debates  are  about  the  story  that

non-Aboriginal Australians want to tell themselves about their

country, and more specifically, they are about the stories that

white people want to tell themselves about this country.’







18

Truly, as Faith Bandler said in Melbourne in 1997:



‘In this climate of callousness, where a move to dismantle the

structures of democracy is heavily overshadowing us, our task

now, is to use our voices, our energy, our will, and our talent

to  mobilise  the  forces  of  good  will.  We  can  demolish  those

forces of distraction under the banner of justice for all. But we

must act now before it is too late.’



How right Faith was. And how long ago!



I  have  worked  in  Aboriginal  Affairs  for  a  very  long  time.

Twenty-six  years  in  fact.  Don’t  be  too  impressed  by  the  fact

my  hair  is  still  black.  I  have  a  deep  and  meaningful

relationship with my hairdresser. The United States politician

Hubert H Humphrey posed the question ‘What is the measure

of a society? A society is measured by how it treats its most

vulnerable’. Hold that thought as I share with you what I call

the dÃÂ©jÃÂ  vu, ‘back-to-the-future’ state of Aboriginal Affairs in

Australia today. It is impossible in this setting not to ask what

would that old man think of the current debate which ignores





19

the fundamentals: culture; country; and kin - all swamped by

the ‘new way forward’.



It is almost impossible to put into words the distress being felt

at the roll-back in Aboriginal Affairs.  Not least because you

think of all those people who gave so much.



At  the  time  of  the  1996  election,  Mr  Howard  was  quoted

saying the pendulum had swung too far - as you can see he’s

given it a hell of a thump back. Some examples:



*  Mainstreamed  Aboriginal  health  -  and  now  extended  this

idea to all of Aboriginal affairs.



* Denied the existence of the stolen generations - refused to

say  sorry  -  then  spent  millions  in  legal  costs  to  deny  what

happened to Lorna Cubillo and Peter Gunner.



*  Ignored  the  final  report  of  the  Council  for  Aboriginal

Reconciliation.







20

* Rolled back Native Title, an issue the UN Committee for the

Elimination  of  Racial  Discrimination  took  a  great  deal  of

interest  in.  The  proposed  changes  to  the  NT  Land  Rights

legislation could mean whole communities being leased for a

century  to  the  highest  bidder.   The  legislative  changes  will

also undermine the Northern Territory Land Council structure.



*  Encouraged  the  States  and  Territories  to  abandon  cultural

considerations  in  sentencing  known  as  the  Fernando

Principles.  If  the  states  and  territories  legislate  to  do  so,

Commonwealth  money  would  flow  to  the  states.   I  say  to

Minister Brough, there are already enough of our mob in jail.



* Abolished ATSIC. For the first time since 1973 there is no

nationally  elected  Indigenous  voice.  Therefore,  there  is  no

Indigenous  point  of  accountability  of  Government  effort  and

outcomes in Aboriginal Affairs. In essence it is the complete

abandonment of the principle of Self Determination.



*  The  whole  debate  around  ‘shared  responsibility’  and

‘mutual  obligation’  -  boils  down  to:  we  will  tell  you  and  by

the way if you don’t toe the line we will punish you. I fail to





21

see how a child is going to be better off if there is going to be

less  income  the  home.  More  than  a  whiff  of  social

engineering.



* The ‘new paternalism’ being advocated by Tony Abbott, i.e.

putting administrators in communities with authority to direct

all  funding  and  services.  Noel  Pearson’s  description  of  this

approach as ‘Groundhog day’ hits the mark.



*  What  would  Vincent  think  of  Kevin  Andrews  and

Workchoices? Very little I suspect. He could be forgiven if he

thought it was still 1966.



Australia  is  sitting  on  a  ticking  time  bomb.  The  Indigenous

birth  rate  is  almost  double  the  mainstream  -  2.3%  compared

to 1.2%. The average median age of Indigenous people is 21

years  compared  to  36  for  other  Australians.  39%  of

Indigenous people are under the age of 15 years, compared to

20% of the mainstream. And a massive 57% of the Indigenous

population is under 25!!







22

This  is  in  the  context  of  public  policy  being  driven  by  an

ageing  population.   As  Tom  Calma  points  out  in  his  2005

Social  Justice  report,  this  means  more  money  than  current

budgets  will  be  needed  just  to  keep  up  with  the  status  quo.

Otherwise  Aboriginal  children  will  continue  to  experience

poor educational outcomes, chronic unemployment (if indeed

there is any work available) filling up our jails and dying way

too early.



The  life  expectancy  of  Indigenous  people  is  59.4  years  for

men, 64.8 for women compared to 76.6 for men and 82.0 for

women in the mainstream. The infant mortality rate is 3 times

the non-Indigenous rate. In the area of mental health, we are

twice  as  likely  to  be  hospitalised  for  mental  and  behavioural

disorders.  Aboriginal  men  are  7  times  more  likely  and

Aboriginal  women  a  staggering  31  times  more  likely  to  be

hospitalised for intentional self-harm!!



When you collapse these figures down to a local community

level the true horror is revealed.  The average life expectancy

in Wilcannia, far west NSW is 33 years old.

In 1994 Mick Dodson wrote his second Social Justice report:





23



“We  have  all  heard  them  -  the  figures  of  death,  and  of

disability… Every few years (the) figures are repeated and

excite attention. But I suspect that most Australians accept

them  as  being  almost  inevitable.  A  certain  kind  of

industrial deafness has developed. The human element in

this is not recognised. The meaning of these figures is not

heard - or felt.



The  statistics  of  infant  and  perinatal  mortality  are  our

babies  and  children  who  die  in  our  arms…  The  statistics

of shortened life expectancy are our mothers and fathers,

uncles,  aunties  and  elders  who  live  diminished  lives  and

die  before  their  gifts  of  knowledge  and  experience  are

passed on. We die silently under these statistics.



There  should  be  no  mistake  that  the  state  of  Indigenous

health  in  this  country  is  an  abuse  of  human  rights.  A

decent standard of health and life expectancy equivalent to

other Australians is not a favour asked by our people. It is

our right - simply because we too are human.”







24

These words were written twelve years ago. Things have not

improved; it is worse in the sense that twelve years ago these

words  had  an  impact  but  now  they  are  as  familiar  as  lift

music.



‘It is our right - simply because we too are human.’ This, my

friends,  is  what  it  is  all  about.  It  is  about  humanity.  History

tells so many horror stories of what can happen if humanity is

denied  -  the  Holocaust,  Bosnia,  Rwanda  or  the  Sudan.  And

the  examples  in  our  own  history  of  what  happened  when

Aboriginal people were seen as less than human.



Racism is still alive and well in Australian society. It feeds the

current debate. Just one example, the Palm Island man whose

lawyers were successful in having his trial for his involvement

in  the  so-called  riot  moved  to  Brisbane  when  the  Supreme

Court ruled that no Aboriginal person could expect a fair trial.

This  is  not  Alabama,  in  the  1950’s  -  it  is  Townsville,  in

Australia in 2006.



It  is  important  to  make  the  point  that  it  has  not  just  been

governments  who  have  failed  our  people.  Some  of  our  own





25

mob  have  failed  us  too.  I  have  no  argument  with  the  notion

that  communities  and  individuals  have  to  take  more

responsibility.  Where  I  have  the  argument  is  the  almost  total

lack  of  public  recognition  that  many  communities  are

displaying great leadership, innovation and success. Just look

at  the  47  nominees  for  the  2006  National  Indigenous

Governance  Awards.   Just  a  few  examples  from  across  the

country:



Eight Examples

Aboriginal Family Support Services Inc - South Australia

Boigu Island Council - Torres Strait

Broome Aboriginal Media Association - Western Australia

Darkinjung Cattle Company Pty Ltd - New South Wales

Traditional Credit Union - Arnhem Land

Women’s Karadi Aboriginal Corporation - Tasmania

Yarrabah Shire Council - Queensland

Goolum Goolum Aboriginal Cooperative - Victoria



In  2002,  I  attended  a  Ministerial  Council  on  Aboriginal  and

Torres Strait islander Affairs meeting in Brisbane.  A group of

women led by Boni Robertson who had just finished a report





26

on  community  violence  in  Queensland,  pleaded  with  the

Ministers  for  help.  The  evidence  was  there  of  not  only

systemic  failure  by  Governments  over  a  long  time  but  also

failure within our own communities.



Women  in  particular  have  been  screaming  out  for  help  with

this  awful  and  unacceptable  problem  for  years.  It  is  possible

to tackle the issue. Provide a safe place and back-up resources

so people can disclose in safety and with confidence. Provide

a safe refuge for women and children. Recognise that it is not

purely an Aboriginal problem. Implement a proper whole-of-Government response - Cross-jurisdictional cooperation based

on  partnership  with  communities  is  crucial.  And  build

capacity within the community.



Accept that it will take a long time to deal with the problem.

Educate  victims  about  their  rights  and  how  to  protect

themselves. Work with community-based organisations to run

a campaign in the community that abuse is unacceptable and

will not be tolerated. Recognise that it will cost money.  Back

community  members  who  are  prepared  to  speak  out  about

abuse.





27



Recognise the cultural implications, especially if the abuser is

a relative.  And prosecute the perpetrators.



One firm point I want to make this evening is to debunk the

recent  rhetoric  that  the  rights  agenda  has  been  put  to  rest.  It

has not. Every time we go to a funeral we think about rights!



I rarely start my day off cross but on the 26th July this year I

did.  I  was  listening  to  the  Michelle  Grattan-Fran  Kelly

morning chat on Radio National. The basic message was that

Howard  had  moved  the  debate  onto  his  own  ground  and  the

whole idea of rights was off the agenda. It was the day after

Mick  Dodson  appeared  on  the  same  stage  as  the  Prime

Minsiter at a Reconciliation Australia event.



To  think  that  we  have  abandoned  the  rights  agenda  is  as

ridiculous  as  thinking  that  Vincent  would  have  walked  away

from his struggle for decency and country. Those two young

Koori  boys  I  saw  rapping  in  Redfern  last  week  understood

absolutely  how  important  rights  are.  They  sang  about  rights,

coupled with respect.





28



Aboriginal  people  will  never  give  up;  we  cannot  give  up.  I

suggest  to  some  of  the  commentators  that  you  stand  in  our

shoes before you profess to know what is in our hearts and our

heads.



In the 1880s David Fernando stood outside Australia House in

London  for  many  months  with  little  white  skeletons  all  over

his coat protesting about the condition of his people.



In 1927 Jimmy Clements made the journey to the opening of

Parliament  House  in  Canberra.  He  went  to  remind  the  Duke

and Duchess of Kent that we had not ceded our sovereignty.

Bill Ferguson, Jack Patten, Margaret Tucker, Pearl Gibbs and

all  those  others  who  gathered  in  Sydney’s  Australian  Hall  in

1938 for the first-ever Day of Mourning to discuss and affirm

our rights.



Charles  Perkins  and  the  Freedom  Riders  in  1965  set  out  to

expose the lack of rights for blackfellas in rural NSW.  Towns

where picture theatres were segregated, black kids not allowed

to  use  public  swimming  pools.   Aboriginal  women  were  not





29

allowed to try clothes on in stores, and Aboriginal diggers not

allowed into RSL clubs.



The brave men and women who worked so hard for the YES

vote  in  1967  were  fighting  for  our  rights.  The  Yirrkala  Bark

Petition sent to the Commonwealth Parliament in 1963 - was

about our rights within the Australian Constitutional and legal

system.  The  men  and  women  who  set  up  and  sustained  the

tent embassy on the lawns of Parliament House in 1972 were

demanding our rights. The thousands of people who marched

with  us  through  the  streets  of  Sydney  on  the  26th  January

1988 marched for freedom justice and hope.



Michael  Long’s  walk  from  Melbourne  to  Canberra  last  year

was about rights. Every time Bangarra Dance Theatre opens a

show  anywhere  in  the  world  it  affirms  our  right  to  story  and

dance  and  cultural  identity.  The  smash  hit  at  this  year’s

Cannes film festival ‘Ten Canoes’ set ten thousand years ago

in  country  and  language  -  this  is  surely  about  our  right  to

country and culture.







30

And of course, the story of that great old man whose struggle

and  victory  we  celebrate  tonight  -  his  struggle  was  all  about

rights.



I say in the strongest possible terms: Governments come and

go. Public opinion waxes and wanes. We ain’t going nowhere.

This  is  our  country.  We  will  never  forgo  the  pursuit  of  our

rights. To do so would be to betray all those people both black

and  white  who  have  gone  before  us  -  and  the  children  and

grandchildren who follow us.



That old man knew how to wait. And we know how to wait.

We have done an awful lot of it. Perseverance and tenacity are

fellow travellers.



I  would  like  to  turn  my  thoughts  to  the  power  of  quiet

leadership. I  can  think  of  no  better  expression  of  such

leadership than that shown by Vincent Lingiari.



You old man, who told your story to a nation and it could not

look  away.  You  old  man,  who  said  no  to  unfair  wages  and

conditions  and  no  to  Lord  Vestey.  You  who  watched  your





31

people suffer. You who knew how to wait. You old man, who

led  -  and  won  -  the  most  heroic  campaign  ever  seen  in  the

history of industrial relations in Australia. You who declared:

The  issue  on  which  we  are  protesting  is  neither  purely

economic  nor  political  but  moral  ……  On  August  23  1966,

you  old  man  who  decided  the  Gurindji  would  ‘cease  to  live

like dogs.’



I have given much thought to the notion of leadership. A book

that  has  profoundly  influenced  my  thinking  is  Harper  Lee’s

‘To  Kill  a  Mockingbird’.  It  is  the  story  of  a  white  lawyer

defending a black man on a charge of rape in the deep south

of America in the ‘40s. I learnt from the storytelling of Harper

Lee that:



‘One  of  the  keys  to  leadership  is  the  ability  to  take  off  your

own  shoes  and  to  stand  comfortably,  intelligently  and

sensitively in the shoes of others.’



People  in  positions  of  leadership  affect  the  lives  of  many  in

the most profound ways. I say that it is wise for those people





32

to remember that humility and loyalty are strengths. We have

all stood on the shoulders of others.



Rick Farley said in his Barton Lecture in 2001:



‘For  the  last  ten  years  I  have  been  heavily  involved  in  the

reconciliation  movement  because  there  is  no  other  choice

about  race  relations  that  is  acceptable  to  me.  I  have  seen  the

generosity  of  Indigenous  people  as  they  continue  to  offer  us

the gift of their culture while every day they feel the deep pain

of social injustices that shame us all.’



The  generosity  Rick  speaks  of  is  astounding.  On  so  many

occasions I have seen Aboriginal people say to the rest of the

country, ‘Come take our hand; we can only do this together’.

Why?  After  what  some  of  these  people  have  endured.  Yet

they can still extend their hand. That to me is true leadership.

It is the sort of leadership Vincent Lingiari lived his life by.



Headlines  and  horror  stories  abound,  bemoaning  the  lack  of

Aboriginal  leadership  or  the  failures  of  some  Aboriginal





33

leaders. I say this, there is much to learn from the first peoples

about quiet leadership.



Thank  you  Vincent  for  teaching  me  two  additional  things.

That leadership requires heart and that it requires compassion.

This realisation will truly stay with me forever.



I’m very fearful that we as Australians are not living up to the

events of the past. Our country is getting harder to recognise.

One of our greatest moments was in Sydney 2000 when Cathy

Freeman  ran  the  400.   The  wall  of  sound  coming  from  the

stadium  was  like  nothing  ever  heard.  And  no  matter  where

you  were  that  night  -  as  a  nation  were  were  focused

absolutely  on  that  race,  and  all  Australians  united  with  one

voice to cheer Cathy on, to will her to win. We stood together

and that my friends, is what Australia can be.



In the same year hundreds of thousands of Australians walked

across bridges for truth, social justice and rights. To all those

people I say, we need you now more than ever.









34

Thirty four (34) years ago Frank Hardy finished ‘The Unlucky

Australians’, his story of the struggle of Vincent Lingiari and

the Gurindji, with these words:



‘Will  I,  having  written  it,  be  free  to  turn  to  other  books  and

obsessions,  will  you,  having  read  it,  be  free  to  turn  to  the

pursuit of happiness, will the lucky country remain free while

the unlucky Australians are in chains?’



The answer is no!

Deliberate attempts to destroy Aboriginal culture and identity

over  the  past  218  years  have  failed.  You  wonder  if  the

Australian  establishment  was  afraid  of  Aboriginality  -  one

report  of  the  Protection  Board  in  NSW  spoke  of  Aboriginal

children as ‘a positive menace to the State’.



I recall listening to a media conference many years ago.  The

journalist said to a senior Aboriginal man, “What has been the

greatest  achievement  of  Aboriginal  people?  He  said,  “We

have survived”.







35

Here  are  some  ways  I  think  the  values  and  the  ways  of

thinking  and  relating  of  Aboriginal  Australia  can  make  a

contribution to the idea of an Australian citizen identity:



- The Aboriginal sense of belonging to the land - not about

owning  land  but  caring  for  land;  having  a  responsibility

to country.



- A shared identity - it is  time people realised how much

of Australian identity comes from the first peoples.



- The way in which Aboriginal people define our place to

a nation and a local community - this may be a way for

people  to  re-connect  at  the  local  level,  thus  leading  to  a

real civic identity.



- To provide the foundation of the country so we can truly

own the truth



The  search  for  the  mythical  ‘real  Australia’  can  only  be

realised  if  people  know  and  are  proud  of  our  shared  history

and  our  shared  identity.  We  will  never  understand  who





36

Australians are if we leave out the Aboriginal element. Not for

nothing  are  Aboriginal  people  so  often  called  the  ‘real

Australians’.



It always intrigues me that the public debate never recognises

that  for  years,  many  other  Australians  have  been  dedicating

their  lives  to  working  with  us.  There  are,  and  there  have

always  been,  many  life  partnerships  between  Aboriginal  and

non-Aboriginal  people  based  on  love  and  respect.  These

people  do  not  view  Australia  through  the  prism  of  us  and

them, but we.



Conclusion:



Tonight  we  have  explored  our  shared  history.  We  have

reflected on what quiet leadership entails. We have listened to

the ticking time bomb. Our journey has visited some issues of

Australian identity.



It is incumbent on me to offer some ideas for a way ‘out of the

darkness’.  None  of  them  are  new  ideas,  and  from  my

perspective most of them are obvious.





37



1. The  imperative  of  reconciliation  is  urgent.  It  consists  of

three  handfuls  -  truth,  social  justice,  and  rights.  Each

handful must be equally laden.



2. Recognise that there is no magic bullet that will ‘fix’ the

unacceptable social justice outcomes faced by Aboriginal

people.  Communities  are  diverse.  Plans  devised  by

primarily  non-Aboriginal  people  in  city  towers  far  from

the communities that will have to wear them simply will

not work. Local solutions for local issues.



3. The  demographics  of  Indigenous  Australia  must  be

factored  into  planning  and  delivery  of  services.  A

dramatic  and  sustained  increase  in  funding  is  required.

There  has  to  be  long-term  planning  -  thinking  in

decades.  For  heaven’s  sake,  not  just  endless  pilot

programs,  inflexible  guidelines  and  fitting  in  with

electoral cycles.







38

4. State Territory and local governments -have the capacity

to and should advance regional land-use agreements and

accords.



5. Symbolism is vital. An apology is required. The protocol

of welcome and acknowledgment of country is respectful

and good manners. A new date for Australia Day should

be debated.



6. The  demographics  of  Indigenous  Australia  must  be

factored  into  planning  and  delivery  of  services.  A

dramatic  and  sustained  increase  in  funding  is  required.

There  has  to  be  long-term  planning  -  thinking  in

decades.  For  heaven’s  sake,  not  just  endless  pilot

programs,  inflexible  guidelines  and  fitting  in  with

electoral cycles.



7. Acknowledge  and  actively  support  the  principle  of  self-determination - that is, deal Aboriginal people back into

decision making. The gap left by the abolition of ATSIC

must be filled.







39

8. Political leadership is required.



9. Stop attacking and undermining Aboriginal organization,

back  them  instead  -  these  are  so  often  the  bodies  that

have  the  staff  and  the  ideas  that  can  deal  with  local

problems.



9.  Enormous  focus  on  educational  outcomes  -  particularly

pre-school  education  and  the  middle  years  of  schooling.

Education  is  a  key  to  unlocking  the  cycle  of  poverty.

Aboriginal  Studies  should  be  mandatory  for  teacher

training  and  for  all  students  in  schools.  We  need

programs  that  enhance  pride  and  self-esteem  in

Aboriginal  young  people  -  eg.  teaching  Aboriginal

languages.



10. The private sector must continue to forge partnerships

with  Aboriginal  communities.  Continue  to  train  and

employ  people.   And  continue  to  provide  infrastructure

and  economic  opportunities.  There  is  so  much  to  be

learnt from this growing approach.







40

12. Australia needs a just settlement with its first people.



13.  Constitutional  reform  that  recognises  the  place  of  the

first peoples.



14. For heaven’s sake, stop reinventing the wheel. The way

forward  sits  on  shelves  gathering  dust.  339

recommendations  of  the  Royal  Commission  into

Aboriginal Deaths in Custody; the Bringing Them Home

report;  the  final  report  of  the  Council  for  Aboriginal

Reconciliation;  and  a  myriad  of  others.  Most  of  them

cherry picked or ignored.



This is not a 14-point plan. Heaven forbid!! It is just some of

what people have been saying for a very long time.



Can I conclude by borrowing words once again from our old

friend Homer’s Iliad:



‘And what he greatly thought, he nobly dared.’







41

Words  that  could  have  been  specially  written  for  Vincent

Lingiari’s  epitaph.  But  what  these  words  also  put  in  front  of

us  is  the  great  question  of  what  is  our  own  individual

responsibility and role in nation building.



I was at a forum a couple of years ago and a senior Aboriginal

woman  called  Maureen  Watson  posed  a  powerful  question:

Do  we  want  to  be  honourable  ancestors?  I  want  to  be  an

honourable  ancestor.  It  is  our  collective  responsibility  to  be

honourable ancestors. It is also our individual responsibility to

future  generations  who  will  inherit  the  legacy  we  bequeath

them.   Ultimately, they will judge what sort of ancestors we

have been.



There  is  one  thing  I  am  certain  of,  Vincent  Lingiari  would

say,  “to  those  of  us  who  are  feeling  tired  and  worn  out,  you

cannot give up - and give up we will not.”











