

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW , GOLDEN GROVE HOMESTEAD  COMMUNITY CHILDCARE CENTRE, ADELAIDE

3 OCTOBER 2006

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:   Childcare; Solomon Islands; Kokoda; Tree of Knowledge; Media  ownership laws

BEAZLEY:  Parents are entitled to believe that their children in childcare  are receiving the best quality childcare they possibly can.  Good education  outcomes.  Good physical outcomes for their kids.  This is not a hit and miss  process, this is a process which requires some very systematic thought indeed.   So, as part of our Childcare Policy today, our Childcare Policy, which is an  economic as well as a family policy, getting more participation in the workforce  and ensuring that parents can get access to affordable, good childcare.  Part of  the process is to ensure that accreditation is working well and doing what we  need for our children in our childcare centres.

So, we will have an independent inquiry into the accreditation process to ensure  that the parents’ desires, that their kids in childcare should be getting the best  possible outcomes, are actually being met by what’s going on in childcare.   That’s the first thing.  The second thing is, we will work with the States to avoid  duplication and getting best practice into the accreditation process.  So, it’s not  child minding, but real child care which is going on.  And it’s appropriate for me to  be here in South Australia because Minister Rankine heads up probably the best  performing State Government in the area of childcare in the county.  So, we’re  here to learn as well as to have a few views on that matter.

Finally, we need to make sure the national accreditation benchmark is a real one.   And that our centres have the qualified staff that they need and that they’re  getting the outcomes that they need in terms of the physical and intellectual  development of the kids.  Nothing can be more important than this early learning.   Nothing can be more important than this.  And this policy today, builds on my  Childcare Blueprint, which has within it policies for building childcare centres in  primary schools and allowing businesses a variety of tax deductions to  encourage them to support, with good childcare, their employees.

I know, as a dad, what worries you most when kids go to childcare. The cost  worries you, the convenience worries you and you’ve got to have that dealt with.   But you do ask yourself the question all the time:  Are my kids getting the best  care that they possibly could get?  Are they being developed by the process or  are they just being put off in a corner?  I’ve got to say that parents are entitled to  a positive answer on all of that and that’s what the policy today is about.  I don’t  know if you want to say anything Minister [Rankine]?

JENNIFER RANKINE (SA MINISTER):  I certainly agree with Kim.  What  parents want is the best outcomes for their children.  And what we know is that  that happens when they have access to high quality childcare.  We’re here at  Golden Grove Homestead, a community based childcare centre today.  It’s an  accredited centre here in South Australia and it does provide great benefits for  the children in this area.  The State Government is developing, as you know, 20  children’s centres across South Australia that will be completed over the next  term of our Government and that is exactly what Kim’s talking about.  Integrated  childcare, integrated with our kindergartens and our primary schools, so there’s  that seamless transition for our children to provide them with the best outcomes.   And it is an economic issue as well as a social and educational issue for our  children.  It’s an economic issue because if we don’t have our children  developing to their best potential, we are losing the workforce of the future.

BEAZLEY:  Terrific, thanks very much for that. As I said in the outset,  there are many things that are now in our Childcare Policy which are pioneered  here in South Australia, like that proposition that we put forward across the  country for the provision of childcare centres. (Children running out to play)  Free  at last!  Our policy in putting childcare centres near primary schools, produce a  cacophony behind you just like that, but also produce very outcomes for families.   Fire away.

JOURNALIST: There are calls for the Solomon Islands Attorney-General to  be brought back to face child-sex abuse charges.  Also, with the Kokoda Trail,  are we brawling too much with our Pacific neighbours do you think?

BEAZLEY:  Just on the question of the fate of Mr Moti, the Attorney-General of the Solomon Islands, who I understand is seeking diplomatic refuge in  the Solomon Islands High Commission in Port Morseby, we would support the  Government taking reasonable measures to bring Mr Moti back for justice here.   They’ve got that thing though diplomatically with our Pacific Island friends.  The  Pacific Island is our front door. We have to keep responsible for affairs in this  region.

There’s no exit strategy from the Pacific Islands.  We basically have to ensure  that our diplomacy achieves objectives which are good for the people of the area,  as well as being good in the Australian national interest.



On the issue of Kokoda, it is important, in a sensible and diplomatic way, the  Government does not make a botch of Kokoda like it made of Gallipoli.  And that  sacred way is preserved for memorial for successive generations.

JOURNALIST: Does Australia risk being perceived as overbearing with its  neighbours in this process, in its insistence on Moti being delivered to Australian  authorities?

BEAZLEY:  Always got to be careful about appearing overbearing, but  it’s always important that you do the right thing.  It wouldn’t matter if Mr Moti was  here or in the Bahamas, the obligation on the Australian Government would be to

do their best, if there’s a justice issue outstanding, to ensure that he comes back  to face those issues.

JOURNALIST: Fundamentally, you support the Federal Government’s  approach?

BEAZLEY:  I support them working with the Solomon Islands and  Papuan New Guinean governments to secure extradition here, yes.

JOURNALIST: I’m told the Tree of Knowledge, the birthplace of the Labor  Party has died, is that a bad omen leading up to the election?

BEAZLEY:  The tree is dead but the values live on.  And the values are  never more important than they are now.  You know you think that the men that  stood under that Tree of Knowledge basically were fighting for a fair day’s work  for a fair day’s pay.  A basic Aussie value, now under challenge. So the Tree of  Knowledge is dead but the values and the struggle lives on.   Just a relevant  today as it was for the shearers who met under it.

JOURNALIST: Apparently the Papuan Leader is reported to be warning that  another exodus, apparently is the word, of asylum seekers might be approaching  Australia.  If that’s the case does that mean that the rethink of Australia’s asylum  laws was warranted after all?

BEAZLEY:  We’ve got to get our policies and our focus right.  You know,  we’ve been bogged down in Iraq and the focus of our attention has been on Iraq  which is a very bad policy mistake.  What this report shows is that we have got to  re-orient our strategies and our policies to refocus on the South-East Asian and  South Pacific area.  We need a Coastguard, we need a process which ensures  that nobody makes unexpected landings on the Australian coastline.  And they  can be effectively dealt with by what are very powerful and tough laws now.  But  laws designed in the Australian interest, no one else’s.

JOURNALIST: So should they arrive we have the legislation, the legislation  that’s there is appropriate?



BEAZLEY:  If we had a Coastguard to intercept them and to ensure that  they made landfall in the right locations, you would have not have a problem.

JOURNALIST: One other question for Canberra, Leader.  Senator Coonan  appears to be softening her approach to media ownership laws in order to court  the support of the Nationals who are concerned about the local content.  Is that a

sensible measure if she wants to make the changes?

BEAZLEY:  If there’s another National back-flip on this, the last person in  National Party headquarters in Roma, Barcaldine, wherever, just better turn out  the lights as they all walk home with their tails between their legs.  Not another  National Party back-flip, not on this one. They back-flipped on Telstra - they’ve  back-flipped on just about everything.  To back-flip on media ownership laws to  allow monopolies in their various regional areas would just be atrocious.  So,

there’s one thing they can do usefully in these laws - join the Labor Party in  voting them down.

Just one thing, if I can recommend to you: Kevin Rudd has written a very good  article in The Monthly, on Christian values and Labor Party politics.  It’s a very  erudite article and I would recommend strongly that you get out there and read it.   It makes me proud as a politician that somebody writes that well.





ends





