

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON KIM C BEAZLEY MP

TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP, COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY  OFFICES, BRISBANE, 11 APRIL 2006

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:   Cole Royal Commission; Visit to Innisfail; Chris Ellison; Polls

BEAZLEY:  Everyone in Australia is easier to sack except John  Howard’s Ministers.  We, all of us, we Australians, we can now be sacked  unfairly but you can’t even fairly sack John Howard’s Ministers for their bungling  incompetence and the danger that that level of incompetence represents to  national security when it’s exhibited in a portfolio like Foreign Affairs and Trade.

John Howard and his Ministers want to convince all of us that the Foreign Affairs  and Trade Department and therefore the Ministers, were merely part of a postal  system, a post-box if you like, for the passage of contracts associated with wheat  exports to Iraq under the Wheat for Weapons deals, and that they posted those  documents across to the United Nations who then exercised responsibility.

Last night we saw a customs official say that the buck stops here with John  Howard and his Ministers.  We saw a British Customs officer working for the UN,  say the buck stops with John Howard and his Ministers.  And she could not  believe that they were not accepting responsibility.  And well she might have that  view.  The proof that Foreign Affairs was not just a postal service is entailed in  documents like this one here.  What this is a document permitting the export of  wheat to Iraq under the Oil-for-Food deal, signed by a delegate of the Minister -  signed by an officer of the department.  And included in that document is the  statement that the contract may go ahead because it complies with UN rules in  relation to the sanctions that were on Iraq.

That document is signed by a Foreign Affairs official, effectively the delegate of  the Minister.  That is not the signature of somebody with the status of a postman.   That is the signature of somebody with approval authority.  The simple fact of the  matter is this:  We do know that the bribes, the dollars stopped with Saddam  Hussein.  But the buck stopped with the Australian Ministers.  And those  Ministers now seek to evade their responsibility.  They cannot do it.

Everybody in Australia is easier now to sack courtesy of John Howard’s laws.   The only people you can’t sack are John Howard’s Ministers.  This is so typical of

the Howard Government.  One rule for them, privileges for them, and another  rule for all Australians.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the amnesiac defence that Mr Vaile adopted  yesterday will wash with the public?

BEAZLEY:  All Australians understood what was going on there.  This  was a bloke evading his responsibilities.  This was a bloke concealing his  knowledge.  He may have sat there like a rabbit caught in the spotlight but the  reality is this is the bloke with whom the buck stops.  And if he was too dumb to  be able to exercise his authority properly or if he was throwing a smoke-screen  over the real state of his knowledge before the Royal Commission, it doesn’t  matter, either way, that bloke should go.  He’s responsible.

JOURNALIST: I understand you’re going to Innisfail tomorrow, what’s  happening up there?

BEAZLEY:  Yes I am.  I’ve been to Innisfail before in the immediate  aftermath of the Cyclone and I’ve decided that the thing that all of us need to do,  those of us who have got some influence and capacity in politics, is we need to  go and look at the situation pretty regularly.  Because I don’t think that this is  going to be a set of circumstances and this is in no way a criticism, a set of  circumstances that’s is not going to be resolved any time soon.  So, I need to  keep my information base fresh on what’s actually happening on the ground  there and what help they need.

JOURNALIST: Do you have any concerns about the operation Mr Beazley?

BEAZLEY:  No I don’t - I don’t have concerns about the operation.  Peter  Beattie put a very good man in to head it up.  But because we don’t have  concerns and operation doesn’t mean that there aren’t problems there and that  means that I, as a political figure in this country, need to keep an understanding  of that.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of reports that tradesmen up there are  charging three times the going rate, $150.00 - $200.00 an hour?

BEAZLEY:  Well I guess I’ll find out more about that tomorrow and I’ll  find out how much of a problem it is.  This is the difficulty you’ve basically got.   You’ve got a problem of effectively reconstructing a whole town or a set of towns  and you’ve got the workforce up there used to building the odd building in Cairns.   I mean, that’s it, the tradesmen are all here in Brisbane or further south.  And to  get tradesmen up there for a lengthy period of time is going to be a very difficult  to do indeed and that’s certainly one of the issues I want to talk through with  General Cosgrove.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it’s price gouging?

BEAZLEY:  I would not want to label it that yet until I’ve had the  opportunity to hear firsthand what it is that people are doing.  You know I do  know something from my experience in Western Australia with the labour market  that we’ve got there and the collapse of skills in our community now right around  the country.  You know that in the traditional trades areas under Howard, over  the last ten years, the training of people basically collapsed so, it’s a very much a  sellers market when it comes to using labour skills.  If you’re an electrician in the  north of Western Australia now you’d get $200,000.00 a year.  That’s the same,  I’d imagine, similar things are applying there but I’d need to get that firsthand.

JOURNALIST:  (inaudible)

BEAZLEY:   What Minister Ellison says ought to happen to people who  are applicants for asylum status, is against the law. We have got another  incompetent Howard Minister on our hands here. What he is suggesting about

clearing applicants with the country of origin, in this case Indonesia, is actually  against international law. You cannot operate that way. Now we’ve got tough  laws in this country, and so we should, in relation to asylum seekers here. They  are tough laws, but they are also laws that have to be properly enforced and  what is being suggested by Minister Ellison is not a proper enforcement of these  laws.

JOURNALIST: On Newspoll today with your personal approval rating  slipping, can you afford another one of those.

BEAZLEY:   I tell you what I took out of Newspoll today and I don’t need  a poll to tell me this - the Australian people understand that what John Howard’s  industrial relations laws are going to do is bad for the economy, bad for  themselves, bad for their families. Now I don’t a poll to tell me that but that’s what

this poll says today, and it’s the reason I intend to rip those industrial relations  laws up.







Ends



