John Howard and the ‘strong leader’ thesis.  John Howard’s Decade Conference  National Museum of Australia, 3-4 March 2006

James Walter, Monash University



Abstract  John Howard has been an unusually dominant leader, and  much has been said about the political skill that ha s  enabled him to achieve this status. This paper starts by reviewing current commentary on Howard’s dominance  of his government and of the FPLP. It notes that the t rend to executive dominance (and to leadership centrali ty  within that trend) and the apparent collapse of eff ective opposition is not unique to Australia: how muc h of  Howard’s pre-eminence can be attributed to institutio nal and contextual change and how much to his person al  achievement (and have observers sufficiently noted the d istinctions)? The patterns revealed by this exploration   are then considered against the analytical templates emerging from the literature on those who ‘steer by powe r  chances’, and particularly the essays of the Australia n theorist, the late Graham Little, on ‘strong leaders.’ If, as  this analysis suggests, Howard does fit the ‘strong leader’  typology, what can be said about the tension betwe en  such leadership (with its tendency to concentrate power ) and democratic practice (with its checks and balance s  designed to prevent just such a concentration)? Does H oward’s record give us an incentive to initiate the  renovation of institutions that will serve as a hedge a gainst leadership dominance?



As the tenth anniversary of John Howard’s prime ministership was celebrated, commentators  uniformly remarked upon his authority as leader: ‘h e is seen by most Australians’, ran one  typical summary, ‘as providing strong leadership in  uncertain times…’ 1 Every poll attests to  the accuracy of this perception. Here, I want to el aborate upon what that strength has meant in  terms of Australian governance, to analyse Howard’s characteristics against a model of strong  leadership that long preceded Howard, to canvass th e place of strong leaders in liberal  democracies, and to suggest some of the benefits an d costs of Howard’s practice.

Howard’s authority  Howard has dominated his party and his era because he has been a creative and aggressive  proponent of a distinctive world-view. Judith Brett  has shown how Howard, scorning the  intelligentsia, determinedly committed to plain spe aking, has fashioned an enormously  powerful message that professes to speak for the ‘o rdinary battler’, and to advance the  interests of ‘the mainstream’ and a common heritage  against vested interests (‘elites’),  internal division, international challenge and fore ign hostility (Brett 2003). How did he do it?  He recognised four things. First, that Labor had ab andoned popular nationalism in its pursuit  of economic reform, and its insistence on what ‘we’  must do to prosper in a global market. In  response, Howard skilfully took over the Australian  Legend, once the preserve of radicals and  the ALP, insisting that there was an ‘essential’ Au stralian heritage to be defended, and turned  its values—the fair go, mateship—into a story of co nservative individualism. Second, he  articulated what a disconsolate electorate was feel ing: that Labor’s reform was top down, a  series of injunctions voiced by the knowledge elite  with which the rest of us were to comply.  Instead Howard turned the reform message from a mantra about the imperatives of the market  into a story about how careful change would deliver  more jobs and more choice. And he  demonised the unrepresentative elites said to have captured the Labor party—he would  govern ‘for all of us’. This was at once a message of unity (he spoke for ‘the mainstream’)  and a way of marginalising opponents. Third, sensin g that the climate of uncertainty  engendered by change had generated disabling anxieties, he realised that if targeted and  organised, these emotions could be mobilised to adv antage. The naming of specific ‘elites’ as  the enemy of ‘mainstream’ aspirations (and the rhet orical association of those elites with  everything Howard sought to overcome) gave anxiety a target and political action an

2

objective—the restitution of conditions in which we  could be ‘comfortable and relaxed’.  Fourth, the sheer aggression with which Paul Keatin g had sought to box in the coalition  parties by defining issues (Asian engagement, recon ciliation, the republic) in ways they could

not accommodate could be turned against Labor: this  was the prelude to the ruthlessness with  which Howard would later, as Prime Minister, revers e the valencies of political discourse to  disable the ALP (Brett 2005) in, for instance, deba tes on immigration and asylum seekers  (Marr and Wilkinson 2004) and the ‘history wars’ (Macintyre and Clark 2003). Brett, no

apologist for the right, argues persuasively that H oward is the most creative conservative  political leader since Menzies.  Paul Kelly, in his Cunningham lecture (Kelly 2005) and in recent newspaper articles, 2  has provided a cogent overview of how Howard has consolidated power though his prime  ministerial project: using public sentiment as his frame of reference (and justifying prime  ministerial power as serving the public will); embr acing a narrow vision of ministerial  responsibility; running a tight, secretive and coll ective cabinet as an instrument of his  authority, of obedience and unity; imposing more re strictions on the public service and  augmenting political control over policy. None of t hese elements is new. Howard builds upon  trends already evident in the practices of his pred ecessors, but has carried them to a new level.  (His cabinet, for instance, is said to be the most unified since Menzies’: it has certainly been  that whose processes have been the most difficult t o penetrate). But the introduction of one  new dimension—the prime minister as national security chief—has significantly enhanced his  authority: ‘In the hands of an astute leader such a s Howard it represents a fusion of greater  political authority and electoral popularity’ (Kell y 2005: 16).   Alongside his clever utilisation of the levers of governance, Howard has profited from  a period of unparalled economic growth, and the rel ated perception that he is the leader who  has ‘“brought home the bacon”—a glowing 83 per cent of voters who rated the economy as  the main issue believe he has managed the economy well or quite well.’ 3 It is widely argued  that economic management is the key reason why ‘Australians have re-elected the Howard  Government three times to give it 10 years in offic e.’ 4    Both of these elements—the perception that the eco nomic growth indicates that  government is in ‘safe hands’, and the shift toward s prime ministerial dominance—should be  seen in a broader perspective. In relation to the f irst,

These have been boom years for the world economy, the best decade for global  growth since the 1970s. Among the 28 other advanced economies, as the International  Monetary Fund defines them, eight have grown evem faster than Australia since 1995,  in terms of output per head, and all but five have been close behind. 5  As for the second, across many democratic polities it has been observed that, in government,  the complexity of modern decision-making has shifted the emphasis towards charisma,  authority and decision and away from collegial cons ensus (McAllister 2004). The prime  minister has thus become far more than the ‘first a mong equals’. Party structures have  declined as a repository of influence, and hence th e prime minister’s power over political  careers (and hence as the driver of party disciplin e and object of loyalty) has been much  enhanced. The prime minister has become ‘central in how responsible government operates;  he or she may choose to include or exclude particul ar actions under the doctrine, thereby  determining [a] minister’s fate … [T]he prime minis ter, rather than the parliament …  determines how the doctrine is implemented’ (McAllister, 2004: 5). Arguably, globalisation  plays a part: ‘parliamentary systems are becoming more presidential in character, style and  operation, as the environments in which they operat e become more uniform’ (McAllister,  2004: 8; and see Marsh, 2003). The trends all point  towards a centralization of power in the  prime minister, ‘but the change is gradual and in s ome cases outweighed by the personalities  involved … In short, the personality of the leader is greater than the strength of the trend’

3

(McAllister, 2004: 26). The personality of Howard, then, is a determinant in the success of his  prime ministerial project.

The strong leader as a personality type.  Some political scientists have long sought to relat e particular characteristics to the success or  failure of leaders. An influential early exponent o f the psychological analysis of leadership  was Harold Lasswell, initially at the University of  Chicago. He was interested in why some  people seem motivated to seek power, and proposed that the core of the political personality  was a tendency to use power to overcome actual or t hreatened loss of values (including self-esteem) (Lasswell 1948). Lasswell’s successors went into more detail, proposing that  particular constellations of power-related traits w ere characteristic of different leader types  (Stogdill 1974), and elaborating on the motives dri ving an investment in power (Winter  1973).

Following in this tradition, an Australian politica l scientist, Graham Little (1985), has  illuminated mainstream politics with a sophisticate d model of what he called ‘political  ensembles’ linked to ‘political climates’ that favo ur the success of one type of political  ensemble rather than another. Little’s typology of ‘political ensembles’ crystallised around  ‘strong’, ‘group’ or ‘inspiring’ leaders. These las t two categories are not germane to our  concerns here: Howard is universally seen as a stro ng leader. Little offers us a way to  understand both leadership proclivities, and their appeal. According to Little’s theory, each  leader, and each ensemble, has a characteristic way  of addressing relations between ‘self’ and  ‘others’—indeed, ensembles are formed because they share a common assumption about how  to address this relationship, and recognise a leade r who expresses their common project.  ‘Strong’ leaders see self-other relations as compet itive, and favour structure and firm  direction as a way of managing this dilemma. Insist ent on defending structures and  institutions, they are nonetheless given to treatin g differences as an occasion for confrontation  and assertion rather than negotiation. They attract  followers by sweeping aside uncertainties  in identifying threats, and promising to fight the necessary battles on their behalf. In a world  of conflicting ends, such decision clarifies and mo bilises.

Little’s contribution was to remind us that leaders hip success depends on a resonance  with followers’ needs, and to focus our attention o n the way shared world-views (in the case  of the strong leader, the world as competitive, nee ding structure and direction) are at the heart  of what makes a group coherent. Further, political climates will tend to favour particular  leaders (and the dominance of particular ensembles)  at particular times—for instance, in hard  times, times of challenge, where aggression seems a n appropriate measure, ‘strong’ directive  leaders may be favoured (Thatcher was one of Little ’s models); where the mood is more  expansive, the temper up-beat, an ‘inspiring leader ’ may gain the lead (Whitlam at the end of  the post-war boom). How well does Little’s argument illuminate Howard’s success?

Howard—who came to power arguing that he would create the conditions where people  could feel ‘comfortable and relaxed’—was a fighter from the first: driving liberal ‘wets’ from  his party (and expunging its Deakinite social-liber al heritage); overthrowing the top echelons of  the public service; turning the debate about nation al identity into the notoriously combative  ‘history wars’; sweeping Labor appointees on public  authorities aside; questioning the motives  of leaders of the ‘Aboriginal industry’; insisting on the unity of the common culture against  multicultural incursions; and taking the battle to those ‘elites’ who, he said, stood in the way of  social progress. Howard has a consistent vision, a fantasy of battle that underscores his self-belief: he self-identifies as a Churchillian warrio r: ‘I am the bloke who ultimately wins the  battle, and in political terms that is Churchill’.

He was the natural leader, then, to prosper from th e ‘securitisation’ agenda provoked,  first, as illegal immigration was construed as an a ttack on national sovereignty (Marr and

4

Wilkinson 2004), then immensely amplified by the September 11 attacks (Howard was in  Washington at the time), the ‘war on terror’ and th e Iraq invasion (Garran 2004). He was, in  effect, a crisis leader who began to identify threa ts, articulate the need to fight, institute  divisions between ‘them’ and ‘us’ and rally ‘the tr oops’ well before international events  accentuated the negatives. When they did, as Mark McKenna argues, his natural propensities  could be fused with the need for combat leadership,  and Howard emerged as the ‘wartime’  leader that had, as McKenna shows, long been his fa ntasy ideal (McKenna 2003).

In his conduct of politics, Howard has been various ly described as ‘dogged and  determined’; as a ‘canny, controlling prime ministe r’; as having become so dominant in his  party ‘he can hang on as long as he wants’, ‘he own s the party’. Guy Rundle’s description of  him as a ruthless, pragmatic opportunist, prepared to do whatever it takes, is an element that  must be acknowledged (Rundle 2001). But the compulsion to seek battles, to steer not just by  power chances but also by crises, is not pragmatic and more than simply tactical.

We know this sort of leader: hard working, driven, controlling and moralistic. Little’s  essays on the ‘strong leader’ (Little 1985; Little 1988) have shown the underlying  psychological constellation and how it fuses with p olitical style. These are the compulsives,  given to work and worry, seeing the world as threat ening and order as only to be maintained by  strength, inclined to dominate through moralistic r hetoric, externalising anger and hostility onto  selected enemies, refusing compromise or surrender as an admission of weakness, insisting on  realism and decisive action. Preoccupied with adver sary politics and warring tribes, the strong  leader’s message is yet one of unity in the face of  those who would divide us. Such a leader  transforms policy problems ‘from a matter of calcul ation of results to a matter of emotional  loyalty to ideals… [His] view of reality must be ac cepted else the cause fall apart’ (Barber  1972 6). And Little adds, ‘A good deal of moralizing is u sed against the foot-soldier who dares  to put initiative against sheer obedience; initiati ve is for higher ranks, like big crimes’. Little,  writing long before Howard’s ascension, captures th e essence of his style. Further, as was  remarked earlier, observers of the institutional tr end towards enhanced prime ministerial power,  argue that it can be ameliorated or augmented by a leader’s personality (McAllister 2004).  Howard, the ‘bloke who wins the battle’, has signif icantly expanded prime ministerial power  (Kelly 2005). And the ‘securitisation’ of politics attendant on border protection, the Iraq  invasion and the ‘war on terror’ has been an additi onal accelerant—at the time of writing, as his  ascendancy was being celebrated, few could see anybody who could now challenge his control.

Strong leaders and liberal democracy.  There is ambivalence about leadership within libera l-democratic politics. This is because the  concept of leadership can operate in considerable t ension with both the liberal and the  democratic strands that contribute to liberal democ racy. A liberal perspective values the rights  and freedoms of individuals, while a democratic per spective values collective decision-making processes such as majority rule. Strong lead ership does not seem to be a strong theme  in either perspective.

Leadership involves risks, not only for the incumbe nt (think of election aftermaths and  the obloquy usually visited on the losing leader), but also for followers (power can be  misused, derailing the group’s intentions; power mi ght even be turned against us). The  quandary can be expressed this way: we need leaders, since without their drive and ambition,  nothing might be done and society would atrophy; yet, though there have been wise leaders, a  proportion of the people who aspire to leadership m ight be driven less by the social good than  by the desire for power and deference (see Lasswell  1948); how then can we ensure the  benefits of leadership, and—as demanded by liberal- democratic principles—defend against  the misuse of power?

5

In effect, liberal-democratic systems mainly addres s the issue of leadership by trying  to constrain it. They impose checks and balances (r ecognition of rights, separation of powers,  political pluralism, constitutionally defined limit s on government) that, at least in the area of  state power, are intended to constrain collusive gr oups and overweening individuals. Quite  apart from well-understood formal institutions (the  checks ands balances above), there is a  range of conventions underlying political practice that might be deemed to contribute to the  same end. The need to win power through parties—entailing the acknowledgment of  collective beliefs and negotiation—is part of this.  In Westminster systems, the reliance on  collective (cabinet) authority rather than prime mi nisterial power; the distinction between  partisan objectives and public service advice; the system of accountability, vested in  ministerial responsibility, all contribute to the s ame end. A polity that does not embody such  constraints is liable to be one in which leadership  excess can flourish (see Glad 2002). Neither  Australia nor other Westminster polities have yet r eached this pass. It might be argued,  however that changes in party politics, prime minis terial dominance, and public service  neutrality signify not only the transition in gover nance that Kelly (2005) describes, but also an  erosion of the limitations on leadership caprice. I s it the case that in accelerating the trend  towards executive power, the strong leader can erod e democratic practice?

Howard’s strength: what are the costs?  Howard’s strength and persistence have had a profou nd effect on changes in Australia over  the past decade. He has had a sense of purpose, a p hilosophical framework and a commitment  to change that has driven the country towards prosp erity, and an individualist view of  achievement that has undercut class divisions. He h as used his hold on executive power to  reinforce his party at a time when parties generall y have lost traction, and redefined liberalism  in the process. He has, on occasion, taken tough de cisions even though they were unpopular,  and seems to have garnered respect, even if not aff ection. Many believe that they are better  off now than they were ten years ago, and he has su stained remarkably high approval ratings.  His supporters have much to celebrate, and much has been written about the extent of his  achievements (Cater 2006). It is also the case that  many, ‘think Australia is now a less fair  society, they question the PM’s honesty, and they s ee him as a divisive leader who wrongly  took Australia into war in Iraq.’ 7 Indeed, according to Hugh MacKay, Howard has made  people relaxed and comfortable

… by the process of them becoming disenchanted and disengaged from politics.  People are no longer engaged in the big issues. It’ s really a case of leave it to him,  leave it to the Government … They’ve become literally and metaphorically backyard  obsessed … We’ve become a more fearful society—because it’s a more fearful world  … By explicit and implicit messages, he’s allowed u s to become a less compassionate  and more prejudiced society. 8  But it is, of course, characteristic of a strong le ader both to name fears (which he will combat)  and to encourage followers to ‘leave it to him’. Le aving it to the leader, however, is precisely  what democratic institutions were intended to avoid .   In fact, despite his electoral majorities and the measures of prime ministerial approval  there are also significant indications of entrenche d public disquiet. By the late 1990s, 74% of

survey respondents had little confidence in federal  government; 84% distrusted both major  parties; and there had been a 30% drop in confidenc e in government over the preceding 13  years (Papadakis 1999; Marsh & Yencken 2004: 28-30). A survey of ‘middle Australia’  (Pusey 2003) showed that there is more consistent s upport for old economic institutions than

for the new market based and deregulated institutio nal arrangements advocated by political  elites; and that, overall, reformers have not won c onsensus for ‘the new consensus’. Peter  Saunders has summarised an extensive survey of social attitudes by remarking on, ‘ a sense of

6

alienation and powerlessness in which a gulf has op ened up between the values and priorities  of ordinary Australians and those in positions of p olitical power and influence’ (Saunders  2002: 264). Arguably, those transitions in parliame nt, parties, the public policy process and  the role of the prime minister that Howard has ampl ified are at the heart of this disquiet.   In relation to parliament, Howard has ingeniously used his majority, secretive cabinet  processes, and an interpretation of ministerial res ponsibility that shifts the onus for mistakes  from the executive to the public service, to impede  transparency and evade accountability.  Even when—during his first three terms—opposition majorities in the Senate could embarrass  the Government, and force disclosure, information w as withheld as much as possible and  ministerial and backbench discipline was remarkable. Once majorities were gained in both  Houses, the capacity of Senate committees to ensure  some level of scrutiny was intentionally  diminished, and only pressure from his own backbench ensured concessions on some matters  of public sensitivity.   The dominant parties are now capital intensive, pr ofessional, centralised and  dependent on the projection of leader effectiveness . Party branches, conferences, policy  committees and the like have been supplanted, and t he capacity for ordinary members to feel  they can be heard has withered away. The networks of advice and support, capital generation  and communication centre on the leader rather than the party at large. Party transitions have  been complemented by changes in the role of the pri me minister. Ian McAllister, reviewing  the state of play, remarks ‘that prime ministers an d opposition leaders have replaced many of  the roles historically played by political parties in ensuring the efficient operation of the  parliamentary system’ (McAllister, 2004: 2). Weaker voter attachments enhance the role of  the leader. With partisan de-alignment, party leade rs ‘stand in’ for parties in representing  issues, integrating interests and mobilizing opinio n. As parties of mass organization with local  branches have declined, voter attention has shifted  from the local to the national stage, with  parties shifting their emphasis from local to natio nal leaders in parallel. There is less focus on  policy, and more on the personality of the leader. Leadership effects on voting outcomes are  now widely recognized. All of this gives the leader  a licence and impact unmatched in former  party structures.   Turning to the public service, there has always be en argument over the supposed  separation of politics from administration and the capacity for ‘frank and fearless’ advice from  a reasonably impartial public service within Westmi nster democracies. In Australia, a  reasonable case can be made that the federal bureau cracy complemented the parties in a post-war policy project that responded to what the elect orate demanded: relatively equal life chances  (Brown, 1995; Encel, 1970, Walter 1999). Ministers were told not only what they wanted to  know but also what they needed to know. There is li ttle doubt that the public service within  Westminster polities has become more compliant of late, and in the Australian case, more  politicised.

Reforms to the Australian public service, intended to make its leadership more  responsive to the government of the day, began unde r Labor governments in the 1970s and  1980s. Whitlam (ALP, 1972-1975) introduced expanded ministerial staff (Walter, 1986). Under  Hawke (ALP, 1983-1991), a key measure was the shift of career public servants at the top  levels to contract appointments (Keating, 2003a). H oward, since 1996, has simply continued  where Labor governments began. But that departmental secretaries now serve at their minister’s  pleasure was signalled by the sacking of a number i mmediately upon Howard’s assumption of  office, and a later controversial dismissal of (and  unsuccessful legal appeal by) a well-regarded  career officer who was effective, but not to his mi nister’s liking. The perception that public-spirited career civil servants have been replaced b y political appointees is inevitable. When  very senior public servants (Beale 2004; Podger 200 5) and the authors of public sector reform  themselves begin to express concerns, as does a for mer secretary of PM & C and advocate of

7

reform, Michael Keating (2003b: 94), it is time to wonder whether ‘responsiveness’ has  mutated into the sort of ‘politicisation’ that impe des both the transmission of unwelcome advice  and the ability of public servants to ensure due pr ocess—and the integrity of the system.  The picture is further clouded by the increasing au gmentation of partisan ministerial  staff. Originally introduced to maximise sources of  advice, to provide alternative options and  critical dissent rather than to impose concurrence- seeking behaviour (see Walter 1986),  ministerial staff have come to have the opposite ef fect (see Keating 2003b; Weller 2002).  Their ability to intervene in departmental processe s; to mediate between the political and  administrative domains; to drive, sieve and skew ad vice; to insist upon what the minister  wants as opposed to the public interest or the inte grity of government has amplified concern  about public sector reform. It has provoked not onl y extensive review of ministerial staff

(Holland 2002) and calls for accountability measure s (Holland 2002; Keating 2003b; Weller  2002; Tiernan & Weller 2003), but also a reconsider ation of and demand for greater security  of tenure and strengthening of the independence of departmental secretaries to act as a  counterweight (Keating 2003b). The Howard government has not heeded these calls.   What have been the effects on leadership behaviour ? One indicator, in relation to the

Howard Liberal-National Party (L-NP) government, is the prevalence of commentary on the  fraught issue of truth in government. Most such com mentary is provoked by incidents that call  to mind the way Howard and his ministers handled the so-called ‘children overboard’ affair  (2001), the use of intelligence in the presentation  of the case for war in Iraq (2002/3), instances  of adverse and peremptory confrontation of dissenti ng public servants (for instance, the  pressure for Federal Police Commissioner, Mick Keelty, to rectify his comments on terrorism  in 2003; the attack on the credibility of former pu blic servant, Mike Scrafton, in 2004) and  denial of timely knowledge about the abuse of Iraqi  detainees (2004), or about the activities of  the Australian Wheat Board in its dealing with Iraq  (2006). Some of these issues have been  analysed in detail—see for instance Patrick Weller’ s book on the children overboard affair  (Weller 2002), or the Parliamentary Joint Committee report (2004) and the Flood report (2004)  on intelligence in relation to the case for war in Iraq. In most cases only disclosures by the press

and in senate committees brought the truth to light : doyenne of the Canberra Press gallery,  Michelle Grattan remarked, ‘If it had been left to the PM, we’d never have found out’.   All these cases raise the issues of information, co mmunication and truth and of the  proper role of the executive. Even if one accepts t hat the government wholeheartedly believed  in what it was doing, it is clear in such instances  that it was economical in what it would  divulge, chose evidence that suited a preordained p urpose rather than heeding more cautious  advice, used ministerial staff to filter informatio n and to police the party line, refused to hear  evidence that would contradict its stance (thus bei ng able to claim it ‘didn’t know’ when  evidence ran against it—the tactic of ‘plausible de niability’) and expected concurrence from  its public servants rather than frank and fearless advice. This is not a scenario of evidence  based decision-making, contestability and adjudicat ion between alternative options, but of  funnelling everything in terms of what a leader is seen to want, and manipulation of  information to forestall debate, predicated on the conviction that we should leave it to the  leader.

Conclusions  Arguably there has been a confluence of challenging  times, emerging institutional tendencies  and personal preferences that has fostered Howard’s  particular style of strong leadership. The  underlying proposition is that as institutions beco me less effective, leaders may tip the balance  within what I earlier called the leadership quandar y, pursuing what they regard as imperative at  the expense of democratic conventions. This may, as  suggested above, foster actions that

8

recklessly engender cynicism (and undermine confidence in democratic institutions); tactics  that create a vacuum where accountability should be ; and practices that deny transparency.  Has this argument been taken to an extreme? On the one hand, pure types will be rare:  a leadership typology is a guide to how certain cha racteristics may play out rather than a rigid  mould, and different ‘strong leaders’ may accentuat e different parts of the syndrome  (Thatcher, emphasising conviction, appeared arrogant; Howard, emphasising the unremitting  effort, ‘all achievement is against the grain’, pro jects ordinariness and humility). On the other  hand, on many issues Howard’s government has been flexible, taken advice, and listened to  opinion, demonstrating responsiveness and reason—a government doing what ‘you’ want.  New issues emerge on which there is no prior positi on: in some instances (such as water  management) a whole of government approach creates opportunities for outside advice and  creative solutions (see, e.g., Kelly 2005: 9-10). B ut there are core ideological issues— privatisation of public assets (especially the sale  of Telstra), family support, user pays  education, welfare reform, deregulation of the labo ur market (and demolition of union  power), commitment to the US alliance (and the ‘war against terrorism’)—where neither  contrary evidence nor adverse public opinion will d issuade Howard. He is prepared to defer,  to await a better climate, but he will never give u p. And it is in these battles that his ways of  drawing interests together and building support are  marked. First, he eschews the ‘tribalism’  of old politics and couches his message so as to be  ‘heard’ by diverse interests: his avowed

aim, to create coalitions across the ‘mainstream’. Economic reform, for instance, appeals to  the self interest of cosmopolitans (with skills, fl exibility, capital to invest), but can be framed  to persuade aspirational voters that opening up of choice will provide pathways out of their  current less advantaged positions. Second, he evide ntly calculates that there are those he can  afford to ‘lose’—church leaders, welfare advocates,  academics, small ‘l’ liberals, indeed  many of those Brett dubbed the ‘moral middle class’  (Brett 2003) that was once the Liberal  Party’s core (see ‘tribalism’ above). Third, these are represented as marginalised ‘progressive  elites’ trying to shore up old approaches that serv ed their purposes, threatening the interests of  ‘all of us’. Here, Howard draws on scapegoat stereo types, affirming the ‘goodness’ of the  mainstream and displacing negative affect onto marg inal ‘others’. So he reaches down to the  ‘battlers’, refocussing their understandable anxiet y about reform as an ‘objective’ fear of  malign minorities, encouraging them to mobilise beh ind a strong leader who will fight these  special interests.

At the emotional level, Howard tells a story of the  sunny uplands where we might be  comfortable and relaxed and our shared values can f lower, but it is underpinned by the  orchestration of fear—fear of those who would block the realisation of our dreams and (from  2001) our security, sovereignty and even survival. 9 The times have suited him—just when his  ‘fight-flight’ outlook was beginning to pall, as op inion polls turned against him in 2001,  international circumstances swung in favour of ‘the  garrison state’ (Lasswell 1935; Lasswell  1941) and Howard was handed a script that coincided precisely with his world view, a world  view now in accord with the political climate he fa ced and attuned to his skills as a conviction  politician:

A conviction politician uses his or her philosophy … to bind the troops together, to  highlight differences with rivals to the point wher e their views are unthinkable … A  Strong Leader’s philosophy must be simple and relia ble … made to strike hard and  stick. The intention is not to contribute to a deba te; the intention is to overcome and  then marginalize contrary views out of existence (L ittle 1988: 42).  Politics, however, should  be about debate—about the vigorous negotiation of different views,  competing interests and alternative options. When t his is denied, we get a fatal narrowing of

all that might contribute to informed opinion and s ensible policy—a public service incapable  of telling the government other than what it wants to hear (Podger 2005); advisory agencies

9

micro-managed and peopled only with the like-minded (as Malcolm Fraser has argued);  media chorusing received opinion (and excluding dis senting voices); cowed researchers  pulling back from what their evidence might suggest  (academics fearful that peer evaluated  research will be excluded by a ‘community’ represen tative or by ministerial whim; public  instrumentalities—such as the CSIRO—expected to tailor findings, e.g. on climate change, to  policy preferences); and all reinforcing what the s trong leader already knows and curtailing  the generation of new ideas.

It is this, we can speculate, that may finally unde rmine the strong leader: he comes to  power with a set of convictions about what should b e done already in place; he fights  unremittingly to see his agenda realised, as Howard  has done with extraordinarily skill over  ten years; but he remains focused on the past (from  which his ideas derive) and the present he  seeks to control,  10  ending in ‘a crisis of ideas’ (Kelly 2005: 10). Th e ideas of opponents have  been marginalised or rendered unthinkable; but his own resources are, finally, exhausted. Can  Howard’s continuing energy and engagement surmount this predicament?

1  Karen Kissane, ‘A Lasting Impression’, Age, February 20, 2005  2  Paul Kelly, ‘The Sweetest Anniversary’, Australian, February 25-26, 2006.  3

Kissane, op. cit .  4  Tim Colebatch, ‘The money man’, Age, February 22, 2006.  5

Colebatch, op. cit.   6  Barber was commenting on his designation of ‘active- negative leaders’, a type addressing the same  constellation of traits as Little’s ‘strong leader’.   7

Kissane, op. cit.  8  Quoted in Michelle Grattan, ‘Howard’s way: more wealth and confidence but less tolerance’, Age , February 21,  2006.  9

See this exemplified in ‘Transcript of the Prime Min ister, The Hon John Howard MP, Address to the National  Press Club, Great Hall, Parliament House, Canberra, 7 October, 2004’, at http://www.pm.gov.au , accessed  October 9, 2004.  10

See, especially, Judith Brett, ‘Howard: man of this  moment’, Age, February 22, 2006.

References

Barber, J.D. 1972, The presidential character: Predicting performance in the Whitehouse ,  Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.   Beale, R. 2004, retirement speech, February 2004, c ited in Kelly (2005): 11.  Brett ,J. 2005 Relaxed and comfortable with the Liberal Party, Quarterly Essay No. 19, Black

Inc., Melbourne.  Brett, J. 2003 Australian Liberals and the Moral Middle Class, Cambridge University Press,  Melbourne,   Brown, N. 1995, Governing Prosperity, Cambridge University Press, Melbourne.  Cater, N. ed. 2006, The Howard Factor, Melbourne University Publishing, Melbourne.  Encel, S. 1970, Equality and Authority, Cheshire, Melbourne.  Flood, P. 2004, Report of the Inquiry into Australian Intelligence Agencies , Australian

Government, Canberra.  Garran, R. 2004, True Believer: John Howard, George Bush & the Ameri can alliance , Allen  & Unwin, Sydney.  Glad, B. 2002, ‘Why Tyrants Go Too Far: Malignant Narcissism and Absolute Power’,

Political Psychology, vol. 23, no. 1, pp.1-20.  Holland, I. 2002, Accountability of Ministerial Staff? Research Paper No. 19 2001-2,  Parliament of Australia, Department of the Parliame ntary Library, Canberra, 18 June.  Keating, M. 2003a, ‘The public service and the management of the public sector’, in The

Hawke Government: A Critical Retrospective , eds S. Ryan and T. Bramston, Pluto  Press, North Melbourne, pp. 367-380.

10



Keating, M. 2003b, ‘In the Wake of “A Certain Maritime Incident”: Ministerial Advisers,  Department and Accountability’, Australian Journal of Public Administration, 62(3):  92-97.  Kelly, P. 2005 Rethinking Australian Governance—The Howard Legacy,  Occasional Paper 4,

Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia, Canber ra.  Lasswell, H. 1935, World Politics and Personal Insecurity, Free Press, New York.   Lasswell, H. 1941, ‘The garrison state’, American Journal of Sociology, 46:  455-68.  Lasswell, H.D. 1948 (1976), Power and Personality, Greenwood Press, Westport, Conn.  Little, G. 1985, Political Ensembles: A psychosocial approach to pol itics and leadership,

Oxford University Press, Melbourne.  Little, G. 1988, Strong Leadership: Thatcher, Reagan and an Eminent Person, Oxford  University Press, Melbourne.  Macintyre, S. and A. Clark 2003, The History Wars , Melbourne University Press, Melbourne.  Marr, D and M. Wilkinson 2004, Dark Victory, Allen & Unwin, Sydney.  Marsh I. and Yencken, D. 2004, Into the Future: The Neglect of the Long Term in Au stralian

Politics, Australian Collaboration/Black Inc., Melbourne.  Marsh, I. 2003, ‘Consensus in Australian Politics’,  in Australia's Choices: Options for a Fair  and Prosperous Society, ed. I Marsh, UNSW Press, Sydney.  McAllister, I. 2004, ‘Political Leaders in Westmins ter Systems’, in Technical Report

Seminars, Political Science Program, RSSS, ANU at  http://eprints.anu.edu.au/archive/00002580/. Canberra.  McKenna, M. 2003, ‘Howard’s Warriors’, in R.Gaita (ed.), Why the War Was Wrong, Text  Publishing, Melbourne: 167-200.  Papadikis, E. 1999, ‘Constituents of confidence and  mistrust in Australian institutions’,

Australian Journal of Political Science, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 75-94.  Parliamentary Joint Committee on ASIO, ASIS and DSD, 2003, Intelligence on Iraq’s  weapons of mass destruction, Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.  Podger, A. 2005, retirement speech, 30 June 2005, c ited in Kelly (2005): 5-6.  Pusey, M. 2003, The Experience of Middle Australia, Cambridge University Press,

Melbourne.

Rundle, G. 2001 The Opportunist: John Howard and the Triumph of Rea ction , Quarterly  Essay No. 3, Black Inc., Melbourne.  Saunders, P. 2002, The ends and means of welfare: coping with economic  and social change  in Australia , Cambridge University Press, New York.  Stogdill, R. 1974, Handbook of Leadership, Free Press, New York.  Tiernan, A and Weller, P. 2003, ‘Ministerial Staff:  A Need for Accountability’, in  Senate

Finance and Public Administration References Commit tee Inquiry into Members of  Parliament Staff (MOPS), Canberra: 1-11.  Walter, J. 1986, The Ministers’ Minders: personal advisers in nation al government, Oxford  University Press, Melbourne.  Walter, J. 1999, “Bureaucracy and Democracy in the American Century: A.F. Davies on

Administration and the ‘Knowledgeable Society’”, Australian Journal of Public  Administration , 58 (1): 23-32.  Weller, P. 2002, Don’t Tell the Prime Minister, Scribe Publications, Carlton North.  Winter, D.G. 1973, The power motive , Free Press, New York.

