

Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 1

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON ALEXANDER DOWNER, MP





TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:   13 November 2006

TITLE:  Joint Press Conference with Indonesian Foreign Minister Dr Hassan Wirajuda

DR WIRAJUDA:  As you all have witnessed, we just signed here in Lombok the Agreement  on Framework for Security Cooperation between Indonesia and Australia.  This agreement  provides the framework of cooperation and consultation on security issues of concern to  Indonesia and Australia.  This agreement governs the cooperation on security in broader terms  and is not a military pact.  This agreement will provide a legal basis, and umbrella, for  cooperation in the security field.  It governs the areas of the cooperation that we have to cover  so far but also new areas that we have identified.  We strongly believe that the signing of the  security framework agreement will strengthen the bilateral relations between Indonesia and  Australia within the framework of comprehensive partnership.  It was signed by our leaders  during the visit of President Yudhoyono to Australia in April last year.  And in their meetings

in Batam in July this year, the two leaders instructed the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and  Australia to complete the negotiations process with a view to signing the agreement at the end  of 2006.  So we are pretty much within the instructions of the President and Prime Minister.

This agreement certainly reflects the maturity of Indonesia-Australia relations as close  neighbours.  This is also an important landmark in the relations between our countries as we  have been able to deal with sensitive issues in more open and constructive (inaudible) and I  would say not only that we have been able to deal with sensitive issues but we are able to  transform the potential problems into a productive cooperation.

We have several principles covered by this bilateral agreement and these are equality of states  and maturity of (inaudible) cooperations, respect and support the sovereignty, territorial  integrity, national unity and political independence of the parties, non-interference in  domestic affairs, not to support and to participate in any activities that threaten stability,  sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the parties, including not to use the territory of  either party to support the separatist movements directly against another party.  Another  important principle is our agreement to settle any disputes in a peaceful manner and not to use  force or to try to use force against the territorial integrity and independence, political  independence, of the other party.

There are ten areas of cooperation covered by this agreement:  defence cooperation, law  enforcement cooperation, counter-terrorism, intelligence cooperation, maritime security,  safety and security of aviation, non proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction, be it  nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, cooperation on emergency response and dealing  with natural disasters, cooperation and coordination that particular United Nations and other  international organisations, but also to establish contacts and better understanding between



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 2

societies in matters relating to security.  We have agreed to name this agreement as Lombok  Agreement.  The implementation of those ten areas of cooperation will be done by the  respective organisations under the supervision of the Indonesia-Australia Ministerial Forum  (IAMF).  Thank you very much.



MR DOWNER:  Well, Your Excellency Hassan Wirajuda and Members of Parliament and  distinguished guests, I just want to say on behalf of the Australian Government that we are  delighted to sign this historic agreement here today, an agreement which will I think become

known in years to come as the Agreement of Lombok or the Treaty of Lombok, and so it  should be known by a name as we have discussed, I hope that in years to come when people  study the diplomatic history of Australia and they look at the way we’ve engaged with our  immediate neighbour Indonesia, one of the key events will be the 2006 Treaty of Lombok.

I think it will be an important event to understand.  Our two countries live side-by-side and  we need to have between us an agreement that reflects the challenges that we face and the  commitment of both of our countries to address those challenges in a strong and a

constructive and a practical way, and that’s exactly what this agreement does.  And when you  look at the areas of cooperation covered in this agreement, they range from combating  terrorism and a range of transnational crimes, to defence, law enforcement, intelligence,  maritime and aviation security, addressing the issue of the proliferation of weapons of mass  destruction, and also emergency management and response.

And I think this is a truly important agreement for our two countries and we of course do have  some ad hoc agreements that cover some of those areas, not all of them, and what this does is  provide a bedrock for the relationship for many years to come.  We of course get on well as  foreign ministers and have been good friends through good and bad times in the bilateral

relationship and I think I can say the same for President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister John  Howard.  But you know the day will come - I know people think it’s hard to believe - but the  day will come when we will all move on and others will replace us and others will replace  them.  We don’t want a relationship just based on the personalities involved at the time and  the fact that those personalities get on well with each other.  You want an agreement which  will provide a bedrock for the relationship, and I think this is what this Australia-Indonesia  Agreement on the Framework for Security Cooperation, the Treaty of Lombok, I think it’s  what it does.

So I’m delighted to participate today in the signing ceremony, and this will now be considered  by both of our parliaments and I am hopeful that they will be very positive in their response to  it.  So I would like to congratulate the Foreign Minister on the work he’s done and he has put  into it, and the officials in the Indonesian Foreign Ministry and also in other agencies, and say  that there has been excellent cooperation in putting this agreement together and I appreciate  the friendship that has developed through that process.  Thank you.

JOURNALIST:  The treaty, I notice, includes a reference to neither governments intervening  in the internal affairs of the other.  Does that, if I could ask Mr Downer, does that apply to  Australia not to criticise if it does perceive any human rights abuses in Indonesia in the  future?





Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 3

MR DOWNER:  We had a very full discussion with the Indonesian Government about the  human rights issues, but let me say in response to a question like that, something that I think  is mentioned in the preamble of the agreement, and that I think people in Australia need to  understand.  There has been a massive transformation in Indonesia over the years and it is  important that people in Australia understand that Indonesia today is the world’s third largest  democracy, it is a democratic and pluralistic society.  I think you can see from the presence in  this room of the media, a country with free press, freedom of speech and expression, and these  are fundamental tenets of a democratic society.  The fact that two great democracies like  Australia and Indonesia can sign an agreement like this says a lot for the nature of our  societies today, and I think in Australia there perhaps is still a bit of a perception that  somehow Indonesia is the Indonesia of President Soekarno and President Soeharto.

I think people need to understand there has been a dramatic transformation in Indonesia and  whilst it’s true Indonesia has difficulties to address, when you look at the way the Indonesian  Government, particularly the President himself, have addressed the issue of Aceh over recent  times, it’s a great achievement, and I know in relation to other parts of the country, Papua of  course gets publicity in Australia, that there is a determination on the part of the Indonesian  Government to deal with those problems with the same diplomacy and the same goodwill  with which the present Indonesian Government has handled the Aceh problem.

JOURNALIST:  Mr Downer, to you first of all, if you don’t mind, then to you Mr Wirajuda  as well.  Certainly some people in Indonesia would consider that allowing non-government  organisations, for instance, in Australia to provide some money or logistical support to the

Papuan separatist movement, would be supporting separatism in Papua.  Would Australia be  taking…

MR DOWNER:  Well, it would be.

JOURNALIST:  Would Australia be taking any action against such organisations and , Mr  Wirajuda, would you expect Australia to take any action against organisations that provide  logistical or monetary support to separatist organisations?

MR DOWNER:  Well, first of all, I mean, we have our own domestic laws and this isn’t a  treaty that derogates from our domestic laws: the kind of proposition that some people have  put forward in the last few days that this means we’re going to clamp down on freedom of  speech and freedom of expression and creativity in Australia.  That of course is completely  absurd and frankly it discredits people who make those sorts of arguments.  Of course we’re  not planning to do that.  What I want to note though is this, that the Australian Government  has said, ever since I can remember, that it supports the territorial integrity of Indonesia.  And  you can say it over and over again, but there is something you can do more than just say that  and that is you can put it in writing.  And I say this to Australians, if Indonesia were to break  up, or if there was to be a massive upheaval in the Republic of Indonesia, to try to destroy the  integrity of the country, not only would that be a disaster, including a human rights disaster,  for the people of Indonesia, but that would be a disaster for the whole region, including  Australia.  And so as far as the Australian Government is concerned, we remain very strongly  of the view that Indonesia’s territorial integrity and the unity of the Indonesian nation is not



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 4

just in the interests of Indonesians but it’s something that is in the interests of the whole of the  region, including Australia.

Through this treaty we are able to affirm that in writing, that the Australian Government  won’t be aiding and abetting secessionist movements.  We haven’t been aiding and abetting  secessionist movements, but I think this will provide the greater confidence to people, in  particular in Indonesia, who might be concerned that the Australian Government might do  that.  But that isn’t to detract from freedom of speech and freedom of expression of people in  Australia.  I mean, people in Australia can hold what view they like about anything they want.   And of course that’s true of Indonesia.  Individual Indonesians can hold what view they like  about Australia.  It’s a free country.

DR WIRAJUDA:  Mr Downer, that underlines, Australia has its own laws and regulations  governing not only freedom of speech but also their security.  We have just signed the  Framework on Security Cooperation.  Certainly we will develop close cooperation and  consultation on issues affecting sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of either

party and of course in addition to their own laws and regulations, like here in Indonesia, I  believe that any agreement that will eventually be ratified by their respective parliaments  would be also part and parcel of the law of the land.  In other words in good faith we trust that

we both would implement the agreement and the commitments that we touch with in the  proper manner.

JOURNALIST:  I have a question I expected that both of you would answer the question.   How does this agreement prevent similar incidents as last April, when Indonesia recalled its  Ambassador from Canberra to take place again.  And the second question, based on this  agreement, will there be uranium trading between Indonesia and Australia in the near future?

MR DOWNER:  Well, first of all, in relation to incidents earlier this year, well obviously  Australia has its own domestic laws, but I think that what this agreement does is consolidate,  and in writing, Australia’s commitment to Indonesia’s territorial integrity, so nothing that  Australia does consistent with Australian laws will in any way detract from Australia’s  commitment to Indonesia’s territorial integrity, and once this treaty is ratified, that will be part  of the law of Australia, that the Australian Government won’t be supporting the break-up of  the Republic of Indonesia.  Of course, as I’ve said, that’s been the position of the Australian  Government ever since I can remember, but having said that, there are all sorts of different  views in Indonesia about Australia and whether Australia is up-front about this and whether  people feel comfortable about the commitments that politicians make to Indonesia, but when  you have something like that written in a treaty, then I think that makes a very big difference.

As far as uranium is concerned, all of our exports of uranium are covered by what are called  nuclear safeguards agreements.  We have a number of these.  I can’t remember quite how  many we have, but we have quite a number of these with countries that have civil nuclear  power programs.  We export no uranium at all for military purposes and if Indonesia were to  proceed with a civil nuclear power program, and Indonesia wanted to buy uranium from  Australia, that may or may not happen of course, then Australia and Indonesia would have to  negotiate a separate nuclear safeguards agreement.  Indonesia of course is a signatory to the  Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty so that is one of the bases on which we sign these



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 5

agreements, and I think Indonesia has always been a very strong supporter of the non-proliferation regime.

This provision about the nuclear industry is I think a very important step forward in terms of  two countries living side-by-side in this part of the world being very strongly committed to  the non-proliferation regime.  I mean, if Australia one day decides to build civil nuclear power  plants, then this is an agreement that helps to reinforce what was already of course a part of  Australian law, that Australia is strongly committed to all of the provisions of the Nuclear  Non-Proliferation Treaty.  It may be that we will do that.  I don’t know whether we will.   We’ll wait and see the outcome soon of a report that the Australian Government has  commissioned on the viability of building nuclear power stations in Australia.  And with  Indonesia, it’s something I know that the Indonesian Government is looking at - I mean, I  think more and more countries are looking at in the context of climate change and CO2  emissions and the need to address the issue of CO2 emissions.

The main thing here is for countries like Australia and Indonesia to demonstrate to the world  their strong commitment to counter the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and in  particular in this case nuclear weapons.  And there isn’t any possibility in any of our lifetimes  that Australia and Indonesia would ever even contemplate developing nuclear weapons.  I’m a  hundred per cent certain of that.



DR WIRAJUDA:  I wish our media friends not to focus on Papua incidents and supposed  uranium sales from Australia to Indonesia.  As we have experienced the agreement covers  quite a wide range of areas of cooperation.

When we talk about cooperation on weapons of mass destruction, we actually talk of how  Indonesia and Australia could cooperate to promote non-proliferation of weapons of mass  destruction.  Indonesia and Australia are both party, I would say faithful parties, to all of the  main agreements or treaties relating to weapons of mass destruction (inaudible) that means  nuclear weapons, or non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and safeguards agreements.  We  are also a party to the chemical as well as biological weapons conventions.  In fact we have  been actively together in promoting regional awareness and also policy on non-proliferation.   In the case of Papua, or Papuan citizens, asylum-seekers, seeking political asylum in  Australia, I would mention that when we initiated our discussions for us to begin our  negotiations on this treaty, it was before, long before, the case of some West Papuans trying  to seek political asylum in Australia.  Yes, prior to the meeting between President Yudhoyono  and Prime Minister Howard in Batam last July, Prime Minister Howard underlined the  important principle that Australia would adhere to, namely not supporting any separatist  movements and not for Australia to be used as bases or what is also called launching pad or  power stage for separatist movements to (inaudible) this was only a response to particular  situation at a particular moment and (inaudible) the situation has been pretty quiet and there is  no exodus or mass movement of West Papuans through neighbouring countries in the south.   So it is more your speculation that it is a case of a “big if” here.  So I would remind you that  the proper coverage of this agreement, this is quite wide-ranging and of course the  implementation of this agreement (inaudible) our collective effort in (inaudible) relations  between our two countries, I would say this signing is a historic moment in our bilateral  relations.



Inquiries:  (02) 6277 7500 6



JOURNALIST:  I direct my question to Mr Wirajuda.  I just wonder if you believe Australia  is currently being used as a staging post for Indonesian separatist groups.

DR WIRAJUDA:  With the signing of this Framework on Security Cooperation between us, I  don’t believe that Australia would be a staging post for any separatist movement.

JOURNALIST:  If I could just seek Pak Wirajuda’s clarification on that answer, are you  suggesting that in the past , in the recent past, Australia has been used as a staging post for  separatist movements, particularly regarding Papua, and do you believe that will now change?



DR WIRAJUDA:  We have expressed this openly so we have expressed our concerns to the  Australian Government that those who are granted temporary visas have tried to use their  presence to champion their separatist aspirations but we have also witnessed that they have  been pretty quiet since then so that is why I said that with the signing of this agreement  between us it strengthens our belief that Australia will not be used by them.

ENDS



