1

THE EIGHTH INDONESIA-AUSTRALIA  MINISTERIAL FORUM

BALI, INDONESIA, 29 JUNE 2006





INDONESIA-AUSTRALIA MINISTERIAL FORUM  JOINT MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

1. The eighth meeting of the Indonesia-Australia Ministerial Forum was held in Bali on 29  June 2006.  The Australian delegation was led by the Hon Alexander Downer MP, Minister  for Foreign Affairs.  The Indonesian delegation was led by HE Dr Boediono, Coordinating  Minister for Economic Affairs.  The Australian and Indonesian delegations are at Annex A.

2.  Ministers reiterated the outcome of the recent meeting between President Yudhoyono and  Prime Minister Howard and their shared commitment to enhancing stable bilateral relations  based on mutual respect, trust and confidence, welcomed the progress made in implementing  the Comprehensive Partnership, and reaffirmed Australia and Indonesia’s strong commitment  to and respect for each country’s territorial integrity and unity.  Ministers agreed the  Ministerial Forum provided a further timely opportunity, in the context of the Comprehensive  Partnership, to consolidate and advance cooperation in key areas, including security, counter-terrorism and other transnational threats, avian influenza, disaster management and reduction,  interfaith dialogue, education, illegal fishing, infrastructure, energy and minerals and other  development cooperation.

3. Ministers noted the progress of the working groups of the IAMF in advancing cooperation  (reports at Annex B) and welcomed the signing of new agreements to enhance bilateral  cooperation, including the subsidiary agreement governing Australia’s new A$10 million  emergency avian influenza assistance program.

DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS

4. Ministers agreed that the “Australia-Indonesia Partnership” demonstrates a bilateral  commitment to cooperate in advancing Indonesia’s efforts to increase and sustain economic  growth, build democratic institutions, enhance security and stability, and improve the quality  and accessibility of basic services, particularly health and education. The Partnership would  encompass all Australian bilateral official development assistance to Indonesia, which is  expected to reach over A$2 billion over five years.  Ministers noted that all funds under the  A$1 billion assistance package agreed following the 26 December 2004 tsunami  had now  been allocated to high priority reconstruction and development activities, both within and  beyond tsunami-affected areas.  The Joint Commission of the Australia-Indonesia Partnership  was held as part of the IAMF, announcing new development activities and outlining progress  on implementation, including further allocations for tsunami-affected areas of Aceh and North  Sumatra (see separate communiquÃÂ©).



5.  Ministers reiterated their condolences for those affected by the devastating earthquakes in  Yogyakarta and Central Java and acknowledged the valuable and timely responses of the  integrated disaster relief teams which provided an excellent model to respond to natural

2

disasters.  Ministers noted the effective mobilisation of domestic resources by the Indonesian  Government and applauded the commitment to disburse the remaining grant funding under  the Australia-Indonesia Partnership for programs to reconstruct and rehabilitate devastated  areas in Yogyakarta and Central Java.



6. Ministers recalled President Yudhoyono’s implementation of policies to promote  development and peaceful resolution of the situation in Papua.  Ministers noted Prime  Minister Howard’s support for political, economic and social development in Papua as part of  the Republic of Indonesia, and the support for full and effective implementation of Special

Autonomy and respect for human rights. Ministers appreciated the statement of Prime  Minister Howard that Australia’s development assistance is not used to fund political  activities in Papua, or separatist movements, and that Australia’s code of conduct for NGOs in  Indonesia prevents funding of organisations that operate contrary to the laws and policies of  either country.



7.  Ministers recognised HIV as a serious ongoing threat to the economic and social  development of many developing countries, including Indonesia, and that alongside successes,  much remains to be done in promoting cooperation for further prevention, care and treatment.  Ministers acknowledged the long-standing partnership between Australia and Indonesia to  address HIV/AIDS, noting the valuable support provided to Indonesia’s AIDS Commissions  through Australia’s aid program.



8. Ministers noted the desirability of concluding negotiations on a Transfer of Sentenced  Persons Agreement by the end of 2006.

SHARED RESPONSES TO TRANSNATIONAL THREATS

9.  Ministers reaffirmed support for the conclusion of a bilateral agreement for security  cooperation by the end of 2006 which would provide a framework for the existing and future  development of the security relationship.  Ministers agreed there would be value in the  Framework Agreement for Security Cooperation providing a treaty-based expression of  strong support for each country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, including Indonesia’s  sovereignty over Papua.

10.  Ministers reiterated their shared goal of peace, security and prosperity in the region and  noted the importance of regional bodies in advancing cooperation, including APEC, the  ASEAN Regional Forum and East Asia Summit.  Ministers agreed on the importance of  continuing to cooperate closely to combat the threat of terrorism and other transnational  threats in the region and underlined that the threats remained serious and were long-term  challenges that would require sustained and coordinated actions.  Australia commended  Indonesia for its active role in promoting bilateral and regional cooperation in combating  terrorism, including the significant progress in apprehending and prosecuting terrorists and  their supporters in Indonesia.  Ministers acknowledged the deep and broad bilateral  cooperation in areas such as law enforcement, border control, intelligence, terrorist financing,  transport security, legislative reform and defence.  Ministers welcomed the practical and  effective role played by the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation in developing  the expertise of law enforcement officials from countries of the region and encouraged further  contribution by countries in the region and beyond to the Centre.

3

11.  Ministers agreed that Indonesia and Australia would jointly convene a sub-regional  ministerial-level meeting in the second half of 2006 to strengthen and expand the scope of  counter-terrorism cooperation among those countries in the region most directly facing the  terrorist threat.



12.  Ministers acknowledged the threat posed by illicit access to and use of man-portable air  defence systems (MANPADS) to civil aviation in the Asia-Pacific region, and agreed on the  importance of cooperating closely including through capacity-building to promote more  effective controls over MANPADS in the fight against terrorism and to ensure flight safety  and security.  They also noted with concern the interest of terrorists in acquiring chemical,  biological and radiological weapons, and undertook to strengthen efforts, in cooperation with  other countries, and consistent with international law, to prevent such weapons from falling  into the hands of terrorists.

13.  Ministers committed to intensify bilateral cooperation to strengthen respective abilities  for effective counter-proliferation measures. Ministers supported adoption of UN Security  Council Resolution 1540 in line with Article 25 of the UN Charter, and non-proliferation

commitments in the Bangkok and Santiago APEC Leaders Declaration and undertook to work  together to enhance measures for preventing the proliferation on WMD and missile-related  materials and technologies, including export controls.  They recalled the successful co-hosting  of a second regional workshop on the Biological Weapons Convention in Bali in February  2006, with agreement to assist in implementation of enhanced biosecurity measures.   Ministers agreed that the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) remained the cornerstone of  the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and underlined the need for its universality and   full compliance with all articles of the NPT by all States Parties. They called on all states that  have not yet done so to conclude and implement relevant safeguards agreements and  Additional Protocols without delay.  Noting shared goals on nuclear non-proliferation,  Ministers agreed to work to strengthen bilateral nuclear cooperation for peaceful purposes.

14.  Ministers reaffirmed the importance of a cooperative approach to meeting shared  maritime security challenges including smuggling and threats to safety of navigation and  environment and the importance of adhering to relevant international instruments and  standards.  They recognised the primary responsibility of littoral states for maritime security,  and the legitimate interests of user states, including in the major straits of the region.  They  noted Indonesia’s participation in aerial and naval maritime surveillance initiatives with  neighbouring countries, and Australia’s readiness to contribute where possible in these and  other areas.

15. Ministers welcomed steps taken in Australia to strengthen border protection measures  including the contribution made by offshore processing of unauthorised boat arrivals.   Ministers reiterated the importance of enhancing strong and cooperative ties between the two  countries based on mutual respect, trust and confidence.



16.  Ministers agreed that people smuggling and trafficking, being heinous crimes, remained  threats to national security and prosperity and called for closer bilateral and regional  cooperation. Ministers recognised that determined efforts have contributed to a significant  reduction in maritime people smuggling activities.  Ministers welcomed effective bilateral  cooperation between law enforcement and immigration authorities.  Ministers noted that the  Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and related Transnational Crime,  co-chaired by Australia and Indonesia, continued to provide an excellent framework for

4

strengthening the capacity of the region to cooperate in the common fight against people  smuggling and trafficking.  Ministers endorsed plans for a Bali Process regional workshop on  trafficking to be hosted by Indonesia and co-chaired by Australia to share best practice and  experience for victim identification, repatriation and reintegration.

17.  Ministers agreed that avian and pandemic influenza continued to pose a significant  potential threat to countries in the region and recognised the importance of bilateral and  multilateral cooperation.  Ministers welcomed the cooperation between Australia and  Indonesia through the recent APEC exercise and Indonesia’s leadership and coordination of  the ASEAN Disease Surveillance Network.  Ministers agreed that animal health surveillance  is a high priority.  They also agreed on the importance of transparency in the reporting of  influenza cases in humans and animals, and to prompt sharing of epidemiological data with  the World Health Organisation.  Ministers affirmed the value of enhancing Australian

assistance in the areas of capacity building to prevent and contain an emerging influenza  pandemic, surveillance and early intervention in response to outbreaks.

18. Ministers welcomed the increased cooperation between Australia and Indonesia in the  field of marine affairs and fisheries, covering fisheries management and conservation on  shared stock, combating illegal unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing, enhanced better  understanding and management of the MoU Box, and partnership and coordination.  Ministers  noted the good progress being made on bilateral cooperation to formulate a fisheries  management plan for red snapper stock supported by joint research.  Ministers reiterated that  the problem of illegal fishing in both countries posed significant risks and costs to their  natural environments and economy that need to be solved collaboratively, including through  information campaigns, improved information sharing, joint study on illegal fishing,  expanding cooperation on coordinated fisheries surveillance activities and enhancing  surveillance capacity.  Ministers noted the effort by both countries to identify and register  fishing vessels in East Nusa Tenggara and Moluccas that entered the MoU Box in order to  enhance conservation outcomes in the area.  Ministers noted work underway to expand  alternative livelihood projects for Indonesian fishing communities. Ministers discussed  provisions of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, including the  obligation of both states under article 73, and in that context the Australian policy of rapid  repatriation. Ministers reiterated the importance of the 1997 Perth Treaty entering into force  as soon as practical, acknowledging some work needed to be undertaken. Ministers  reconfirmed the importance of pursuing cooperative naval activity, where possible.



19.  Ministers agreed that Australia and Indonesia would convene a regional Ministerial  Meeting to discuss measures to address the shared problems of illegal fishing. The Ministerial  Meeting will be preceded by a senior officials meeting in Jakarta.



20. Ministers noted the significant consequences of illegal logging globally and the efforts  being made by Australia and Indonesia to address this problem.  Ministers noted that there  were a range of other forestry-related issues including re-forestation and efforts to deal with  forest fire, that Australia and Indonesia could cooperate on.  Ministers agreed that cooperation  in this area should be progressed through the renamed Working Group on Agriculture, Food  and Forestry Cooperation.









5

PROMOTING UNDERSTANDING AND PEOPLE-TO-PEOPLE LINKS

21.  Ministers noted the importance of strong people-to-people ties between Australia and  Indonesia and the role of education links in fostering these relationships, noting that over  16,000 Indonesian students were enrolled to study in Australia in 2005 and the strong support  for scholarship programs being provided through the Australia-Indonesia Partnership.   Ministers commended the work of the Australia-Indonesia Institute in promoting greater  mutual understanding of each country and strengthening institutional links.  Ministers  welcomed recent efforts to enhance linkages between Indonesian and Australian  parliamentary institutions and expressed their commitment to enhancing linkages in this area.   Ministers welcomed the Australian parliamentary delegation visit to Indonesia later in the  year and agreed on the importance of a reciprocal visit early in 2007.



22. Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to the protection of human rights and promoting  tolerance and mutual understanding between different religions and cultures, and working  together to counter radicalisation and the spread of extremism. Ministers welcomed the  outcomes of the Second Regional Interfaith Dialogue held in March 2006 and noted the  important role of religious leaders, in collaboration with government, to strengthening  moderate voices within their respective communities.  Ministers looked forward to continued  efforts to promote greater regional interfaith cooperation in the lead up to the next Dialogue to  be held in 2007.



TRAVEL ADVISORY

23. Indonesian Ministers requested that the Australian Government reconsider its travel  advisory for Indonesia, and were concerned about its effect on the economy. Australian  Ministers reemphasized that Australian travel advisory remain under constant review.  Ministers noted ongoing cooperation on counter-terrorism, including information exchange  and agreed to continue to strengthen this cooperation. Ministers agreed that officials would  meet to discuss further such cooperation.

STRENGTHENING TRADE AND INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES

24.  Ministers welcomed the signing of the Indonesia-Australia Trade and Investment  Framework (TIF) by Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade Mr Vaile and Trade  Minister Dr Pangestu in September 2005, in Vientiane, Lao. The main objective of TIF is to  enhance trade and investment between Indonesia and Australia on a balanced and  comprehensive basis. Ministers recognised the value of the TIF to increase commercial  opportunities for Australian and Indonesian business by providing a framework for trade and  investment facilitation and promotion, improved policy dialogue, capacity building and  strengthening commercial ties particularly among small and medium enterprises.  Ministers  acknowledged TIF progress so far and looked forward to the next Trade Ministers’ Meeting to

be held in the second half of 2006, to advance implementation of the TIF Action Agenda.  Both sides have adopted an indicative work program in order to take forward work under TIF.    Ministers noted ongoing cooperation in trade capacity building.

25. Ministers underlined their commitment to trade liberalisation and reaffirmed their  commitment to lower tariffs and other barriers to trade so that Indonesian and Australian  exporters and consumers continued to benefit. Ministers noted the continued increase in  bilateral trade in 2005 and the potential for trade liberalisation to contribute to further growth.

6

Ministers recognised the contribution of cooperative activities and welcomed further  cooperation in agriculture, minerals and energy, specific industrial sectors, and other sectors  that enhanced bilateral trade and trade with other countries. Ministers welcomed and  encouraged Indonesia’s efforts to progress the necessary domestic economic reforms to  increase its competitiveness and improve the investment climate, as well as to implement its  commitments under bilateral, regional and multilateral agreements.

26. Ministers looked forward to the opportunity to meet with Australian and Indonesian  business representatives during the Business Dialogue to identify opportunities to increase  commercial linkages.  They recognised the contribution of the two bilateral Business Councils  and looked forward to their joint conference in Australia in November 2006.  Ministers noted

the low levels of two-way investment and supported efforts to expand business opportunities  and direct investment flow.

27.  Noting that Australian and Indonesian Trade Ministers were currently in Geneva,  Ministers urged conclusion of the WTO Doha Round of trade negotiations this year, noting  that while there had been some recent progress and positive indications of further movement  by a number of key Members, time was now the critical factor.  Failure to meet this deadline  could delay conclusion of the Round.  Political commitment and greater flexibility was  required from all Members to achieve the high level of ambition set out in the Doha mandate  and reaffirmed by Ministers in Hong Kong.  Ministers stressed the crucial role of special and  differential treatment for developing countries which will be an integral part of the agreement  in the Doha Round.  Ministers noted that the 20th Anniversary Cairns Group Ministerial  Meeting would be held in Cairns in September, and agreed the meeting would be an important  opportunity to contribute to the successful conclusion of the Round in 2006.

28. Ministers confirmed their shared interest in achieving a comprehensive, high-quality  ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement that would provide added impetus to  the already strong trade and investment linkages between their two countries.  Consistent with

the Guiding Principles agreed by Leaders in November 2004, the negotiations are scheduled  to be concluded in early 2007 with full implementation within ten years.

29.  Ministers stressed the fundamental importance of stability and security to economic  growth.  Ministers reaffirmed their strong commitment to strengthening APEC’s capacity to  support and promote trade and investment in the region as core drivers of economic growth

and stability, and looked forward to Australia’s hosting of APEC in 2007.  Ministers affirmed  their commitment to taking concrete action to implement the Busan Roadmap towards the  Bogor Goals. Ministers acknowledged the value of APEC’s complementary human security  agenda.



AUSTRALIA-INDONESIA DEVELOPMENT AREA

30.  Ministers noted progress so far on the Australia-Indonesia Development Area (AIDA)  Review and agreed to hold an officials-level inter-sessional meeting in the second half of  2006.











7

NINTH MINISTERIAL FORUM

31.  Ministers agreed that the ninth meeting of the Australia-Indonesia Ministerial Forum is  tentatively scheduled to be held in Australia in 2007.











The Hon Alexander Downer MP    HE Dr Boediono

Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs      Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs

Australia       Republic  of  Indonesia



BALI, 29 JUNE 2006



8

Annex A



Indonesian Delegation

HE Dr Boediono, Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs (Co-Chair)

HE Dr Hassan Wirajuda, Minister of Foreign Affairs

HE Dr Hamid Awaluddin, Minister of Law and Human Rights

HE Abdul Rachman Saleh, Attorney General

HE Dr Sri Mulyani Indrawati, Minister of Finance

HE Fahmi Idris, Minister for Industry

HE Dr Purnomo Yusgiantoro, Minister for Energy and Mineral Resources

HE MS Kaban, Minister for Forestry

HE Paskah Suzetta, Minister of National Development Planning/Chairman of BAPPENAS

HE Freddy Numberi, Minister for Marine and Fishery

HE Jero Wacik, Minister for Tourism and Culture



Australian Delegation

The Hon Alexander Downer MP, Minister for Foreign Affairs (Co-Chair)

The Hon Philip Ruddock MP, Attorney-General

Senator the Hon Amanda Vanstone, Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs

The Hon Ian Macfarlane MP, Minister for Industry, Tourism and Resources

Senator the Hon Eric Abetz, Minister for Fisheries, Forestry and Conservation

