Labor's Housing Affordability Policies; Howard Gives  Up Fight On Inflation; Road Funding; Kyoto; Foreign  Aid  Doorstop Interview - 4th November 2007

RUDD: Thanks  everyone, I know  everyone’s hot  out there so we’ll  hop straight into  it. Mark Buttigieg  our candidate for

Cook and Wayne Swan, Tanya Plibersek. I want to talk today about housing  affordability and the challenges which working families face right across Australia.

It’s quite extraordinary today what Mr Howard had to say about interest rates and  inflation. Before the last election, Mr Howard promised that interest rates would be  kept at record lows. They have gone up five times since then and today he made  the extraordinary claim that the policies of his Government had absolutely no  responsibility or relationship with those rises. The other extraordinary thing which

Mr Howard has said today is that he’s hauled up the white flag in the fight against  inflation. He said, we’re now facing unavoidable inflationary pressures.

Working families are under real financial pressure. Mr Howard has said that  working families have never been better off. Mr Costello said there is no housing  affordability crisis. Can I just say, it shows how much both have lost touch with  what’s going out there right across our country.

If you look at first home buyers in particular, we have a big challenge on our  hands. The Housing Industry Association-Commonwealth Bank housing  affordability index recently demonstrated that first homebuyers are now spending  a record 31.7 percent of their family income on mortgage repayments. That’s 31.7

percent. We now have housing affordability for first home buyers at record lows.  We now have figures which point to the fact that first homebuyers as a proportion  of overall homebuyers is now going down and down and down. And a 25 percent  reduction, in the number, relative to what it was as a proportion, relative to what it

was only a few years ago. We have a real problem on our hands. And the overall  figure which everyone has in mind is where we were in 1996 with average homes  representing something like four times the average wage. Now, we’re looking at  those house prices representing seven times the average wage.

For those reasons, there is a housing affordability crisis, particularly for first home  buyers. We’ve already announced three major sets of housing affordability

Kevin Rudd



Tanya PlibersekWayne Swan



Mark Buttigieg

policies, coming to a total of $1.1 billion. And they’ve all dealt with how we assist  on the supply side of this equation. Boost the stock of rental accommodation,  affordable levels. Boost the stock of housing in new housing developments which  has available where we can actually negotiate a deal with developers to bring  down infrastructure charges. And we’ve also released a policy about future  Commonwealth land release.

Today, what I’m pleased to announce, is Labor’s First Home Saver Account  policy. This first home saver account policy is designed to restore hope in the  Australian dream. That young people can still aspire to the great Australian dream  of home ownership. I’ve already gone through the figures that suggest that that  dream is getting harder and harder for young Australians to realise in their  lifetime. So we want to make it that much easier. So what we’re proposing  through our First Home Saver Account is an arrangement like this. We’re putting  forward a policy of some $600 million. And we’re going to use this money as  taxation receipts forgone in order to make it possible for people to save in a tax  friendly environment to buy their first home. And that means we’ll have First Home  Saver Accounts set up in a similar way to which superannuation accounts are set  up. And that means that with a ceiling of $10,000 contributions per year, that we  believe that over a four year period - which is the time over which we would allow  people to start withdrawing funds for the purposes of buying a home - they’re  going to be able to attract significant tax advantages from doing that.

How would it work in detail, a few points on that.

In that $10,000 threshold it means that $5,000 of that amount of course will be  taxed when it goes into the home saver account at the same rate as you are  currently taxed for contributions going into a superannuation account, that’s  fifteen percent. It also means that on top of that $5,000 you could put in another  $5,000 of after tax income. And when at the end of the day the interest earnings  start to accumulate, it also means that you’ll be taxed on those at the same  concessional rate that applies to interest earnings on superannuation funds.

This we believe is a good way forward. Because over time it means that young  people saving for their first house are going to have a real tax benefit in putting  that money together to make the great Australian dream possible. Can I just  conclude on this. If you look at housing affordability - Mr Howard says that  working families have never been better off, Mr Costello says there is no housing  affordability crisis - and here we are more than half way through this election  campaign and Labor has out four big policies on how to help Australians with the  housing affordability crisis. Today I’m proud to announce our policy to assist first  home buyers in particular.

We have a proposal also for a Housing Minister. How could Mr Howard be serious  about dealing with the housing affordability crisis when he can’t even name a  Minister or a department of state which is responsible for something so basic to  people’s lives. Having said that, I’ll turn to Tanya to add, and then we’ll take any  questions.

PLIBERSEK: Thanks, Kevin. The key to this First Home Saver Account is that  people will be able to save a lot more than if they were simply putting this money  into an ordinary savings account. To use the example of two people on the  average income. If they save about 10 percent of their wage, the tax treatment of  this account means that after five years they’ll have about $55,000 saved, and  that’s about 34 percent more than if they just have this in an ordinary account. So  that can be a really substantial deposit on a new home.

That’s very important for a few reasons. We believe it’s very important to support  a savings culture in Australia. We know that Australians today are saving less  than they ever have in the past. We believe that this measure will encourage  Australians to save an extra $3 billion over three years. That’s very important for  the national economy. But it’s also very important for the family budget. What

we’re hearing more and more these days are that people are borrowing 95  percent, 100 percent - even 105 percent - of the value of the home they’re  buying. So if anything changes, if one person has to drop back to part time work,  if someone loses their job, if a baby comes along unexpectedly, or if interest rates  change, they are in serious trouble. And we’re seeing that mortgage defaults have  gone through the roof. In fact, they have doubled in recent years. So, borrowing a  smaller proportion of the value of the home is very important for people’s future  financial security.

We also want to emphasise that we don’t think this policy or any policy is the  silver bullet for housing affordability. We believe that we have to have a range of  measures, and this goes along with the First Home Owner Grant that is already in  existence - we will keep that - it also goes along with our National Rental  Affordability Scheme which will drop rents on 50,000 properties, new properties  that are going to be build using this tax credit. It goes along with our Housing  Affordability Fund which can save up to 20,000 on the value of a new home. And  it goes along with our policy to release surplus Commonwealth land for new  housing. We believe that all of these things together will make a difference to  housing affordability in Australia.

RUDD: And just before taking questions, and we’ll be having further to say about  housing and housing affordability also between now and the election.

JOURNALIST: Over four or five years, won’t the price of housing go up?

RUDD: Well, as Tanya just said, there is no silver bullet in this. But we just want  to get people into a savings culture early, saving with a tax friendly environment  so that they have much more of a chance to enter the home ownership market  and to get out of the rent trap. That’s where we see the real problem now, and  there aren’t at present incentives in the taxation system to do that.

JOURNALIST: If people are struggling already to make ends meet though, do you expect that it is possible that they could save 10 percent of their income?

RUDD: Well, that’s why we designed a system whereby people can, for example,  deposit a minimum of $1,000 a year. And they can obviously go up to a maximum

of $10,000 a year. So we’re very mindful of people’s different income  circumstances and what can be saved. And, therefore, we’ve set a minimum  withdrawal point at four years. But of course, it could be much longer than that.  For example, if you’re an 18 year old and you’re saving for a house, then why not  get into the culture of putting some money away, and seeing it grow over time. I  think that reflects a good positive signal to young people out there in terms of the  hope and dream of home ownership.

JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, have you announced this strategically because you  anticipate an interest rate rise this week?

RUDD: We have worked on this policy for the better part of four or five months. If  you attended our housing affordability summit in Canberra, you would have  noticed that most of the measures that we are taking forward to the Australian  people were canvassed in one way or another at that summit - in public forum or  in private discussions. We brought the whole industry together.

Certainly our policy on affordable rental accommodation, $603 million, that came  out of a very good session of that summit. Secondly, we put forward our policy on  bringing down infrastructure charges on new developments, again out of new  ideas that were canvassed at that summit. This also has its origin back there. We  believe that when it comes to housing affordability, Labor has a positive message  for working families. We’ve been putting in out there for months now. And Mr  Howard’s response is - more than half way through this election campaign -  through Mr Costello - who will replace him as Prime Minister, is there is no  housing affordability crisis.

JOURNALIST: What do you say to claims that young people, first home buyers,  want it all in the one go. They want all the mod-cons and (inaudible) if they want  to afford property?

RUDD: Well everyone makes their own decisions and their own call in life. What  I’m concerned about is the dropping number of first home buyers each year  relative to the overall number of home purchases each year. The figure I gave you  before is that’s come down some 25 percent over the last three years. That’s a  direct reflection of the problems that we’ve got. And if you look at the housing  affordability index put out by - not the Labor Party - the Commonwealth Bank  and the Housing Industry Association, this says that for first home buyers we now  have housing affordability at record lows.

So under Mr Howard’s and Mr Costello’s Government, housing affordability for  first home buyers is at record lows. They have nothing by way of new policy until  the eve of an election about this. We have concrete policies on the ground now.

JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, what happens if, say, after four years somebody  changes their mind and wants to invest that money in shares? Will they have to  pay back the tax concession?

RUDD: What we’ve got - and you’ll see this outlined in the policy there - are

7

some flexible arrangements for down the track. If, for example, a person chooses  not to purchase their first home by that means, then they can of course roll that  amount into a superannuation fund. If they want to withdraw it for other purposes,  for consumption purposes, then they would at that point, as the document  indicates, lose the tax advantages.

JOURNALIST: How many people do you anticipate will set up one of these  accounts?

RUDD: Well, we’ve done a fair bit of modelling around this based on some  schemes which operate around the world. We’ve also looked at the way in which  co-contribution systems currently work for the superannuation industry within

Australia. And therefore we believe there will be a very significant take-up of this.  If you look at some of the numbers, I’m advised that currently in Australia we have  about 150,000 first home buyers entering the market each year. That number is  going down. That represents some 220,000 individual income earners. Put that  out over two or three years, and you’re looking at about 600,000-plus.

We’re anticipating something in the order of about an 80 per cent take-up, around  that figure. And, of course if we widened the net in terms of those eligible who are  not out there buying their first home at the moment, it would still represent a  significant take-up rate. So we have been very mindful of international experience  in putting together the cautious costings.

JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, this morning John Howard …

RUDD: I’ll do this one and get back to you.

JOURNALIST: I was going to ask the same question, but is John Howard, do you  believe, softening up the electorate for an interest rate rise this week through his  changed rhetoric?

RUDD: Well, what I am stunned by with Mr Howard today is him hauling up the  white flag in the fight against inflation, by saying it’s unavoidable. And what I’m  stunned by today is Mr Howard owning no responsibility for his Government’s  policy over the last several years when it comes to the five interest rate rises that  we’ve seen. We’ve had Mr Howard saying in response to a question, “So, no  policy miscalculations at all?”, Mr Howard says, “No, no, no.” Three years ago, Mr  Howard said he would keep interest rates at a record low, and today he says he  has no responsibility whatsoever. I find that a remarkable [inaudible].

SWAN: I just wanted to add a couple of things to that. Mr Howard this morning  said he had no responsibility for inflationary pressures in the Australian economy;  it was all the fault of somebody else. Now, the truth is Mr Howard has refused to  take seriously repeated Reserve Bank warnings about skill shortages in the  Australian economy and the consequences of infrastructure bottlenecks. Those  are the factors that have put upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure

on inflation rates, and he cannot escape responsibility for that fact.

He did make an irresponsible promise at the last election to keep interest rates at

record lows, and five interest rate rises later, he now seeks to say that he bears  no responsibility for inflationary pressures in the Australian economy. It has been  his inaction and his complacency when it comes to skills and infrastructure that  has put upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates, and  he ought to accept some responsibility for that.

JOURNALIST: This morning John Howard raised an interview with Charles  Woolley that puts Peter Garrett in the spotlight again, and said that he’s been  saying things that he shouldn’t have said in relation to Labor’s promises. Are you  concerned about that?

RUDD: Well, Mr Howard is showing signs of being increasingly desperate. I’ve  said for a long time Mr Howard has lost touch with working families. I’ve said for a  long time that Mr Howard is lost in the past, no plan for the future. What I see  more and more is Mr Howard becoming politically desperate after 11 years in  office and, on the eve of an election, prepared to say anything and do anything.  And the desperation reflected this morning, talking about reports of reports of  reports. I mean, let’s get real here.

We have a plan for the country’s future, it’s a positive plan, and one of the core  pillars of that plan is what we’ve put out for housing affordability. Now we’ve got  $1.7 billion worth of policy on this out there. Can I just say, where is Mr Howard  on housing affordability? Or are we going to have the usual - 5 minutes to  midnight in the Liberal Party election campaign launch, something, you know, out  of the hat, having ignored the problem for a long, long time.

JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you said you were not going to make any comments with regard to keeping interest, or having interest rates at record lows. What is your  commitment to the public on rates?

RUDD: My commitment to the Australian people is to do everything we can  through the budget policy and through skills policy and infrastructure policy to  maintain maximum downward pressure on inflation and, through that, maximum  downward pressure on interest rates. That is the responsible undertaking to the  Australian people. The irresponsible, untruthful undertaking to the Australian  people was that given by Mr Howard three years ago when he looked down the  barrel and said he would keep interest rates at record lows. They’ve gone up five  times since then and if you’re a first home buyer out there, guess what that’s cost  you? An extra $200 a month, $2,400 a year. That’s on a mortgage of about  $242,000 for a first home buyer. First home buyers are paying through the teeth  for Mr Howard’s broken promises on interest rates.

JOURNALIST: Is the Coalition’s tactic of trying to outspend you on the Ipswich  motorway going to work?

RUDD: I was pretty interested about all that, because I am advised - I mean,  what stuns me about this package today is that, after 11 years in office, we had  this sort of razzamatazz announcement about roads here and roads there. And of  this $10 billion, I am advised that $4.1 billion has been previously announced. I

am also advised that $3.1 billion replicates announcements already made by us.  But the one which I think really takes the cake is the upgrade of the Ipswich  motorway - $1.1 billion. And in terms of high levels of policy consistency on the  part of Mr Howard, I asked him this question earlier this year in the Parliament  about committing to the full upgrade of the Ipswich motorway, and he said the

commitment the Government has made is an amount of $2.3 billion. And, of  course, that’s in relation to the other alternative, which was the Goodna bypass.

He says, “The reason we do not support the upgrade of the Ipswich motorway is  that there is clear evidence that as soon as that upgrade was completed it would  be necessary to invest in a further expansion because of the enormous amount of traffic.”

He goes on to say, elsewhere in March, he says that upgrading the Ipswich  motorway is a short-term option, but won’t provide a long-term solution to traffic  problems in that part of southeast Queensland. So here we had six months ago  Mr Howard saying this is the absolutely wrong investment to make in roads in  southeast Queensland. On the eve of an election, Mr Howard back flips to the  tune of $1.1 billion, on top of the $2.3 billion he’s putting into the Goodna bypass,  and he expects us to believe that his roads policy is credible. Give us a break.

JOURNALIST: Is Mr Garrett a repeat offender, though, by saying multiple times  that your policy will change after the election?

RUDD: I think the great thing, as I said earlier today, about Pete is his deep  commitment to action on climate change, up against a Government which for 11  years has been inactive on climate change. Remember, we had recently,  revealed in the nation’s newspapers, that the previous Environment Minister had  written to the Prime Minister and others - oh, no, to the Treasurer and others, a  couple of years ago saying Australia must increase the renewable energy target.  Nothing was done. Nothing was done on Kyoto. Nothing was done on lifting the  carbon target, either.

JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you said you would keep the first home owners grant  with this policy, but will you commit to maintaining the same amount in that grant?

RUDD: Well, I’ll turn to Tanya on this.

PLIBERSEK: Certainly. We’ve always said that housing affordability is going to  require a range of responses, and we will certainly commit to keeping the first  home owners grant as it is now, in its current form. The advantage of our policy is  that when people go to buy their first homes, they’ll have a much more substantial

deposit, they’ll be borrowing less. Presumably they won’t have to pay mortgage  insurance, which is an additional cost if people are borrowing 90, 100 per cent of  the cost of their home. So they’ll find their place, they’ll have a substantial deposit.  On top of that, they’ll get their first home owners grant.

SWAN: Could I just say one more thing about this policy, because it is very  significant. This policy is about encouraging a savings culture in Australia. And  there are two very big investment decisions that all Australian families make. One

is their super. And the other one is to buy a home - and to give those first home  owners some tax preferment here is an historic decision, a very historic decision.  It is part of that great reform process that this country has been through, where  we decided to encourage people and to get them into saving for their retirement.  And many people now are benefiting from that long-term policy. This is a long-term policy which is going to put in place encouragement for people to save from  an early age.

JOURNALIST: Just on foreign aid, again. Is it useful calling on the Government to  match your foreign aid commitments?

RUDD: We have a long-term plan for Australia’s future, and part of that is a long-term plan for stability in our immediate region, the southwest Pacific. If you travel  around the southwest Pacific, anywhere from East Timor through PNG, down  through the Solomons and elsewhere into Fiji, we have major problems with the  state of basic economic infrastructure, basic social outlays in education and  health.

What is the long-term cost to Australia of not acting? If we fail to act in our region  to build the economic and social fabric, and rebuild it of our neighbours - guess  what? We run the grave risk that we will pay a huge price downturns through  military interventions, which are massively expensive, as well as the possibility of  long-term refugee outflow as well. That is the basis for my clear-cut commitment  that, if Labor is elected, by 2015 we will increase our overseas development  assistance to 0.5. [of GNI]

We believe that is the right way to go, and my challenge to Mr Howard is to think  of the long-term national interest - not just his short-term political interest leading  in to the election - and to commit to that 0.5 target. So many in Australia want to  see that happen. The churches want to see that happen. Aid organisations want  to see that happen. People out there right across the community and the region  need to see that happen. It’s in our national self-interest for that to happen as  well.

I’ve got to go.

JOURNALIST: Does Mr Garrett still have your confidence?

RUDD: Absolutely.

Authorised by Tim Gartrell, 161 London Circuit, Canberra City, ACT 2600

