



Media contact: Tony Parkinson (Ministerial) 02 6277 7500  Media releases and speeches are available from DFAT via the internet.      http://www.dfat.gov.au/

MEDIA RELEASE MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS ALEXANDER DOWNER FA  023          1  March  2007



VISIT TO INDONESIA



I will visit Indonesia from 4 to 7 March 2007 where I will co-host a Sub-Regional Ministerial  Meeting on Counter-Terrorism in Jakarta with my Indonesian counterpart, Dr Hassan  Wirajuda.

The Attorney-General, The Hon Philip Ruddock MP, the Deputy Commissioner of the  Australian Federal Police, Federal Agent John Lawler, and our Ambassador for Counter-Terrorism, Mike Smith, will accompany me to the Meeting which will take place on 5 and 6  March.

Foreign affairs and law enforcement ministers and police chiefs will attend from Malaysia,  the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.  The objective of the Meeting is to address how to  sustain cooperation between the countries most immediately affected by the threat from  regional terrorist groups.

The Meeting will explore practical ways to deepen cooperation and address emerging  challenges in combating terrorism in the sub-region, particularly in the critical areas of  countering radicalisation and preparedness for mass casualty incidents.  Participants will also  discuss law enforcement cooperation, legal frameworks for countering terrorism and the  threat of unconventional weapons.

The Australian Government places the highest possible priority on fighting the terrorist threat  at home and abroad.  Success can only come through co-operative efforts to apprehend  terrorists and prevent attacks.

I will hold separate bilateral talks with Indonesian Foreign Minister, Dr Hassan Wirajuda, and  Minister for Law and Human Rights, Dr Hamid Awaludin.  I will also hold talks with my  other regional counterparts.

In addition to the Meeting in Jakarta, I will visit Semarang, Yogyakarta and Bekasi to provide  impetus to bilateral counter-terrorism and development efforts.

I will open the inaugural Regional Executive Leadership Program at the Jakarta Centre for  Law Enforcement Cooperation (JCLEC) in Semarang.  JCLEC was established and is  managed by Australia and Indonesia.  The leadership program aims to develop the personal,  organisational and leadership skills of senior law enforcement officers from around the  region, with a focus on counter-terrorism, transnational crime, intelligence and decision-making.

In Yogyakarta, I will call on the Sultan of Yogyakarta and the chairman of Indonesia’s  second-largest Muslim organisation, Muhammadiyah, Dr Din Syamsuddin.

Australia supports the development of the Indonesian education sector through AusAID’s  $355 million Basic Education Program (BEP), which will fund the construction or extension  of about 2000 schools in 19 Indonesian provinces over the next three years. I will visit the  BEP-funded Madrasah Tsaniwiyah, an Islamic junior secondary school in Bekasi, near  Jakarta.

