1







Keynote address to the Federal Conference of  the Australian Education Union

Canberra, 16 January 2007

Fred van Leeuwen, General Secretary  Education International







Colleagues,

Firstly, it is a great pleasure to join you again at the AEU’s Federal Conference. AEU,  and its predecessor ATF, have played a special role in international work, globally  and in the Asia/Pacific region. You were among the earliest advocates for the  creation of Education International 14 years ago. You were in fact, among the most  consistent and determined advocates of international teacher union unity.

The track record since EI was founded in January 1993 shows that we were right to  take that historic step together. We know that solidarity through EI works, we know  that it must be kept alive and that it must be nurtured. If we want democracy and  social justice to globalize like our economies have, if we want to prevent the world  from being governed solely by the dictates of so-called free markets and trade  agreements, we must hold on to that concept . In this respect I would like to thank  you for your involvement in our solidarity work. You are helping us to assist our  colleagues in other parts of the Asian-Pacific region and you are providing valuable  leadership for the work of our International.

Today almost ninety percent of all teachers’ organisations worldwide belong to our  International. This makes us one of the largest and most representative non  governmental bodies in the international community.

In July this year, EI will hold its 4th World Congress. It will be in Berlin, near where  the Wall once epitomized the division between East and West, and the repression of  liberty. The Wall that fell in 1989! Our theme will be “Educators joining together for  quality education and social justice”. Let us look together at the theme in the context  of Australia’s place in the global community.

QUALITY EDUCATION

There is a general consensus - among governments, employers and the trade union  movement - that education is the key to each nation’s future in the global economy,  and that education is the key to each individual’s chances for a better life. But many  politicians and business leaders are preaching that globalization means you have to

be more competitive, and being more competitive means you have to deregulate. We  remind them however that education is not only, not even first of all, an economic  tool. By education we mean literacy, the ability to calculate, and preparing for  working life, but we also mean something more.  We mean education to be a citizen,  an actor in society, a participant, to have a say in your own future, to be able to

2

assert your rights while respecting the rights of others. And quality public education  is built upon certain values - universal values of understanding and tolerance.

For our school systems to be successful in promoting dialogue and universal values  they must be open, democratic, and publicly funded. They must operate under the  supervision of democratically elected authorities. This does not mean that the State  or Education Ministers should dictate what and how we teach. On the contrary, while  we accept our governments to set the parameters for our education systems, for our  work, we are the ones who have the expertise and the professional responsibility to  prepare our young people for adult life, including the world of work.

Resources

Even though no-one contests that investment in education pays off for countries and  individuals, Australia ranks among the lower half of the OECD countries in per capita  education expenditure. And here is the really significant piece. Public investment, ie  government expenditure, in Australia is very low. Private input into education in  Australia is higher than almost all other OECD countries. Only two - the United  States and Korea - have a higher rate of private input, and in both those cases that  is principally because higher education is financed mainly by private input in the form  of endowments or fees. In the case of Australia, private input is higher for primary  and secondary education. And this has consequences for equity.

We have evidence from 67 countries on the equity of the outcomes of education  systems, drawn from the OECD’s Programme for International Student Assessment  (PISA). PISA reveals marked differences among countries. Finland and Canada are  both high performers but their results are also more equitable than most other  countries. Students differ in achievement but not because of their social  backgrounds. On the other hand, the results for Australia and Germany reveal  substantial inequity: differences in school performance among students reflect  marked differences in their social background. Disadvantaged students in Australia  fall about 1½ years behind their counterparts in Finland.



The role of the public and private sectors

We are aware of the ongoing debates here in Australia about the input of the Federal  versus the State governments. 30 years ago, teachers and parents in Australia made  the big break- through of achieving Federal funding to improve resources for State  schools. But what do we see today, 30 years further down the track? We see that  68% of Australian students attend public schools, but only 35% of Federal  Government funding goes to public schools. Colleagues, when you look at the  figures, it is apparent that your Federal Government has become principally a funder  of private schooling in Australia! The figures show that trend dates back exactly 10  years. Surprised? If public schools had the same share of Federal funds as they had  in 1996, they would have had 1 billion dollars in resources more than they get  today. Then, like the US Federal Government your Federal Government sets national  standards. So it takes resources away from public schools, put them into private  schools, and then says “meet our national standards”!

There’s more. The Australian model of fees for higher education is being exported to  other countries. By the way, labour governments have been promoting this too, and

3

a former Australian Labour Minister for Education was promoting university fees in  Ireland last year. There are strikes in Greece over this issue as we talk, with the  University teachers being supported by EI’s affiliates in primary and secondary  education.

You see the point. There is a common pattern of downgrading the public sector, and  pumping up the private sector, that includes transferring massive resources from  public to private, and that is driven essentially by ideology. We might ask, does the  evidence back this ideologically driven shift of resources? According to the OECD  there is no significant overall superiority of non-government schooling in any  country.

And there’s more. The fashionable trend today is Public Private Partnerships - PPPs.  PPPs will be promoted at the World Economic Forum in Davos next week. Australia  has been among the leading governmental advocate of PPPs. And Australia has  become one of the biggest sellers of educational services to overseas students. In  international meetings, we get the impression that top officials from your Federal  Department of Education and Training are there to promote a business, not to  promote education, and certainly not to promote equity.

Teachers

Colleagues, Quality public education requires quality teachers.  That means well  prepared, qualified teachers with proper terms and conditions of employment. The  right to education is the right to a qualified teacher. We know however that we face  looming teacher shortages. Unesco has just completed and published a report  showing that if our political leaders do not act fast, nine years from now the world  will be short of 18 million primary school teachers, 13 million in the low income  countries, 5 million in the industrial economies. This may be the most serious  challenge our profession has ever faced.

[South and West Asia will need to raise their current teaching forces by 7% and  create another 325,000 teaching posts in less than a decade. For Afghanistan to  achieve universal primary education by 2015 it will need to hire 9% more teachers  every year. India will need the greatest inflow of new teachers in the world - more  than two million.



[A frightening scenario is unfolding in low income countries facing serious teachers’  shortages. Unqualified persons are filling teachers’ positions, education quality  suffers, the best qualified teachers go into private education, with resources that  expand as public resources decline. Or they go abroad…. Although we support the  right of every teacher to seek employment in another country, we must strongly  oppose the poaching of qualified teachers by employment agencies from the UK, the  United States and other rich countries. A new Commonwealth Protocol on Teachers  Recruitment has been agreed by our Commonwealth member unions and their  governments. The International Labour Organization has now agreed, at our urging,  to use this protocol and to establish its standards worldwide.]

The evidence available shows that the majority of governments are applying two  strategies: the intensification of the workload of teachers already in service in  developed countries, and the mass-scale engagement of unqualified personnel with  even less provisions into teaching, in developing countries. Australian teacher

4

shortages will mean large class sizes and less time for students with special need. In  a report that we submitted to the ILO and UNESCO a few months ago we  recommended two lines of action. First, Governments must pay more attention to the  training, recruitment and retention of qualified teachers. Secondly, the teaching  profession must be made more attractive. When, in low income countries, average  primary school teachers’ salaries have declined over the last 25 years, that is a sad  commentary on short-sighted public policies.

[According to international comparative surveys about income levels in various  professions worldwide, such as the UBS study “Prices and Earnings Around the Globe  in 2003”, primary school teachers’ remuneration, expressed in terms of purchasing  power parity, compares unfavourably with most of surveyed 13 professions in the 70

largest cities in the world.

In our report to ILO and Unesco, we pointed to the growing phenomenon of violence  in schools and attacks on academic freedom and tenure for teachers. We also  stressed that Gender equity remains a critically important issue particularly with  respect to pay, violence against women teachers and discrimination in employment.



We also pointed out that, too often, teacher organisations are not included in  consultations and negotiations concerning education reforms. Paradoxically,  the situation is better at international level, where EI is invited to participate in all  major forums where education is discussed, such as the EU, OECD and UNESCO,  actively and inclusively representing the interests of its members. We strongly  believe that such social dialogue and partnership is the “glue” of successful education  reforms.  EI promotes that view repeatedly wherever governments meet, regionally  or internationally.

Colleagues, the key to the future in Australia, as in other countries, is dialogue and  engagement with partners of civil society including the education unions. The  systematic rejection of dialogue has proven to be sterile and unproductive. It is  through dialogue and engagement with civil society that we can build better  education, and a better world.

The world knows you have a particular problem in Australia. A decade ago, education  unions were acknowledged as Partners In Education Reform. But since then, to say  that your Federal Government has kept education unions at arm’s length would be  the understatement of the decade! Why? Such a stance is not in the interests of the  people who work in education, who we represent, nor in the interests of the children  and young people we teach. There is no rationale for such a stance, except for a  purely ideological one.

The visceral and ideological antipathy of your government towards trade unions has  of course become clear for all to see in the laws that have been brought in to  prevent unions from carrying out their normal functions of representing people who  work for a living. For 100 years, since the federation of Australia in 1901, your  country had been considered world-wide as one of the models in terms of respect for  fundamental labour rights. No longer is that the case. When the ILO lists the  countries where fundamental labour rights are systematically violated, Australia is  unfortunately one of them.

5

Let me make it very clear. Australia’s federal laws on workplace relations are in  violation of international labour standards and of conventions that Australia has  signed, ratified and committed to respect. These laws are anti-democratic, for they  are designed to take away the rights of ordinary working people, and to strengthen  the powers of those who run the economy for their own benefit.

It is striking to see that the period when Australia moved steadily away from social  dialogue and social partnership coincides with a period of increase in inequity. In the  country that once prided itself on equality of opportunity, a widening gap has opened  between rich and poor. And, as we have just seen, that gap is also reflected in  education.

Let me just say that a lot of people will be watching the outcome of your federal  elections this year, and let me not beat around the bush - a lot of us believe that  your country, and its citizens, deserve a change!



Globalization

Today, we know that the livelihood of every working family is affected by the global  changes sweeping our economies. No sector of production or provider of services is  spared. And no country is isolated. The global economy is a fact. The information  and communication revolution is a fact. Global transport and movements of peoples  are facts.  It is not a question of being for or against globalisation - it is about what  sort of globalisation we want. Globalisation has meant, inevitably, movements of  peoples, and those who advocate 'law of the jungle' globalisation have ignored the  consequences of those movements, the impact on schools and health services, not to  mention jobs. But they have also shirked their responsibilities to ensure public  resources for our schools. They use globalisation to avoid tax, instead of building up  our public services. All governments feel these pressures.

Migration

The diversity of the world has now come into each of our national societies, into  each of our local communities. A country of immigrants like Australia has an  advantage in the global community of the 21st century, because you began to  confront the challenges of building a multicultural society earlier. You have also  recognized the rights and role of the indigenous people who were there before the  immigrants, and Australia has played a leading role in international mobilization by  indigenous peoples from over 70 countries around the world.

I come from a country - the Netherlands - that was historically one of emigration.  Today, the former emigrant countries have to address the same issues of  multiculturalism as the countries of historical immigration. So do the former colonial  powers - Britain, France and Germany. So do the other industrialized countries -  Italy, the Scandinavians, Japan. There is simply no member country of the OECD  (except perhaps Iceland) where immigration is not an issue.

The reaction to this reality is sometimes frightening. Anti-immigrant political  movements have developed across the OECD countries - from Denmark to Austria to  Britain, France and Italy. So-called mainstream political parties are jockeying to

6

recuperate the slogans of the demagogues. We know you have had the experience  of a government playing cynically on anti-immigrant sentiments for electoral gain.

Nor is the issue of diversity restricted to movements from the South to the North.  There are movements of populations across all the borders of Africa, Latin America,  the Middle-East, Asia and the Pacific.

The demagogues would play on fear and the rejection of those who are different. As  educators, we must recognize the richness that comes from embracing human  diversity. Vicious cycles of extremism and exclusion, now threaten us not just locally

or even nationally, but globally. With slogans dating back to medieval times, but  using the the technologies of the internet and mobile ‘phones, a deadly conflict has  emerged and the world is fearful.

As educators, as citizens, we must dare to imagine together a better world - a world  of justice and fairness and decency, of understanding between cultures and peoples,  of respect for fundamental rights and freedoms, and above all for human dignity. EI  has a responsibility to play its part in developing a vision of the world - based not on  building barriers of ignorance but on building bridges of understanding.

EI and all its member unions have a responsibility in helping create the conditions  that allows societies to be diverse…  There are three specific areas where our  International and its member organizations can make an important difference. First,  promoting democracy and human rights, secondly by helping to achieve quality  education for all inhabitants of this planet, and thirdly, by building a strong,  independent world trade union movement.



New nationalism

I said earlier that globalization is with us to stay, but the question is, what kind of  globalization? Globalization of the law of the jungle, of the rule of the strong over the  weak? Or globalization that takes into account the human and social dimensions?  Many conservative governments are ironically linking policies stated to enhance  competitiveness in the global economy with reassertion of nationalism. That is the  case in Australia, where industrial democracy has been uprooted in the name of  global competitiveness, by a government that played to narrow chauvinism for  electoral purposes by its rejection of asylum seekers. It is the case in one of Europe’s  most populous countries, Poland, which I visited recently, where the government is  reasserting “traditional Polish values” while pressing for changes to make Poland  more competitive. It is the case in Japan, where the Abe government has moved to  insert “obligatory patriotism” as a central feature of the Education Law. Amendments  of the Education Law stating the goals of education to include “respect for traditions  and culture”, and “love of the nation and homeland” are widely seen as preparing  the way for similar amendments to the Japanese Constitution. It is the case in the  United States, where government support for US-based multinational corporations  goes hand in hand with building a 400 kilometer fence to keep out Mexicans.

What is the common picture here?

All these governments, Australia’s included, use the combined arguments of national  patriotism and global competitiveness, to push through policies that serve the short-

7

term interests of their dominant economic groups. This approach is not only immoral,  it is unsustainable over time. It is the responsibility of education unions worldwide,  and of the broader trade union movement, to advocate for a globalization based on  equity, social justice and common rather than competing interests, such as the need  to act together on climate change. Our responsibility to promote understanding  among nations and peoples is not just idealistic pie in the sky. It is vital.

Nationally and internationally there is an unrelenting assault on the very concept of  democratic values and core labour standards. Competition is used to justify the law  of the jungle. I put it to you that globalization should not be used to justify  weakening of standards. Rather, globalization is the very reason why we need to  strengthen standards and reinforce democratic values.

A strong, diverse and independent trade union movement for the 21st  century

We as education unions have a special responsibility and a role to play. But we would  be kidding ourselves if we thought that we could do it alone. I really believe we can  achieve our vision of a better future, but to do it we must build alliances with those  in our societies who are committed like us to social justice.  In fact, this was a key  rationale in the creation of EI.

Today EI, as a forward looking organization, is playing an important role in the  international trade union movement. Last November, in Vienna, a new International  Trade Union Confederation came into being with your former President, Sharan, as  the first President. The new Confederation is independent of all authorities. It is not  beholden to any political, religious, or cultural group. It is committed like EI to  respecting diversity, and combating discrimination of any kind - whether racial,  ethnic, or on the basis of language, sexual orientation, gender, age or socio-economic status. EI will continue to play a strong role as an autonomous Federation  within the Council of Global Unions, which we have helped to form, and came into  being in Brussels just last week.

I must underline the importance of these alliances in our advocacy at the UN, at  agencies such as the World Bank and the IMF, and also when the private sector  meets at the World Economic Forum in Davos. Through our cooperation with the  trade union movement we have very important access to the OECD and to the G8.  Last July, representing the Global Union Federations and EI, I was able to put the  case for Education to President Putin as host of this year’s G8 summit, as I did the  previous year with Prime Minister Blair prior to the Gleneagles summt.

Trade unions have an essential role in our democratic societies. But we have to  rethink the movement. Mobilizing information, mobilizing members, mobilizing  partnerships, using the new tools of the information age, all of this gives new  meaning to the word that underpins our trade union organizations and the  progressive movement. That word is SOLIDARITY. As the economic pendulum has  swung towards the primacy of the market, people know in their hearts that there is  another dimension to human interaction. Without solidarity, no human community  survives for long. That is as true for the global community as it is for a village.

We know that in country after country there is no peace, that democracy remains a  forlorn hope, that social justice is non-existant and that equality is a distant illusion.

8



We know that human rights are trampled and violated. We know that all too often  the law of the jungle prevails over the law of justice, that the strong are allowed to  crush the weak, and that governments that should protect and defend their citizens  repress them instead.

We know that ongoing violence and conflict is the reality today in Iraq, Afghanistan,  Kashmir, Sri Lanka, Somalia, Sudan and in the Middle-East. Democracy is not to be  found in North Korea nor in China. Equality does not exist for women in Saudia  Arabia. Trade union rights are violated in Ethiopia and Cambodia.

And yet, it would be all too easy to say that the absence of democracy or equality or  respect for human and trade rights are problems somewhere else. Those same  issues are are  confronting us today in the very countries that have prided  themselves on their democratic traditions. I mean the United States. And I mean  Australia.

Colleagues, you are engaged today in a great struggle to reassert the values in  education and society of respect for rights, not just for the few, not just for the  privileged, but for all, at home and abroad. Rights for all: that is why we call them  human rights. There is no issue that is more important as we move forward in the  21st century. It includes the right for all to quality education, with quality teachers. It  includes the right to all to organize themselves in representative organizations so as  to have say in the destinies and wellbeing of their families. It includes the right to  social justice.

Your struggle to assert these rights, for all, is the struggle of your colleagues around  the world. Just as you in AEU have so effectively supported the rights of colleagues  in many other countries, so your colleagues support you. Your success will not only  be success for yourselves, but also for a future generation of young Australians. And  it will be a success that we will all wish to share.

I wish you a successful conference. And I wish you success beyond the conference,  as you return to your schools and communities, to push back that pendulum so that  once again decency, fairness and human solidarity will prevail.











