THE RULE OF LAW----LOOKING BEHIND THE ICON

The Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory

Blackburn Lecture--15 May 2007

The Honorable Murray Wilcox QC

former Judge of the Federal Court of Australia

Nowadays the word  "icon" is much misused. But the word

retains the traditional meaning of an object of  particular admiration, even veneration. In that sense,  the concept of the rule of law, which we celebrate this  week, would, I believe, be widely accepted (not only by  lawyers) to be an icon of Australian society.

At the heart of the concept of the rule of law is the  idea that a government is entitled to control  individuals, or to punish them for their behaviour, only  to the extent it has been authorised to do so by a law  previously validly made. The rule of law contrasts with  the type of idiosyncratic, despotic control

of people

that has occurred, at some stage during its history, in  virtually every country.

Of course, everybody, except (presumably) the despot  himself and his henchmen, will prefer the rule of law to  despotic rule. There is no doubt that Australians do. The  idea that governments may infringe individuals' liberties  or legal rights only when so authorised by a previously

enacted law is deeply embedded in our culture. The  widespread concern over the treatment of David Hicks  furnishes evidence of this.

David Hicks aside, it must be said that Australian  governments do generally observe the rule of law, in the  sense that they are careful to ensure they are covered by  appropriate legislation before deliberately taking an  action that is disadvantageous to any particular

individual. It may then fairly be said that Australia is  a country governed in accordance with the rule of law.

However, it does not necessarily follow that individual  rights are well protected in Australia.

Whether or not adherence to the rule of law adequately  protects vulnerable people depends on the content of that  law. The apartheid system in South Africa was based upon  an enormous body of law, all passed by South African

Parliaments duly elected from time to time in accordance  with the then racially discriminatory Constitution. The  South African judges of the apartheid era regarded  themselves as bound by that body of law--rightly,  according to conventional legal theory-- and made orders,

sometimes against their consciences, that we would all  denounce today. We would do this because we would see  those orders as denying what we regard as fundamental  human rights.

South Africa is not the only country that can provide  examples of governmental and/or judicial decisions which,  though based on validly made laws, we would all regard as  being totally unacceptable. Think Nazi Germany. Think

slavery in the United States, noting that, for  70 years,

slavery co-existed with a constitutionally enshrined Bill  of Rights. This was able to occur because the Bill of  Rights did not contain an equality clause, such as that  contained in s15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and  Freedoms, and most (if not all) other modern charters.

Closer to home, think of some of the past laws affecting  indigenous Australians and those implementing the White  Australia Policy.

As these examples indicate, the rule of law, though an  essential element of the adequate protection of  individuals, does not itself ensure that result. The  content of the law is all-important. How then can we best  ensure our laws will always have a content that is  appropriate to that purpose?

No doubt, as in every other sphere of human activity,  perfection is unattainable. However, it seems to me we  can usefully look at two possible steps for improving the  protective effect of our laws. The first step is to  upgrade the law-making process, so as to increase the  prospect that the laws our parliaments enact will take

into account the needs of all members of our diverse  community. The second step is to set some protective  benchmarks with which valid legislation must comply, at  least in the absence of a considered decision to the  contrary.

Theoretically, a dictator may make decrees that are  protective of individuals' rights. However, none of us  would believe this to be likely. How could such a  dictator maintain his hold on power? Unhappily,

experience demonstrates the truth of Lord  Acton's famous

dictum: " All power corrupts and absolute power corrupts  absolutely."

In recent years, we have watched events in Zimbabwe. A  once-democratic and prosperous country, in which the rule  of law was enforced by independent judges, has been laid  waste by a President increasingly inclined to treat the  country as his personal fiefdom, able to be raided for  his own advantage. Significantly, the deterioration  began, some ten years ago, with President Mugabe's  termination of the commissions of the independent,  expatriate judges, who had served the country since it  threw off white rule, and replacement of them by local

judges who were beholden to him. There was never a lack  of law in Zimbabwe; it was just that Mugabe ensured this  law would be construed and applied in a manner favourable  to his wishes.

A similar position applied in the Soviet Union and  other Eastern Bloc countries. There was plenty of law,  but it was enacted by puppet parliaments, whose members  were unresponsive to public opinion, and it was applied  by judges who accepted direction from the General

Secretary of the Communist Party.

In the light of these experiences, it seems to be clear  that, for laws satisfactorily to protect individuals'  rights, they must be freely enacted by members of a  democratically-elected parliament and be construed and  applied by independent judges. If these are necessary  elements of a desirable system of governance, how, in  Australia, do we rate?

Federally, and in every State and Territory, we have  regular free and fair elections, supervised by an  Electoral Commission that is widely admired for its  impartiality and competence. If the vote goes against an  incumbent Australian government, it does not call out the  army or police; it resigns in favour of its successful  opponents. There are no riots in the streets. The new  government is sworn in and gets on with the job. Is this  not enough?

Many would argue it is enough. Australian practice  satisfies the essential minimum requirement for a country  to be described as democratic. However, I emphasise the  word "minimum". The term "democracy" covers a range of

situations. Some countries are more democratic than  others. How does Australia fare? In my view, not very  well. I believe there are serious deficiencies in the  quality of our democracy and, moreover, that the

situation has deteriorated in recent years. I will  explain the basis of this belief.

The 1990 Blackburn Lecture was given by Sir Gera,rd  Brennan, then a Justice (and later Chief Justice) of the  High Court of Australia. It was entitled "Courts,  Democracy and the LawW(l). In that lecture, his Honour  traced the history of the doctrine of separation of  powers and, in particular, the theory of responsible  government taught by people such as Professor A V Dicey.  Sir Gerard said this theory was "the ideal to which the  Australian Constitution gave expression".

However, Sir Gerard went on: "The political and economic  events of the 90 years since Federation have exposed the  fallacies of Dicey's theory or made much of it obsolete.  ... In the last 90 years, the balance of power has  reverted decisively to the Executive Government."(2) He  set out reasons. I need not refer to them all, but it is  pertinent to note this observation:

"Concurrently with the growth of executive power, the  tightening discipline of political parties and the  predilection of the media for individuals on whom to  concentrate attention tied the political fortunes of the  members of the Parliament to the political status and

reputation of party leaders. Members in the governing  party became increasingly dependent on the Ministry for  their chances of re-election; backbench members of the  opposition became increasingly dependent on shadow

cabinets for their chances of governing. The theory of  responsible government, which made the fate of an  Executive Government dependent upon the confidence of the  Parliament was, so to speak, turned on its head by the

political dependence of the majority members of the  Parliament on the Executive Government. Policy  formulation became primarily an Executive function. As  the pressure on legislative time intensified, a virtual  monopoly over initiatives for legislation passed to the

Executive Government. " (3)

Sir Gerard commented that "(t)he risk to democratic  freedom is obvious." He went on to quote a well-known  remark of Lord Hailsham, the long-time Lord Chancellor of  England: "We live under an elective dictatorship,  absolute in theory if hitherto thought tolerable in  practice". (4 )

Lord Hailsham's remark was made as long ago as 1976. Sir  Gerard thought it remained apposite in 1990 and I contend  it is even more apposite today.

Consider how our parliaments operate. Ordinarily,  legislation is first discussed by the Cabinet. We know  little about the workings of Cabinets, because  confidentiality surrounds their deliberations, at least  until the release of Cabinet minutes 30 years later.  However, for the reasons given by Sir Gerard, it seems  likely that the view of the Prime Minister or Premier  will have great influence. Whether or not that is the  case, there is a firm expectation, on both sides of  politics, that, after Cabinet's decision is made, all  members of the Cabinet will close ranks around that

decision, supporting it publicly, in the Party room and  in the Parliament. And, of course, on both sides of  politics, backbenchers are expected to support the Party  room decision, whether they agree with it or not. This  has always been the rule in the Labor Party. At one time,  the non-Labor parties prided themselves on being more  tolerant of dissent; however, not any longer. Consider  the outcry last year against the handful of government  backbenchers in the federal Parliament who expressed  opposition to the legislation(5) that would have mandated  that all asylum-seekers be sent to Nauru. Even though

this might reasonably have been considered a matter of  conscience that was not critical to the government's  ability to govern, the dissentients' reasons for concern  were not debated on their merits; rather, the  dissentients were chided for disunity and told this would  imperil colleagues in more marginal seats.

The effect of the practices and attitudes I have listed  is that it is possible for legislation to be enacted by a  parliament notwithstanding that it is contrary to the  real view of a majority of members. Is this democracy?

The problem I have mentioned would not be so serious if  pressure to toe the line was confined to legislation that  was critical to a government's ability to survive (such  as providing supply) or was a direct implementation of an

election promise, when it might be argued that all  government members had a moral obligation to support  delivery of the promise. However, it is not so confined;  rather, if the government has the numbers, it is applied  to all legislation; even legislation not mentioned at the  preceding election.

I said "if the government has the numbers" because there  have been occasions, especially in State parliaments,  when the government of the day depended on independents  to stay in office, but was not guaranteed their support

for all the legislation it might put before the  parliament. When that has been the position, government  legislation has sometimes been voted down. However, so  far as I recall, nobody ever argued this meant the  government needed to resign. The point, of course, is  that the merit of a particular Bill is logically distinct

from the question whether a particular government should  be allowed to continue in office. And yet, when a  government has a majority in the lower house of the  parliament, it is regularly suggested that defeat of a  particular Bill will be fatal to the government. This is

a convenient line for a Prime Minister or Premier to  push; it is another means of maintaining the leader's  control.

Occasionally, pressure is placed upon a government to  allow a "conscience vote" on a particular Bill. When that  happens, the parliament comes alive. Members, on both  sides of the house, say what they really think and are  able to influence the form of the legislation by moving  amendments. They do what they were elected to do. The  debate is usually engrossing, often quite moving. People  ask why this cannot happen more often. I ask why this  cannot be the norm, leaving aside Bills that are critical  to the government's ability to govern or are a direct

implementation of an election promise. Are electors so  stupid that they cannot see there is room for different  viewpoints within a party, notwithstanding a shared  opinion that their party should continue to govern? How

ironic that the parliament, theoretically the master of  the government of the day, gets to do its job properly  only with the permission of that government!

In recent times, the "elected dictatorship' syndrome,  identified by Lord Hailsham, has begun seriously to blur

the dichotomy between Federal and State functions and  powers which lies at the heart of the Australian  Constitution. Consider three recent examples.

First, in late January 2007,the Prime Minister announced  that the Commonwealth would make available the sum of $10  billion towards alleviation of the problems of the  Murray-Darling river system. This expenditure was to be  dependent on the relevant four States transferring to the  Commonwealth the powers over management of the river

system that had been left to them in 1901 under the  Constitution. Although the precise powers to be  transferred have yet to be specified, it is obvious that  any effective transfer of management will result in an  enormous expansion of Commonwealth power in the relevant  parts (which are substantial) of the affected States.

I do not wish to express an opinion as to whether this  expenditure, and expansion of power, would be a good  thing or a bad thing. I mention the proposal only  because it was subsequently revealed that it was neither

considered by the federal Cabinet nor scrutinised by  Treasury prior to the Prime Minister's announcement. It  was always apparent that the proposal had not then been  considered by any Parliament, but it might reasonably  have been assumed it had been carefully considered at an  Executive level. However, not so. A proposal involving  both the expenditure of a considerable sum of money (even  by Commonwealth standards) and a major increase in  Commonwealth powers and responsibilities was put before  the public on the authority of one man. Because that one  man was the Prime Minister, upon whose performance and

authority so many government members depend for their  chances of re-election, government members (even if  Ministers) were effectively precluded from voicing any  concerns they or their constituents (or, if Ministers,

their departments) might hold.

My second example concerns education. A few weeks ago,  the Commonwealth Education Minister pushed her State and  Territory counterparts to agree to a system of  performance based remuneration for teachers. They

refused. That might reasonably have been thought to be  the end of the matter. However, it was announced in the  Commonwealth Budget last week that, from 2009,  Commonwealth contributions to public school funding will  be dependent upon the introduction of performance based  remuneration. Although the States and Territories  contribute much more than the Commonwealth to the cost of

running public schools, and have constitutional

responsibility for this area, their judgment on this  issue is to be overridden. My question on the issue is  not whose judgment is correct, but who should get to  decide.

The difficulty faced by the States and Territories is  that the fiscal imbalance between the Commonwealth, on  the one hand, and the States and Territories, on the  other, makes it essential for the latter to receive  assistance from the former. And this assistance comes in  the form of special purpose grants, commonly called "tied  grants", to which the Commonwealth can, and does, attach  any conditions its Minister pleases.

The third example is the Prime Minister's proposal, last  month, for the States to transfer their product liability  powers to the Commonwealth in return for Commonwealth  funds .

There is nothing new about the Commonwealth using its  financial muscle to influence policy in areas outside  those assigned to it by the Constitution. However, the  practice seems to have accelerated in recent years and to  have increasingly descended to minutiae such as the

former Commonwealth Education Minister's insistence on  all schools having flagpoles and conducting flag-  observance ceremonies. It seems inherently wrong that,  without any constitutional or parliamentary mandate, the  Commonwealth should overrule State and Territory  Ministers and officials in respect of management issues  within the latter's constitutional domain. It must be  destructive of morale for departmental officers to have  to carry out their work under the shadow of outside

interference like this.

Another result of the fiscal imbalance, and federal use  of tied grants, is the inability of the public to  determine who is to blame for unsatisfactory services.  There is widespread current criticism of the public  hospital system. Which government is to blame for this? A

significant portion of public hospital funding is  provided by the Commonwealth, yet public hospitals are  managed by the States and Territories. The Commonwealth  blames the deficiencies of the public hospital system on

State and Territorial mismanagement. The States and  Territories say they are starved of funds. Who is  correct? It is impossible for any ordinary member of the  public to know. So accountability, which lies at the  heart of democratic government, is lost.

The Commonwealth is able, by use of the corporations  power, substantially to impose its will in relation to  virtually any area of State responsibility. As was  demonstrated last year in the Industrial Relations  case(6), that statement is true even in respect of a  governmental area that is expressly assigned to the  Commonwealth on only a limited basis, the balance of

responsibility being left with the States.

In his dissenting judgment in the Industrial Relations  case, Justice Ian Callinan commented (7) upon the  prospect of the powers of each of the State parliaments  being progressively reduced until "it becomes no more  than an impotent debating society". Perhaps we have not  yet reached that stage. However, I believe we are already  seeing the debilitating effect of Canberra's dominance.  State and Territory elections tend to be tepid affairs  devoid of passion and, more importantly, with little  debate about fundamental policy; merely a haggle about  details of the implementation of generally accepted  policy. No doubt this situation substantially stems from  the fiscal and constitutional constraints binding the

States and Territories. But I believe another factor--the  consequence of the first--is the uninspiring nature of  many members, on both sides, of our State and Territory  parliaments. On the day of the recent New South Wales  election, an opinion poll was published. It revealed that

51% of respondents thought the Government did not deserve  to be re-elected, but 57% thought the Opposition did not  deserve election in its place.

Considering all these factors, I am driven to wonder  whether our country might be better served-- at least  governed more transparently and accountably-- if we  openly acknowledged that the Commonwealth had won its  power struggle with the States and the obsolescence of  the distribution of powers thrashed out at the  Constitutional Conventions of the

1890s, and thereafter

written into our Constitution? Might it be better  expressly to amend the Constitution so as to vest all  legislative power in the Commonwealth, I suggest subject  to provisions designed to protect members of  disadvantaged and minority groups, but with  administration of all services conducted at a regional  level?

It can cogently be argued this would provide Australians  with the best of all worlds: legislation that operated  uniformly throughout the nation, constitutional  protection for the more vulnerable members of the  population (at least in relation to generally accepted

human rights) and administrative officers who were more  easily accessible even than those of the (mostly large)  existing States.

Although this idea has been around, and argued by many  discerning people, for some time, I recognise that many  people sincerely believe that, in a country the size of  Australia, it is best to retain a federal system of  government. I respect that view, but I suggest those who

hold it need to do more to improve the working of that  federal system. If the federal system is to be retained,  there is need for a fundamental re-appraisal of the  distribution of powers effected by the Constitution. Each  level of government should be given clear responsibility  for whatever functions are best dealt with at that level,  without interference by any other level of government.  And there would need to be a review of the revenues  available to each level of government, so that none is  put under the power of the other's purse.

Whether we are talking about moving to a unitary system  of government or merely overhauling our federal system,  we are talking major constitutional change. Of course,  any such change would require approval at a

referendum and we all know how few referendum proposals  have been approved. The pursuit of either change would  stir up such a hornet's nest of opposition, from those  who would consider themselves to be personally  disadvantaged by the change, that there would be no  chance of the referendum being carried; that is, if we  took the usual course of proposing that the change have

immediate effect.

But what if we took a different course? What if the  legislation provided for a delayed effect, so that the  new regime only came into operation some years later?

This strange notion, as you might think it, came into my  head as long ago as 1983. In that year, you will recall,  the Hawke government was elected with an announced  program that included many items of a constitutional or  legal nature. One of the promised items was a pledge to

initiate a referendum to amend the Constitution so as to  provide for Commonwealth four-year fixed parliamentary  terms. A few months after the election, Hawke was asked  when he would move on this promise. He replied to the

following effect: "Well, I've been thinking about that. I  do not see why I should be the first Prime Minister since  Federation to be unable to decide when to hold an  election." Hawke's personal disadvantage had trumped his

assessment of what was desirable in the public interest.  Had the issue been a change that would take effect in,  say, 2001, he may have seen it differently. As we know  from the famous Kirribilli agreement, not even Bob Hawke

expected to last as long as that.

You may reply: "Well if a particular change is a good  idea, how can you justify postponing its operation for a  decade or so?" My answer would be a pragmatic one. ~etter  a delayed reform than none at all. If Hawke had pursued  the promise of four-year fixed terms, but delayed until  2001, this would now be the rule.

In the context of a possible switch to a unitary form of  government, I mentioned constitutional protection for the  more vulnerable members of society. I had in mind a  series of entrenched rights and freedoms such as those

included in the Canadian and South African constitutions,  to mention but two of the modern charters of rights.  These charters, unlike the United States Bill of Rights,  both contain an explicit guarantee of equality before the

law, perhaps the most important guarantee of all.  However, adoption of such a charter is not dependent on  switching to a unitary system of government; it would be  equally useful in a federal system. It is an issue that  has previously been considered, without a positive  outcome. It is an issue which ought now be revisited, in  my opinion.

I do not wish to take time today arguing the case in  favour of the adoption of a charter of rights, especially  because the topic has recently been well-ventilated in  this Territory, in the context of debate about the Human

R i g h t s  A c t  2 0 0 4 .  Victoria has followed the lead of the  ACT by enacting the C h a r t e r  o f  Human R i g h t s  a n d

R e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s  2 0 0 6 ,  which is not yet in full

operation. Experience in these two jurisdictions will  help to inform the debate as to the desirability of a  similar initiative elsewhere, including federally.

However, I would like to comment on one argument that is  often put against the notion of a charter of rights. It  has often been said, most recently by the new Attorney-  General of New South Wales, that a charter of rights is  undemocratic because it gives to unelected judges the  last word about legislation, rather than allowing this to  be a decision of elected parliamentarians.

Whether or not that is true depends upon the terms of  the charter. One of the problems about this debate is  that people tend to look at the United States Bill of

Rights, the oldest and most famous charter, and to assume  any charter that may be adopted elsewhere will follow its  essential structure. Yet it need not do so. The Canadian  Charter of Rights and Freedoms, for example, has a clause  allowing the relevant legislature specifically to  override a court's finding that a particular enactment,  or part of it, is invalid because it infringes a  protected right. The legislature does this by re-enacting  the impugned legislation, with a clause declaring it is  to have effect notwithstanding the court's decision.

A similar situation applies in jurisdictions where the  rights are contained in a statute, rather than a  constitution, for example New Zealand and the United  Kingdom. The fact that the parliament is able to have the  last word does not make the protection futile. Experience  shows that, in practice, legislatures take considerable  notice of the court's findings. Overriding is rare.

Constitutional amendments are not the only way in which  we may improve our system of governance, and therefore  the responsiveness of our laws to the wishes of the  people. Much that may usefully be done does not depend  upon constitutional change. An important initiative would  be to improve our parliamentary procedures. Question time  was designed to provide an opportunity for members of the  parliament to obtain information from Ministers. In  theory, it is the most direct and important way in which  Ministers are made accountable to the parliament.  However, it no longer works like that. Question time  today is highly structured. The questions are divided in

advance between the government and opposition, the  government members' questions being mostly "Dorothy  Dixers" that will allow the Minister to make a statement  about some topic. The opposition front bench tends to hog  the questions available to their side, targeting the  topic of the day. Ministers make it a point of honour  never to deal with the substance of the question but to  deliver themselves of a prepared statement that most  often has only a tangential association with the question  that was asked. Any protest about the Minister's failure  to address the question is invariably brushed aside by

the Speaker and often ends with one or more opposition  members being thrown out of the House.

I have often thought how different the situation would be  in a court of law, where the presiding judge would insist  that the witness address the question, not make a  statement about something else. I do not put the  difference down to the fact that, ordinarily, Speakers  lack legal training, but rather that they are usually

members of the same political party as the Minister and  the highly partisan atmosphere that infects modern  parliaments. It is perhaps too much to expect a Speaker  to rein in a senior member of the party upon whose  electoral standing he or she depends for re-election.

As you may know, the tradition in the House of Commons  is that a newly-elected Speaker immediately resigns from  his or her party and no longer attends party meetings. In  return, the tradition is that the Speaker will not be  opposed by any other party at the following election. The  development of such a tradition in Australian parliaments  would go a long way towards restoring fairness in  parliamentary debate and utility to question time.

Perhaps this is beginning to be realised. Although they  did not need to do so, from a numbers point of view, last  week the Labor majority in the New South Wales  Legislative Assembly voted for an independent Speaker,  the Premier referring to the Westminster tradition. It  will be interesting to see what difference this makes.

I earlier suggested the quality of our democracy had  deteriorated in recent years. The position at federal  level was examined in a recently published book entitled  "Silencing

DissentU(8). The book describes the way in  which the Howard Government has methodically reduced the  possibility of criticism from many of the institutions  that historically have been important in advising  governments and/or alerting citizens to deficiencies in  government policies or actions: universities, the

scientific research community, non-government  organisations, the media, the public service, statutory  authorities and the military and intelligence services.

Time does not permit me to set out the wealth of  instances cited by the various contributors to this work.  Particularly worrying aspects of their account include  the way in which the Government has prevented  communication of information to the public by publicly-

funded experts such as scientists employed by CSIRO and  has taken over the role of the Australian Research  Council in determining which academic research grant  applications will be funded. Manipulation of academic  research programs, and suppression of discomforting

scientific conclusions, must adversely affect the quality  of our democracy.

Much more is spelled out in "Silencing Dissent". It  includes the emasculation of Freedom of Information laws,  dramatically illustrated by the High Court's decision  last year(9) to treat as conclusive a certificate of the

Commonwealth Treasurer that it would be contrary to the  public interest to disclose documents concerning the  effect of bracket creep on the First Home Ownersf Scheme,  and the diminished ability of parliamentary committees to  obtain information about governmental activities.

Information is critical to accountability. When  information is suppressed, democracy is diminished.

At some time during the next six months there will be a  '

federal election. I do not imagine its outcome will be  decided by reference to issues like those I have  mentioned today. Yet, on both sides of politics, there  are people who understand the importance of these issues.

Is it too much to hope that, when the sound and fury of  the election has abated, whoever is then in power will  look beyond immediate political goals and consider some  of the issues I have raised? Is it too much to expect  that societies of lawyers, who do understand these  issues, will encourage them to do so?

(1) Brennan, " C o u r t s ,  D e m o c r a c y  a n d  t h e  Law" 7 August  1990.  (2) Op cit at 7  (3) Op cit at 8-9

(4) Op cit at 10  (5) Migration Amendment (Designated Unauthorised  Arrivals) Bill 2006.  ( 6 )  N e w  S o u t h  W a l e s  v C o m m o n w e a l t h  (2006) HCA 52

(7) At 819  (8) Ed. Hamilton and Maddison, Allen and Unwin, 2007.  (9) McKinnon v Secretary, Department of Treasury (2006) HCA 4 5 .

