SPEECH NOTES  Minister for Health and Ageing  Leader of the House of Representatives ,I ”+>;>;p&

Tony Abbott MHR  SPEECH NOTES FOR DUHIG ADDRESS  ST LEO’S COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND, BRISBANE  THURSDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2007

THE ROLE OF THE CHURCH IN THE LIFE OF THE WORLD

There tends to be a “pygmies standing on the shoulders of giants” sense about any memorial  address but especially one recalling the legacy of Sir James Duhig, Coadjutor and then  Archbishop of Brisbane from 19 12 to 1965.

In his fine biography, Father TP Boland notes that “James the Builder” was responsible for  the construction of more than 500 ecclesiastical buildings (churches, schools, religious  institutes and hospitals) over the 53 years of his tenure. In the two decades after 1945, when  he was already 74 years old, he opened 32 parishes, 30 primary schools, seven secondary

colleges for boys and 11 for girls. In these two decades alone, he introduced into the  Archdiocese eight new orders of priests, one of brothers and eight of nuns. As well, he  corresponded extensively with state and Commonwealth politicians about development  issues, founded two university colleges, sat on the Queensland University Senate for nearly

50 years and was a notable patron of the arts.

These years marked the high tide of the institutional church in Australia (as they did in the  rest of the English-speaking world). Catholics were increasingly part of the Australian  mainstream but kept a distinct religious identity based on strong parish life and a heroically  maintained separate school system.

Now, there are even more parishes, more schools and more hospitals plus a whole new  apparatus of social service apart fi-om that naturally flowing from parish, school and extended  family. There are more Catholic institutions but there’s less of a distinctive Catholic  subculture, as has been noted by Cardinal George Pell, the modern Australian prelate most  notably in the mould of Duhig and his great contemporary, Melbourne’s Archbishop Daniel  Mannix.

As Pell noted in a recent address to teachers, the percentage of Catholics who regularly attend  Mass has declined from 50 per cent in 1950 to just 16 per cent at present. A survey of young  Catholics found that just 10 per cent believe “only one religion is true” (compared to 34 per  cent for other Christians); 75 per cent believe it’s “OK to pick and choose beliefs” (compared  to a national average of 36 per cent); and 56 per cent of young Catholics believe “morals are  relative” (much higher than the 40 per cent of other Chstians but mirroring the national  average of 57 per cent).

It’s good that Catholics are prepared to learn from the views of others. It’s good that modern  Popes don’t echo their medieval predecessor who declared that “it’s absolutely necessary for  salvation that every creature be subject to the Roman Pontiff ’. Still, accepting that there are  provisional elements even to religious truth is not to abandon the central claims of Christ and  his Church.

That there has been a serious decline in the self-confidence of Australian Catholicism cannot  credibly be denied. Rising self-confidence in the Pentecostal churches and some recovery in  self-confidence among evangelical Anglicans can hardly compensate for the loss of belief  among the members of what’s by far the largest Christian denomination. Perhaps there are  the seeds of renewal in the World Youth Day preparations, largely in the hands of members

of the Catholic students association. I hope this is not wishful thinking because Western  civilisation is almost unimaginable without the stimulus of Christian faith.

Duhig’s works testify to his faith. It was a life of prodigious activity all dedicated to the  greater glory of God. Boland recounts the story of his final trip abroad. The well-connected  Archbishop had organised his party of 700 pilgrims to walk in the gardens of Windsor Palace.  “To be received by the King with hundreds of Australian Roman Catholics, just as Roman

Catholics” writes Boland “meant that all the battles with sectarianism, the hilltop shnnes  laboriously set on Brisbane’s strategic heights, the expedients he was reduced to in paying for  them, the education campaign to foster faith and launch the Austral-Irish on the road to  affluence, all had been worthwhile. His life was justified”. As the Monarch moved back  towards the castle, Boland notes, the Archbishop led the pilgrims in singing “God Save the  King”.

Duhig’s trip culminated in a visit to Broadford, in Ireland, where he had been born. The  parish priest of nearby Dromcolliher had read of the reception at Windsor and refused to  shake the hand that had shaken the hand of the King. Even so, the returning son was asked to  bless the “Mass Rock” of Monogea high on a hill dominating the whole country. Boland

writes: “One thousand people ascended the bleak mountainside in heavy rain. They climbed  into cloud. As he unveiled the monument and the Mass commenced, the sun appeared and  Limerick, its people, its past, its continuing stock and faith stretched to the edges of sight and  memory.. .Like Moses on (the Mountain) (Duhig) saw his promised land. In it, his long life,  his land, his faith and his culture, (and) those of the Australian church he served were in his

sight green, living and enduring. Past, present and future were telescoped into a moment of  benediction”.

This is the faith and culture that has shaped our world. It’s as natural to love it as it is to love  our parents: not uncritically and not set in a time warp but with a resolve not to lose our grip  on the Cross. It’s good that the students of this College which Duhig founded remember him  with this annual dinner and lecture. Perhaps, in future, it might also be preceded by Mass,

even if that meant long confession queues, the better to honour the Archbishop’s memory.

When convinced that the interests of his people or the values of his faith were at risk, Duhig  could take on the role  of turbulent priest. Prior to the 1949 election, Duhig attacked the  policies of the then-Chifley Labor Government as “cunning and designing.. .a deadly blow to

ambition and enterprise.. .(and) poor value for money”. His repeated message was:  “socialism is the forerunner of communism”. Boland notes that he always began with “praise  for historic Labor” before adding that the Party had moved far away from “the path which its  founders so wisely chose and so firmly adhered to”.

2

Today’s Bishops are almost endearingly mild by comparison. By contrast with Duhig’s  thunderbolts, last month’s election statement from the Australian Bishops Conference was  almost an endorsement of aspects of Government policy. It reiterated the Church’s stand on  life issues (where the Government has introduced new pregnancy support services and

sponsored the Andrews Bill). It demanded the “legal recognition of the unique nature of  marriage between a man and a woman” which the Government has done. It called for “tax  arrangements and social service support” to “strengthen.. .families and reduce.. .the pressures  on them”. The Government’s policies have improved the real income of average single  income families with children by 41 per cent since 1996. These families may not be  comfortable but collectively they are certainly better off.

The Statement said that school funding models “should assist parents in choosing the  education they want for their children”. The Government has abolished the new schools  policy, which effectively banned new Catholic schools and it’s massively expanded funding.  The Statement warned of the “increasing cost burden to families.. .reliant on health services”.  The Government has introduced a new Medicare safety net for just such circumstances (and  the Opposition is still pledged to abolish it). “Mental health is an area of particular need”, the

Statement said. The Government has pledged an extra $1.9 billion for mental health  including, for the first time, Medicare cover for psychologist consultations.

“More than ever”, the Statement said, “we need cooperation at all levels  of government to

implement policies which will safeguard our water resources”. As it happened, this is  precisely what the Howard Government offered and the Victorian Labor Government  sabotaged. All that was missing from the Statement (and I did look hard to find it) was an  acknowledgment that Government policies had, at least in considerable measure, addressed

the issues which the Bishops raised.

Governments should not expect gratitude. People have a right to raise their expectations. The  more a government provides, the more it will be expected to provide. On behalf of the nine  Catholics who comprise fully half the Howard Cabinet, I should thank the Bishops for their  Statement which at least was more encouraging than the opinion polls.

Who could disagree with the Statement that “the proper balance between the rights of the  employer and the rights of the employee always needs to be maintained”. Still, are these  rights best guaranteed by unions or by the buoyant economy which has added 2 million new  jobs and a 20 per cent increase in real wages since 1996? The Statement said that “all asylum

seekers, regardless of how they arrive.. .should have their claim processed in Australia  according to international convention”. Except for those arriving on offshore islands, this is  what happens. I suspect it’s the look as much as the reality of the Government’s policy which  people find objectionable, even though it has all-but-stopped the people smuggling trade and

its human toll.

The Bishops’ Statement declared “that it is not God’s way to oppose violence with greater  violence”. I suppose this must have been what Archbishop Duhig was driving at when he  said, in 1940, that “Catholics would rather be called on to fight for Europe’s traditional  civilisation than have the day of reckoning deferred by an alliance with those who openly  declare war on God”.

3

Of course, the Church should be heard on great issues of state. There is a place for prophets  in public life calling us to be our best selves. But politics is difficult terrain especially for  Bishops of whom so much is expected. There is no less political diversity within  congregations than there is religious diversity within political parties. In the Labor Party, for  instance, people of deep Christian faith have to coexist with the 30 (out of 60) Labor  Members of the House of Representatives who took an affirmation rather than an oath on the

Bible at the commencement of the current Parliament. People don’t always expect moral  leadership from politicians but they do from Bishops if they choose to involve themselves in  contentious political issues. That’s why theirs is the harder job.

So how could the Church reinforce the moral authority and sense of purpose which inspired  James Duhig? Perhaps, by finding new roles that no one else seems ready to fill.

In times past, people made sacrifices for the Church because it asked them to in a good cause.  For 100 years, numerous young Australians entered the orders of teaching brothers and nuns  because it was necessary for the creation and survival of a Catholic school system. These  vocations more-or-less stopped once state aid meant teachers could be paid a salary to  support a family.

In remote Indigenous townships today, the problem is not so much lack of money or even  lack of staff but lack of staff who regard their work as a life rather than as a temporary  posting. The missionaries of former times had their faults but many of them were buried in  the places and among the people they served. To really make a difference, the Government’s  intervention in the Northern Territory (which is now a matter of bipartisan agreement)  requires at least some senior staff to put down roots in these communities.

If the nurse’s children attend the local clinic, the teacher’s go to the local school and the  policeman’s run the gauntlet of local streets, local people will be confident that the system is  finally working for them. But this takes the type of commitment that money can’t buy. The  Church can’t run places in the future as it might have in the past, but it can still serve them.

How many religious people would be prepared to live in an Indigenous community as well as  lobby on its behalf? That would be taking the “preferential option for the poor’’ very seriously  indeed and would be a modern way of dedicating one’s life to God.

ENDS

4

