Sun, 27th January 2008

SPEECH AT 2008 YOUNG LIBERALS  CONVENTION, PERTH - RENEWING OUR  SENSE OF MISSION  The Hon Tony Abbott MHR   Shadow Minister for Families, Community Services, Indigenous  Affairs and the Voluntary Sector

Good afternoon Ladies and Gentlemen. Defeat is a bruising business but  despondency is a temptation that the Liberal Party must resist at all  costs. It’s not justified and will make our problems worse. Kevin Rudd must be the first ever  Opposition leader who projected himself as an echo of the prime minister he wanted to replace.  The recent election must be the only time in Australian history when the Opposition campaigned  against the Government but not most of its policies. Despite everything, we are only a three per  cent swing, at most, away from government.

Around Australia, Labor has out-politicked the Liberal Party but not out-governed us. The Howard  Government’s critics attacked its values, motives and integrity but almost never its competence.  Between 1996 and 2007, there were more than 2.2 million new jobs, real average wages  increased by 21 per cent, and Australians’ real net wealth per head doubled.

This happened because of good policies in Australia, not China. The Howard Government didn’t  shirk the policy changes previously considered politically impossible such as shifting taxes from  income to spending, expecting people to work for the dole, introducing AWAs, and enforcing the  rule of law in sectors such as the construction industry. Of course, if my neighbour’s wealth has  increased much faster than mine, I don’t necessarily appreciate being told I’m better off. Even so,  a big increase in total national wealth almost certainly beats a small one. Temporarily submerged  in the after-glow of Labor’s win, is the fact that the Howard Government was probably the only  competent administration in the country.

Australia is a confident, outward looking country, at least in part because the Howard Government  thought that people should “have a go” in more things than sport. Australians have long had very  high rates of home ownership. Today, more Australians are self-employed than belong to trade  unions. We have among the world’s highest rates of share ownership, private health insurance  and independent school attendance. These lasting cultural shifts are unlikely to succumb to the  latent hostility of the Labor Party.

The ultimate tribute to the Howard Government was the fact that the Opposition kept agreeing  with it on tax, water, immigration, national security, health, schools, and welfare. This will be of  little consolation as Labor quietly guts the policies it claimed to support. Still, for all the misjudged  politics of its fourth term, no one could credibly make the accusation against the Howard

Government, so often levelled at the state Labor Governments, that it was all spin and no  substance.

The measure of the Howard Government’s success is the policy that Labor won’t change despite  its yearning to do so. The private health insurance rebate won’t go and Labor will pay a heavy  electoral price for “improving” it in ways which damage current beneficiaries. The same applies to  private school funding. Boat people will continue to be detained although not on Nauru. Australian  forces will not be entirely withdrawn from Iraq and will stay in Afghanistan for as long as other  countries maintain their current commitment. Unfair dismissal laws will not be reapplied to small

Page 1 of 5

union-made awards. Still, all new policy will reflect Labor’s values, not the Liberal Party’s, and  existing policy will be administered in accordance with the new government’s priorities, not those  of its creators.

The longer the Howard Government lasted, the more that was expected of it. Eventually, it was  “fitted up” for crumbling roads, clogged ports and struggling hospitals even though these were all  the state governments’ fault. Paradoxically, the better it fixed the problems that were its  responsibility, the more it was expected to fix the problems that weren’t. In this sense, the Howard  Government was a victim of its own success while federal Labor reaped a perverse political  dividend from state Labor’s incompetence.

Once the Labor Party chose a leader with no past, the “it’s time” factor became almost irresistible.  To the public, it seemed that the vision of 1996 had all been achieved. We looked short of  inspiration, if not energy. Our new ideas, such as Work Choices, could be characterised as nasty  surprises sprung on people after the Government won an unexpected senate majority.

New policies might have helped but only if they could have overcome the response: “if this is such  a good idea why didn’t you try it before”. The problem with changing the leader - the standard  response to bad polls - was that every poll over the last 12 months of the former Government’s life  showed that John Howard was more popular than the Government he led. Paul Keating won the  1993 election because of doubts about the then Opposition, not because a former treasurer was  able to remake himself as prime minister. Last year, Morris Iemma was able to present himself as  a “new” premier of NSW because he had been little more than a bit player in the by-then wholly  discredited Carr Government.

History’s verdict on Howard should not be “the man who stayed too long”. To have retired, full of  honours, 12 months before a thumping defeat, would have been cutting and running. He deserved  the lion’s share of credit for the Government’s success and has rightly taken responsibility for its  ultimate defeat. He is entitled to be judged as one of Australia’s best prime ministers and to rival  Menzies as the greatest Liberal.

Still, as part of the Liberal Party’s renewal, we have to face up to the ways in which we contributed  to our own downfall. The campaign launch featured sound new policies but gave the impression  that people’s problems could be addressed by hand-outs. For all the political danger it posed, we

should have tackled the dysfunctional federation which is by far the biggest political challenge  facing Australia, especially the dog’s breakfast of divided responsibilities in health. It may not have  changed the result but it would have been a fifth term agenda worth fighting for. It would have  been the sort of political challenge that absolutely required a leader of John Howard’s stature and  undoubted conservatism.

After it had lost power in Canberra in March 1996, the biggest mistake that Labor supporters made  was to conclude that they’d been beaten by a worse team. For years, Labor thought that the  defeat had been a horrible mistake by an electorate which didn’t really know what it was doing. If  that was how the Keating Government reacted to losing, it would be understandable if a much  better government were tempted to blame ungrateful voters. It would be an even bigger mistake,  though. In politics, as in commerce, the customer is always right. The only people who have never  lost a democratic election are the voters. Successful politicians need not like election results but  they have to respect them and must always learn from them.

Work Choices was a big problem because it undermined the faith of the Howard battlers who had  always been the difference between winning and losing. It gave the union movement a credible  excuse to spend more on anti-government TV ads than both major parties spent in the election  campaign. The failure to defend it in campaign advertising (on the grounds that Work Choices was  “Labor’s issue, not ours”) reinforced a perception that it might actually be indefensible. The fifth  term agenda struck voters grown accustomed to good economic times as mere business as usual.  Most of all, the scare campaign didn’t work because Kevin Rudd seemed an unlikely ogre.

Handicapped by longevity, leadership questions, negative campaigning and with no striking fifth  term agenda, the loss could have been far worse. The difference between 53 per cent and 47 per  cent of the two-party-preferred vote, between a 16 seat majority in 2004 and an 11 seat deficit in  2007, was not between getting everything right then and getting everything wrong now. Instead, it  was a few key mistakes suggesting that a good government might have been past its prime. Even  a 5 per cent swing does not constitute a general repudiation of the Liberal Party; rather it was a  direction to lift our game.

If not at the 2007 poll, certainly for the past two decades, the Liberal Party has been  overwhelmingly on the right side of history. Both in opposition and in government, we have

Page 2 of 5.

provided the intellectual power and political inspiration for the reform agenda that has transformed  Australia. Because we place our faith in the common sense and decency of every human being,  we think that people should be free. This preference for freedom would be almost revolutionary in  the Labor Party but it is an article of faith for us. We are the freedom party but it is freedom on  ethical foundations that we support, in the tradition of Edmund Burke and Adam Smith, because it  offers the surest path to a better society.

As Liberals, we constantly strive to make things better but don’t see more government as the  answer to every problem. Government intervention, when it happens, should support people’s  choices, not take them away. We want to raise people up, not level them down. To us, only in the  absence of opportunity is inequality a sign of unfairness. We would rather see some people doing  better than everyone staying the same. To us, successful government encourages people to be  their best. It doesn’t try to run their lives for them.

Unsurprisingly, for members of a party with both a liberal and a conservative heritage, we think  that “economic liberalism” and “social conservatism” are a natural fit. Freedom is part of the  Western tradition. From the time of Magna Carta and the Provisions of Oxford, the story of  English-speaking civilization is the development of freedom. In our culture, “freedom broadens  slowly down from precedent to precedent”, as Tennyson put it. The puzzlement of academics at a  family-friendly party supposedly supporting family-unfriendly work practices disregards the modern  reality of families that need to have services provided outside traditional business hours.

As conservatives, we have Burke’s sense that a successful society involves keeping faith with  those that came before and those that will come after us. Our instinct is to respect and cherish our  country and its institutions because they have helped to make us what we are. We are naturally  proud of Australia’s increasingly significant role in the anglosphere and its part in protecting  humanity’s universal decencies. We don’t parade disagreements with our friends and allies and  are inclined to give them the benefit of the doubt. We never lightly change the things that really  matter and, when change is necessary, try to change as little as possible. We want to build a  better world but don’t regard this generation as possessing the last word in wisdom and are certain  that our successors will have their own challenges to meet.

Perhaps the indigenous intervention offers the best illustration of contemporary Liberalism’s  values. It was triggered by a specific report into a particular set of problems but reflected many  years thinking about entrenched disadvantage. It involved banning alcohol, a permanent police  presence in remote townships, and linking government payments to the responsibilities of  citizenship, such as going to school and participating in employment projects. It envisaged  individual rather than collective home ownership. It was “conservative” because it took for granted  that domestic tranquillity and economic improvement were worth having. It was “liberal” because it  aimed to empower remote Aborigines to live outside a welfare village. Of course it was loathed by  everyone for whom Aboriginal disadvantage is a reproach against the “dominant culture”.

At one level, the Opposition’s most urgent job, between now and the next election, is to publicise  the Government’s mistakes. Randolph Churchill once declared that oppositions should oppose  everything, propose nothing and turf the government out. He was right in this fundamental respect:  the opposition’s job is to get elected. Intelligent oppositions avoid fights that can’t be won. They  have no unnecessary enemies. They make the Government rather than themselves the issue by  ensuring that everyone harmed by government decisions well-and-truly knows about it. Even so,  successful oppositions can’t rely entirely on the unpopularity of the Government because credible  critics need to have ideas of their own.

Rudd can still do no wrong, at least as far as the media are concerned, but voters will expect him  to bring interest rates, grocery bills and fuel prices down because that’s what they heard him  promise during the election campaign. Any significant economic downturn will leave the people  who changed their vote in 2007 feeling badly ripped off.

The new Government has done little to meet these high expectations so far, other than flagging  the obvious and parading its good intentions. It huffed and puffed about (but couldn’t stop) the  Christmas petrol price hike, justified (and then criticised) a new round of interest rate rises,  announced that whaling would be monitored by a ship that had not left port, and re-imposed the  permit system turning indigenous townships into no-go zones. A surplus delivered on autopilot is  not evidence of good economic management. Cutting projected spending four years hence will not  reduce inflation now. Creating a new bureaucracy to cut bureaucracy (such as Infrastructure  Australia) will end up generating headlines rather than meaningful change.

Masterly inactivity won’t fool the public forever. A do-nothing government in the tradition of Bob  Carr or Morris Iemma can’t fill the Howard Government’s shoes. These manifestations of running

Page 3 of 5

on the spot are not enough, yet, to cause Rudd’s halo to slip but a telling indicator that yet another  Labor government could turn out to be better at making announcements than getting things done.

Because it’s hard-wired into Labor politicians, the new Government will try to restore the unions’  influence and strength, incrementally in ways that it hopes business won’t notice. “Economic  conservative” ministers will have choreographed public fights with militant union officials while  doing behind-the-scenes sweetheart deals. It will be as fake as world championship wrestling.  Labor has no alternative but to give the unions most of what they want because union money and  manpower will be crucial to winning the next election. Eventually, the union agenda will depress  productivity, lead to wages breakouts in some sectors, reduce employment growth and put upward  pressure on interest rates as the surplus falls.

Labor is counting on being able to blame international circumstances rather than its own policies  for any economic problems. It certainly can’t blame the former Government with which it said it  had “not a sliver of difference” on economic policy. Like its state counterparts, the Rudd  Government will use its inherited surplus to buy off interest groups and hopes that, by the time this  runs out, the Opposition will be too demoralised to mount an effective critique.

Prompted by share market tremors, one commentator has already observed that 2007 might have  been the right election to lose. Others have suggested that the Opposition could coast back to  office in 2010 on fresh memories of the Howard Government’s economic record. Labor is certainly  vulnerable, especially if the economy turns. Even so, on its own, carping is a low rent approach to  opposition and misunderstands the reasons for the Howard Government’s success.

From the period of the Fraser Government, when he first advocated a GST, until he became prime  minister, Howard was the Liberals’ deepest and most courageous thinker on Australia’s problems  and their potential solutions. The Howard Government’s policies were not handed to it by the  public service the day after swearing-in. Howard made the transition from effective opposition  leader to successful prime minister because he had developed a policy framework that touched  deep chords in the Australian people as well as a forceful critique of the Keating Government.  Financial deregulation, tariff cuts, and privatisation, even where implemented by Labor, were  Howard ideas first.

One academic commentator described Howard’s 1989 Future Directions policy as a “coherent  synthesis of social and economic policies in line with national imperatives”. According to Howard  at the time, policy should meet three criteria: does it strengthen the family, give individuals more  incentive and hope, and give a preference to private over government enterprise? This  combination of smaller government and deregulation with traditional virtues such as thrift, initiative  and self-sufficiency reflected Howard’s view that social stability was possible even during radical  economic restructuring.

Although the subsequent Fightback policy stressed economic reform more, and traditional values  less, and was attacked for being too risky rather than too conservative, it was an even more  through-going policy response to the problems of the time. It was preceded by a formal community  consultation exercise, involving submissions and public meetings, in which individuals and  organizations were invited to put forward their views on building a better Australia.

Howard’s success (helped, of course, by disenchantment with the Keating Government) was to  create the impression that Liberal policies were not particularly ideological but, instead, were  tough-minded ways to address serious practical problems. Today’s challenge is to create a new  generation of policies that are based on widely shared values and instincts and which tackle the  things that matter now.

A trap to be avoided is debating our rightful place on some ideological spectrum. To voters who  want their problems solved and their concerns addressed, this will seem like factional self-indulgence. Policies have to be about results. To the extent that internal debates look like they’re  enforcing a correct ideological “line”, they’re almost certain to extend the Party’s time in opposition.  The search for philosophical purity is almost as big a voter turn-off as political insiders speculating  about who might make a better leader. We need to persuade people that we know what their  problems are before we’re likely to be trusted to solve them.

Over the next few months, the Opposition will need to calibrate its response to the alleged  maladministration Labor will claim to have discovered now that it has access to government  records. It would be a mistake to be drawn deeply into these fights because voters are more  interested in the future than the past.

The Opposition will need to identify the seats most likely to come back at the next election and  start preparing local campaigns and candidates. Formal structures are not always the best way to

Page 4 of 5.

do this. Still, one way or another, talented people with a contribution to make will need to be  identified and groomed to enter parliament.

The Liberal Party in federal opposition will have nothing like Labor’s donor base so needs to  become much more of a grass roots movement and to make a virtue of it. Every branch should be  encouraging people who habitually vote Liberal and who think of themselves as Liberal actually to  join the party. An influx of new members from the local church ought to be balanced by new  members from the local chamber of commerce or football club or bush regeneration group. The  best way to empower local party members would be to give every one of them a vote in lower  house pre-selections. The best way to discourage factionalism would be to conduct internal party  ballots on a proportional representation basis. If, say, the candidate who came second in the  presidential ballot automatically becomes vice president, people with significant support in the  party will have to work with, rather than against each other.

It would help if local branches had less of a tendency to regard new members as potential trouble  at pre-selection time. It would also help if there were a right-of-centre version of Get Up. This could  be a mission that the Young Liberal movement makes its own. Grass roots campaigning will help  to turn the next money-is-no-object ACTU/Labor advertising blitz into evidence that the  Government has lost touch and is running scared.

The establishment of a single party on the conservative side of politics is a worthy long-term goal  but has not been necessary to win elections and could easily be more trouble than it’s worth. If  mishandled, a merger of the Liberal and National parties could produce three non-Labor parties,  rather than two, as disgruntled Liberals and Nationals re-establish their own continuing parties.  Creating a single party, rather than a Coalition working in unison, is not as important as finding  good candidates and renewing our sense of mission. A successful merger would certainly signify  new purpose and generate new energy, perhaps more than anything else. On the other hand, the  more likely scenario, a long and messy merger campaign, would raise obvious questions about  our readiness to govern.

Just pointing to the Government’s flaws will not re-establish an attractive and contemporary  political personality for the federal Liberal Party. We need to channel the changes in Australians’  thinking, not resist them. Despite Liberal governments’ good record, Liberals often sound like  reluctant environmentalists, putting green imposts on business almost against their better  judgment. The sooner the Party accepts that environmental protection is not an optional extra or a  minority preoccupation, the sooner people will recover their interest in us.

Similarly, we can’t be judgmental of people who are trying to make the most of the circumstances  they find themselves in. Supporting families shouldn’t mean favouring one family type over others.  We have to resist yearning for “ideal” families and “traditional” mothers. Every family is a source of  nurturing and security for its members. All parents are striving for the best for their children. There  can be no antediluvian thoughts linking childcare and women neglecting their children during the  working day. Whether formal or informal, for parents in the paid or the unpaid workforce, at least  some childcare is the absolutely essential means for most parents to give their children a decent  standard of living and to have a fulfilled life.

When Ronald Reagan described the presidency as a “bully pulpit”, perhaps he was alluding to the  quasi-spiritual dimension of the leadership that successful politicians are now expected to provide.  John Howard succeeded because he told the story of our former relative economic decline and  persuaded us that we could be better than that. Today’s anxieties are less that Australia might  become an economic backwater but that we know the price of everything and the value of nothing.  The next successful prime minister will tap people’s yearning to be a community as well as an  economy; to belong as well as to succeed. A Liberal who understands the importance of the social  fabric and the part Burke’s “little platoons” play in it is more likely to provide this than a Labor  leader addicted to bureaucracy.

Because the next election will largely turn on the performance of the Government, the Liberal  Party’s has to ensure that the public do not take Kevin Rudd at his own estimation. Just as  important, though, is ensuring that the next Liberal Government is at least as successful as the  last. Should we win the next election, especially if that takes place in an economic slump, we don’t  want to have to make up policy as we go along, as Rudd is doing now. For better or worse, we are  already determining the calibre of the next Liberal Government. The quality of our engagement  with the public, the new insights we bring to policy development, and the maturity of our own  conduct now will shape our country three, six and nine years hence, whenever our time comes  again as it surely will.

Page 5 of 5.

