





Speech by



Stephen Smith MP

Minister for Foreign Affairs







A New Era of Engagement with the World









The Sydney Institute

Tuesday

12 August 2008

(Check Against Delivery)

2

Introduction



Thank you, Gerard [Henderson, Executive Director of The

Sydney Institute] for that introduction and thank you for the

opportunity to speak to the Institute this evening.



The Sydney Institute plays a very valuable role in stimulating

and contributing to the public debate about which policy settings

best serve Australia’s national interest.



In that context, let me start my remarks tonight about the

modern Australia’s position in the world at the start of a new

century and a new era of Asia-Pacific influence.



While Australia is only the 50th or so largest country in terms

of population, we are in the top 15 largest economies.



In terms of living standards measured by income per capita, we

are among the top 20 countries and we are also among the top

dozen military or peacekeeping spenders.



We are a significant and a considerable nation.



We are a regional leader.



3

We are not, however, a powerhouse or a superpower.



As a consequence, regional and multilateral institutions are

essential for a nation like Australia.



Australia benefits immensely from a global and regional order

based on principles, norms and rules which regulate relations

between nation states.



Working to strengthen the mechanisms of that international

order helps underpin Australia’s prosperity and security.



We need to take the opportunities available to us in

international affairs, working with major powers, globally,

regionally, bilaterally and, importantly, taking much greater

advantage of international institutions to make a positive

contribution to international security and increasing the wealth

and prosperity of nations.



If we fail to take advantage of these opportunities, we will find

our capacity to protect and enhance our national interest

reducing, and our security and wellbeing declining.



This is particularly so in the new era that is upon us this

century, the Asia-Pacific era.

4



The Asia-Pacific era



This new era is marked by an inexorable shift in global

economic and strategic influence to the Asia Pacific.



Within Asia we have the world’s two most populous countries,

China and India, two of the top three economies, China and

Japan, the largest democracy in the world, India, and the

country with the largest Muslim population in the world,

Indonesia.



China and India are adding their enormous energy to the

already considerable economic strength embodied in Japan and

Korea.



By 2020, it is forecast that Asia will account for around 45 per

cent of global GDP, one-third of global trade, and more than

half of the increase in global energy consumption.



By 2020, 56 per cent of the world’s nearly 8 billion people will

live in Asia.



Asia’s surging growth is helping to drive Australia’s own

economic prosperity.

5



In 2007, Australia’s total global merchandise trade stood at

over A$350 billion.  Of that, over A$200 billion, nearly two

thirds of our merchandise trade, was with Asia.



The shift, however, is not just economic or demographic.  It is

also strategic, one of the reasons we have proposed the Asia-Pacific Community initiative.



Three of the world’s five largest military forces, China, India

and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, are located in

Asia.



East Asian military spending alone is now equivalent to that of

all the European NATO countries combined.



With this transfer of economic and strategic influence comes an

expectation of, and the actual exercise of, greater political

influence.



In ASEAN itself, we have also seen comparable economic and

demographic growth.



South East Asia will always be critically important to

Australia’s strategic, security and economic interests.

6

How South East Asia adjusts to the shifts in economic and

strategic power and influence in the Asia Pacific in the coming

decades will shape Australia’s strategic environment.



The continuing rise of China and the emergence of India will

almost certainly produce the most significant of these shifts.

Our security and prosperity will hinge to a significant degree

on the political and economic development of our friends and

neighbours in South East Asia.



Transnational challenges



This new era also sees the rise in great transnational challenges.



Today, as ever, the world faces significant challenges and

problems faced by nation states are rarely confined to their

borders alone but have transnational impacts.



Today, factors like climate change, international terrorism,

weapons proliferation, transnational crime, environmental

degradation, energy security, health pandemics, poverty and

inequality as a cause of instability are all key factors affecting

Australia’s security as a nation.



7

The Australian Government is determined to look afresh at our

strategic and national security challenges and how to respond

to them. We need to adapt and respond to new challenges.



In this new era and century, a globalised world demands more

than ever a committed and active bilateral, regional and

multilateral diplomacy from Australia.



The Government’s foreign policy approach



The new Australian Government came to office intent on

making a difference as a good international citizen.



We are determined to embark on a foreign policy both shaped

by and reflecting our democratic values, our respect for the rule

of law, domestic and international, our tolerance and our deep-seated belief in a fair go for others.



Three pillars of foreign policy guide Australia’s relationship

with the international community.



One pillar is our commitment to Australia’s Alliance with the

United States.



8

This Alliance remains a fundamental and indispensable bedrock

of Australia’s security, strategic and defence arrangements.



In this context, continued active engagement by the United

States in the Asia-Pacific is essential to the peace, stability and

prosperity of our region.



A second pillar of our foreign policy is comprehensive

engagement with Asia and the Pacific.



As I have outlined, the region’s increasing strategic importance

and global political influence mirrors its rapid economic and

demographic growth.



Last month, I travelled to Singapore to take part in the annual

series of ASEAN-related meetings.  These meetings reinforced

Australia’s positive and constructive engagement with ASEAN,

including in the areas of education and development assistance.



Complementing our relationships with Asia is the important

work we are doing with our Pacific Island neighbours.



The Government is determined to bring a different approach to

our Pacific neighbours: one based on mutual respect and

mutual responsibility.

9



The Prime Minister’s Port Moresby Declaration on 6 March

outlined a new vision for Australia’s engagement in the region,

a vision typified by our Pacific Partnerships for Development.



We are moving beyond the traditional modes of development

assistance with our Pacific neighbours.  We recognise that our

engagement must widen to involve trade and economic

cooperation as well as policy and political dialogue.



As a practical expression of this, we announced this week a

three-year pilot seasonal worker scheme in the horticulture

industry for up to 2500 workers to address labour shortages in

regional areas that can not be filled by Australian workers.



Australia’s Multilateral Engagement



The third pillar of our foreign policy approach is the one I will

focus on this evening, namely the reinvigoration of Australia’s

engagement with the United Nations and other multilateral

organisations.



We do not accept that effort spent maintaining bilateral relations

must come at the expense of effective engagement with

multilateral organisations or vice versa.  This is a false

10

dichotomy. We have vigorously pursued many bilateral

relationships over the past nine months.



These are distinct but not mutually exclusive tools: in many

cases they are necessarily complementary.



Some issues are global by nature and require nation states to

form collective responses, such as climate change, terrorism and

weapons proliferation, among the greatest challenges that

Australia will continue to face over the coming years.



Foremost among these global challenges is climate change.



We believe that Australia can only address climate change in

concert with the international community.  There is equal

futility in not acting or in acting alone.



Our first act as a Government was the ratification of the Kyoto

Protocol.  Since then, Australia has played, and will continue

to play, a leading and constructive role in international climate

change negotiations.



United Nations



11

Australia has a long and proud history of involvement with the

United Nations, a history which stretches back to its

establishment as World War II drew to a close.



No Australian was more central to the development of the

United Nations than Foreign Minister Evatt, who led Australia’s

delegation to the founding meeting in San Francisco in 1945.



As that meeting struggled through the politically complex task

of writing the United Nations’ Charter, Evatt was a remarkable

advocate for the interests of small countries and middle powers.



He brought to those discussions a vision of an international body

that would protect human rights and advance global economic

and social development.



After three months of negotations, the Charter was agreed and

much of Evatt’s work was brought to fruition.



Indeed, the member states’ pledge to pursue within the UN these

human rights, economic and social development goals became

known in San Francisco as the Australian pledge.



It now forms article 56 of the United Nations Charter.



12

Evatt’s vision is more important today than it has ever been.

The need for effective, global responses to the challenges we

face is more urgent and necessary than ever before.



The UN has a critical role to play in the global struggle for a

peaceful, secure world free from poverty, disease and famine.



For these reasons the Australian Government will work to

ensure that the United Nations and its agencies fulfil their

potential as agents for economic and social reform, for peace

and as a protector of human rights.



And as we do this, the UN will necessarily occupy a vital place

in the way we pursue our national and global interests.



Peacekeeping



From its early years, Australia has been heavily involved in the

practical work of the United Nations in bringing peace and

security to nations riven by conflict.



Since the very first peacekeeping operation authorised by the

United Nations Security Council in 1948, United Nations

peacekeeping operations have saved lives, helped communities,

helped societies and helped rebuild nations.

13



Australia has a long and very proud history of supporting United

Nations peacekeeping operations.



In fact, if we take into account the 1947 United Nations

Consular Commission to Indonesia, during which Australia -

then a member of the United Nations Security Council - helped

monitor observance of the ceasefire between Dutch and

Indonesian forces, it’s arguable that we were the first nation

state to have personnel on the ground in any modern

peacekeeping operation.



Geography alone, however, has not defined Australia's

peacekeeping or security interests.



Since 1948, Australia has made contributions to United Nations

and regional peacekeeping operations in Africa, Europe, Central

America, the Middle East and the Asia-Pacific region.



In the case of Cambodia, Australia played a significant role.

Foreign Minister Gareth Evans was instrumental in helping to

bring peace to Cambodia after decades of civil war.



14

He played an important role in the negotiations leading up to the

1991 Paris Peace Agreement, and the subsequent engagement of

a UN peacekeeping force.



As a considerable and significant nation, and as a good

international citizen, we continue the noble tradition of

peacekeeping to this day.



More than 30,000 Australians have served around the world as

peacekeepers. According to the Australian War Memorial,

twelve Australians have died while serving with United Nations

and non-United Nations peacekeeping operations.



Australia’s continued participation in peacekeeping missions

outside our immediate region has helped to demonstrate our

commitment to international peace, security and stability and to

strengthen our credentials as a responsible member of the

international community.



Security Council



The Security Council is at the heart of international responses to

issues of peace and security.  Australia has served on the

Council in the past Australia should do so again.



15

A practical example of Security Council action in which

Australia played a leading role relates to the independence of

one of our nearest neighbours, Indonesia.



As a member of the Security Council in 1947, we joined forces

with a newly independent India to bring the conflict between the

Indonesian Republic and the Netherlands before the United

Nations Security Council.



Australia recognised the forces sweeping away colonialism after

World War II.  We were bold enough to act to support the

emerging Indonesian Republic. And we did this against the

wishes of the United States, the United Kingdom and the

Netherlands.



Indonesia then nominated Australia to represent its interests on

the 1947 Committee of Good Offices established by the Security

Council. Australia did that diligently and robustly.



Just as Australia has served on the UN Security Council in the

forties, Australia still has a role to play today.



That is why we have decided to seek election to the United

Nations Security Council for the 2013-14 term.



16

Australia played a leading role in drafting those articles of the

UN Charter that deal with the Security Council’s work and its

relationship to other central organs of the UN, such as the

General Assembly.



We have a record of long and active engagement with the

Security Council and our wider contribution to the United

Nations places us in good stead to serve again.



We are determined to help address serious global challenges

including conflict prevention, terrorism and the threat posed by

weapons of mass destruction.



We firmly believe Australia has much to contribute to the

Security Council.  We bring unique perspectives, creativity,

energy and a practical problem-solving ethos.  We also bring a

wealth of experience in peace-keeping, conflict prevention and

peace-building.



It is therefore appropriate that we seek a seat at the table of the

pre-eminent international body charged with confronting many

of today’s challenges.



Other UN bodies



17

Our commitment to renewed engagement with the United

Nations is not, of course, limited to the Security Council.



The Government has worked to strengthen our cooperation with,

and support for, the United Nations High Commission for

Refugees.



I am pleased that High Commissioner Guterres has accepted our

invitation for an official visit to Australia early next year.  I look

forward to further our engagement and reinforce Australia's

commitment to improving the lives of refugees.



We are improving cooperation with the UNHCR to ensure our

increased humanitarian settlement program, one of the three

largest in the world, is used to maximum effect in the

international system of refugee protection.



We have also taken wide-ranging measures to reform

Australia’s immigration detention system, reforms welcomed by

the UNHCR as “a very positive step”.



As well, the Government increased funding for the UNHCR in

the 2008-09 budget to $9.9 million and we will make additional

contributions through AusAID’s International Refugee Fund and

18

the Department of Immigration and Citizenship’s Displaced

Persons Program.



UN Reform



We recognise that some UN bodies need to improve their

performance.



But it is counterproductive and wrong simply to criticise the

United Nations from the sidelines.



There is no point just standing outside throwing rocks at the

building.  Instead, we need to be engaged in working hard to

build the UN’s capability, responsiveness and creativity from

within.



Australia’s focus in supporting UN reform is on improving the

effectiveness, efficiency and accountability of UN operations.



In this context we welcome and support Secretary-General Ban

Ki Moon’s structural reform efforts, including with the

Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of

Political Affairs.



19

We also want reform to the Security Council, whose working

methods need to improve and whose membership should expand

to reflect the modern world.



Again I reaffirm Australia’s support for India and Japan for their

bids to become permanent members of an expanded Security

Council.



Multilateralism outside the UN



The Government’s commitment to reinvigorate Australia’s

multilateral engagement extends beyond UN bodies.  We

believe multilateral and plurilateral solutions are essential to

many regional and thematic issues.



The challenge of nuclear proliferation is another issue which can

only be addressed through effective multilateral action.



Nuclear weapons still pose a threat to humanity almost 40 years

after the NPT was signed.   There remains a need for real

progress towards the NPT’s objectives.



That’s why Australia is establishing, with Japan, an

International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and

20

Disarmament, to be co-chaired by Gareth Evans and Ms Yoriko

Kawaguchi, a former Japanese Foreign Minister.



Our objective in establishing the Commission is to reinvigorate

the global effort against the proliferation of nuclear weapons

and to seek a recommitment to the ultimate goal of a nuclear

weapon-free world.



The Commission will aim to shape a global consensus in the

lead up to the 2010 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review

Conference and beyond.



In pursuing this, we are very encouraged by the reaction we

have received to date from both nuclear and non-nuclear

weapon states.



Pursuing our interests through multilateral fora can be

challenging given the diversity of membership and views. As a

result it may not always deliver the results we want, when we

want them.



The recent failure of WTO talks in Geneva to reach agreement

on the Doha Round was a significant disappointment.



21

The Government recognises that the Round still has

considerable potential to deliver much greater market access for

Australian goods and to boost trade and alleviate poverty in

developing countries.



The Australian Government is committed to getting the Doha

Round back on track at the earliest possible opportunity.   The

Round is too important to be allowed to fail and we are too close

to an outcome to let the opportunity pass without further effort.



Australia will continue to work hard internationally to build

support for re-engagement and conclusion of the Round.



Strengthening ties with regional groupings



Australia also needs to lift its gaze and engage with regions of

the world which we have historically or from time to time

neglected.



The Government is determined to bring a wider perspective to

Australia’s relations with Africa.



Australian minerals and petroleum resource companies

discovered Africa last century and it is time that the Australian

Government caught up.

22



We want to broaden and deepen our engagement with Africa to

reflect our growing trade, commercial and investment links.



More than 60% of the United Nations Security Council’s agenda

is focussed on Africa.



We welcome the continuing efforts on the part of the African

Union to join with the United Nations to help address conflicts

in Africa.



We will support the African Union as it mobilises its Member

States to contribute to peacekeeping operations, and uses its

good offices to mediate in times of conflict.



We are working hard to strengthen our relations with Latin

America using both multilateral and bilateral connections.



The Prime Minister, the Trade Minister and I will all visit Peru

in November for the APEC Ministerial and Summit meetings.



We will use this occasion to engage more closely with key

countries of that continent.



23

In 2009, Trinidad and Tobago will host the next Commonwealth

Heads of Government meeting, the Commonwealth itself an

important multilateral institution linking Australia and the

countries of Africa and the Caribbean.



Another regional grouping we are committed to strengthening

ties with is the Gulf Cooperation Council.



We have a very strong trade relationship with the grouping. Our

merchandise exports were worth well over $6 billion last

financial year. We have excellent education ties.



We look forward to concluding a high quality and

comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the GCC which will

bolster our bilateral trade and investment.



I visited the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait in June and

spoke to regional leaders there and at the Afghan Donors

Conference in Paris about how we can build on this sound basis

in trade to broaden the relationship.



The Gulf is, of course, an immensely important strategic region

and it is appropriate that we expand our dialogue with the region

to reflect this.



24

In the critical  South Asian region we will engage more deeply

with regional Governments following the invitation we received

this month to participate as an Observer to the South Asian

Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).



Australia will join China, the European Union, Iran, Japan,

Mauritius, South Korea and the United States as an Observer to

SAARC.



Current events



For a moment let me address my remarks to two current events

in very different parts of the world, Pakistan and Georgia.



Pakistan is vital to global security.  The Australian Government

hopes that, following Mr Musharraf's resignation, the Pakistan

Government will purposefully tackle the country's security

challenges, which have regional and international implications.



In particular, the Australian Government is concerned about

militancy and extremism in Pakistan's border areas with

Afghanistan, which have a direct and deleterious effect on

Afghanistan and the 1100 Australian troops serving there.



25

These security challenges are immense and require a concerted

international effort, in cooperation with Pakistan, to improve

security and governance in these border regions.



Australia, as a friend of Pakistan, stands ready to assist

Pakistan in that task.



Events in Georgia have highlighted the important role regional

organisations can play in mediating where there is conflict.



Australia has called on Russia and again expects it to honour its

commitment to withdraw its troops immediately and meet fully

the provisions of the ceasefire agreement.



Australia welcomes the work the EU, the Organisation for

Security and Cooperation in Europe, the OSCE, has done to

bring Russia and Georgia to a ceasefire agreement.



A Good International Citizen



A key aspect of the Government’s recommitment to

multilateralism is our strong wish to see Australia speak and act

on the world stage as a good international citizen.



26

As a good international citizen we are determined to make better

use of our considerable prosperity to help those less fortunate

than ourselves.



Guided by our commitment to the realisation of the Millennium

Development Goals, we have pledged to increase our Overseas

Development Assistance from 0.3 to 0.5 per cent of gross

national income (GNI) by 2015.



This reverses a trend which for most of the last decade saw

Australia’s commitment to Overseas Development Assistance

going backwards.



We are also focused on providing humanitarian assistance in

emergency situations and protracted crises.  Again, we

cooperate with multilateral partners in this, including UN

agencies, The Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and

international NGOs.



Australia provides timely responses as needed in the face of

humanitarian crises, whether it be through financial means,

personnel or goods.



Protection of human rights



27

Another area essential to good international citizenship is the

protection of human rights.



We have been active both domestically and internationally to

reclaim a reputation as a leader in the international protection of

human rights.



The Prime Minister’s Apology to Indigenous Australians in

February was a defining moment in Australia’s history and was

recognised as a symbolic and momentous step forward by the

international community.



The Government has sent a clear message to the world that

Australia is serious about both symbolic and practical steps

towards reconciliation, and committed to addressing Indigenous

disadvantage.



The Apology was warmly greeted within the United Nations,

including by the then High Commissioner for Human Rights,

Louise Arbour.



In this 60th anniversary year of of the Universal Declaration on

Human Rights, the Government is also taking practical steps to

strengthen Australia’s engagement with the international human

rights system.

28



The Government will extend a standing invitation to United

Nations human rights experts to visit Australia.



In July, Australia became the 30th country to ratify the

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.



We will soon commence consultations on whether Australia

should also become a party to the Optional Protocol to the

Disabilities Convention.



This year marks the 25th anniversary of Australia’s ratification

of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of

Discrimination against Women.



Again, the Government has commenced the process towards

becoming a party to the Convention’s Optional Protocol.



Being a party to the Protocol will enable Australian women to

bring complaints under CEDAW to the United Nations where

domestic remedies have been exhausted.



The Government has also begun consultations with State and

Territory counterparts on Australia becoming a party to the

Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture.

29



The Optional Protocol establishes a system of United Nations

visits to places of detention and requires states to establish a

domestic mechanism to monitor detention.



Responsibility to Protect



An area closely related to our strengthened human rights

commitment is the emerging doctrine of “Responsibility to

Protect” - or “R2P”.



The R2P principle was developed at the 2005 World Summit

and has been reaffirmed in 2006 by the Security Council.  It

holds that States are responsible for the protection of their own

civilians from heinous mass crimes such as genocide, war

crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.



Further, it enunciates the international community’s

responsibility to use diplomatic, humanitarian and other

peaceful means to help protect populations.



Australia supports the R2P principle and, in this critical early

stage of its development, will support efforts to clarify the

concept and consolidate its authority.



30

Outreach and advocacy to advance and consolidate the World

Summit consensus on R2P is a priority at this stage.



Accordingly, the Government has affirmed Australia’s support

for the New York-based Global Centre NGO that will work to

move R2P from principle to practice.



The Government is also keen that Australia continue to support,

develop and advocate the R2P principle.



Australia is fortunate to have a range of institutions, individuals

and NGOs who are very committed to the principle and who can

contribute to its development.



I am also keen that Australia continue to support, develop and

advocate the R2P principle.  We have a range of institutions,

individuals and NGOs who are very committed to the principle

and who can contribute to its development.



I therefore announce tonight that the Government will establish

a $2 million Responsibility to Protect Fund, to be administered

by AusAID, which will underpin work in Australia on the

concept.



31

The fund will be available on a competitive basis to institutions,

NGOs and individuals in Australia, for projects or research

which will materially contribute to making R2P a reliable factor

in international crisis handling.



R2P remains an emerging area of normative growth and the

Government is determined that Australia remains committed to

making the principle central to conflict prevention and

resolution.



Conclusion



By reinvigorating Australia’s role in the multilateral system,

Australia is acting in its long term national interest.



Only by cooperating with other States in regional and

multilateral frameworks can we address the pressing challenges

that span borders and threaten us all.



Working within these systems can be difficult. Many of them

were established at a time when the challenges we face today

were simply not envisaged.



But the Government is prepared to help these systems rise to

new challenges.  We believe this to be the only realistic option,

32

and why Australia must be central to these efforts, reflecting the

Government’s determination to place Australia on a new

international footing, engaging with the world in a new era.



Thank you.

