

1



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  HON STEPHEN MR SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:           31 July 2008

TITLE:   Joint media conference with Nauru Minister for Foreign Affairs  Dr Kieren Keke - Australia-Nauru Memorandum of Understanding



SMITH: I firstly welcome Dr Keke to Australia again and can I start by publicly  offering belated congratulations on Dr Keke’s re-election and reappointment as  Minister for Foreign Affairs.  I did that personally over the telephone some  weeks ago but it’s nice to see you here again.

Today we’re signing the Memorandum of Understanding which reflects  Australia’s development assistance to Nauru.  And, rule of thumb, the  Memorandum of Understanding caters for nearly $20 million worth of funding  and when you add to that the other development assistance that Australia  provides through other programs, rule of thumb, it’s nearly a $30 million  contribution.

The reason we’re signing the Memorandum of Understanding today is that of  course with the closure of the Offshore Detention Centre this led to a decline  of income so far as Nauru was concerned.  So we had to ensure that the  Australian Government’s policy of closing the Offshore Detention Centre  didn’t leave Nauru in a difficult situation.

So Dr Keke and the two Parliamentary Secretaries, Mr McMullan and Mr  Kerr, have been working very hard over the preceding weeks and months to  bring this Memorandum of Understanding to conclusion, and I take this  opportunity of thanking the two Parliamentary Secretaries for their good work.

The Memorandum of Understanding reflects the fact that Australia and Nauru  have a very good relationship.  It’s not just development assistance - Dr Keke  and I have had a number of bilateral meetings and the relationship between  Australia and Nauru is very strong, very friendly and very firm.  And I look

forward to continue to work closely with Dr Keke.

The development assistance, of course, reflects Australia’s commitment to  want to be a good international citizen in its region and to do its bit to ensure



2

that nation-states in the Pacific have the chance to build their capacity of  institutions to provide decent health and education services for their people.

In his first visit to Papua New Guinea, the Prime Minister, in the Port Moresby  Declaration, indicated we would be moving to Pacific Partnerships for  Development with our Pacific Island Forum partners and today I’ll be later  handing over to Dr Keke a letter from me which invites Nauru to commence  discussions and negotiations for a formal Pacific Partnership for Development.

So both the Memorandum of Understanding and the invitation to commence  discussions on a Pacific Partnership for Development reflect the good  relationship between Australia and Nauru and reflect Australia’s commitment  to give Nauru every assistance.

So Kieren, we are very pleased to see you here again.  I look forward to  signing the Memorandum of Understanding and look forward to continue to  work closely with you in the best interests of Australia and Nauru.

Keke: Thank you Minister Stephen Smith, ladies and gentlemen.  Omo yoran ea  kamie memak.  Good morning to you all.  It is indeed by distinct honour to  represent the Republic of Nauru in signing this Memorandum of  Understanding between Nauru and Australia.  Minister, Australia and Nauru  do - as you say - enjoy very positive and close and strong relations. However,  despite Nauru once being under Australian colonial administration, our  relations have not always been so close.  It was disappointing that at the time  when we were slipping into a major economic crisis in the last decade, which  almost saw Nauru totally collapse, that earlier Australian Governments seemed  to sit by and simply watch.  Given our long intertwined history it is difficult to  understand the lack of a helping hand at the time which could have averted the  worst of our economic and social woes.



However, when we first met earlier this year, not long after you took up office  as Minister for Foreign Affairs, I stressed to you at the time the gravity of the  crisis that Nauru has been through over the last decade and the efforts our new  breed of leaders have taken to stabilise Nauru.  I stressed that Nauru needs  ongoing support if we are to cement in place the reforms and the recovery we  have achieved to date.

Nauru does not want to remain dependent on external aid but I ask you to  appreciate that assistance now will enable Nauru to achieve economic stability  in the future.   It is therefore extremely pleasing to recognise the now very

close and constructive relations between Australia and Nauru and in particular  the Rudd Government’s commitment to development assistance for Nauru as  demonstrated in the signing of the MOU today.

I must also express my gratitude to you and your Government for the way in  which you have responded.  You have reacted to the issues we discussed



3

earlier this year and there has been ongoing communication.  Minister, I truly  appreciate your frequent correspondence and your phone calls.

My President, His Excellency Marcus Stephen, also asked me to convey his  personal appreciation through you to your Prime Minister for the frequent  communication they have had since your Government took office.  Your  Government has demonstrated a clear desire to work closely with Nauru.

In fact the commitment of your Prime Minister and your Government to  improve relations with the whole of the Pacific has been obvious and I believe  has been very positive and effective to date.  Over the last week I have spent  some time with Parliamentary Secretaries Bob McMullan and Duncan Kerr.  I  trust they will echo to you my feelings that are nothing but positive not only  for Nauru but also in terms of their interactions with all nations of the Pacific  represented at the meeting we attended last week.

Minister, this MOU is significant for a number of reasons.  Firstly, the degree  and range of assistance Australia is committing to support Nauru’s  development is significant.  Nauru has in recent years faced major challenges  and has undergone reforms across many sectors.  This has been a necessity but  has also largely only been possible due to the strong support of our  development partners, most notably Australia.  This fifth MOU supports  Nauru’s own national sustainable development strategy and will work to  develop Nauru’s long term viability.

The considerable level of funding provided for under this MOU will address a  range of needs and sectors.  This includes governance reforms, financial  management, public sector reform, health, education, key infrastructure - such  as power, water, telecommunications - law and order, as well as private sector  development.  This wide range of inputs and assistance is obviously critical to  Nauru’s own recovery efforts.

Of further significance is the fact that since the original MOU signed in 2001,  this fifth MOU is the first one that’s not dependent on cooperation in the  management of asylum seekers.

In effect, by not linking it to the hosting of an Offshore Processing Centre,  Australia is now recognising Nauru’s very real need for development  assistance.  A stable and viable Nauru is important for the region and for  Australia.   Just as we have seen in other Pacific nations, weak governance and  economies in the Pacific have led to civil unrest and opened the region up to  the risks of organised transnational crime and terrorism.  Nauru does not want  to see these risks in our region.

Minister, of greater significance to me, is that this MOU represents a renewed  commitment by Australia to Nauru and indeed the Pacific.  The Port Moresby  Declaration released by your Prime Minister sets out the new relationship



4

Australia is seeking with the Pacific.  I wish to commend the Australian  Government for this new approach and its very clear efforts to improve  relations with your Pacific neighbours on a basis of partnerships and mutual  respect and responsibility.

This fifth MOU is a precursor to developing a new long term Partnership for  Development between Australia and Nauru.  Nauru welcomes this  development and I look forward to working together in the coming months to  build on our recent experiences and to develop this new partnership that will  assist Nauru address our long-term sustainability challenges and our  development goals.

Minister, as we discussed earlier this year and since then, there are a number of  wider issues which extend beyond the direct assistance provided for under the  MOU.  I’m pleased again to note how responsive you and the Australian  Government have been on a number of these issues. For some years now  Nauru has had no banking services and the need to re-establish full commercial  banking services is critical for our development.  Nauru is seeking interest  from the major Australian banks to establish a presence in Nauru just as they  have a presence in many other Pacific islands already.

Finally, we have discussed the issue of our high unemployment and Nauru’s  keen interest in labour mobility and access to unskilled and skilled labour  opportunities for our people in Australia.  We have recently taken steps to  facilitate the up-skilling of a small number of Nauruans in welding to gain  access to skilled employment in areas of need in Australia under the existing  rules.  I look forward to the Pacific Forum Leaders’ meeting next month and  the discussions Pacific leaders may have with Prime Minister Rudd on the  issue of labour mobility and a possible pilot program for the Pacific.

Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your patience and attention.  Minister,  thank you for your time today and please accept Nauru’s gratitude for  Australia’s much improved commitment to Nauru and the Pacific as  demonstrated in the MOU we are signing today.  Ma tubwa kor.  Thank you.

Smith:  Thank you.



[MOU signed]

Smith:   We’ll take questions from the media if there are such questions.

Question:  Mr Keke, what does it mean for Nauru that this MOU is not tied to detention  centres?

Keke:  I guess in the past, as I mentioned there was a concern from Nauru that the  relationship with Australia had weakened and it was . . . the interaction had  increased due to the presence of the processing centre on Nauru.  But I think



5

we are very much appreciative of the new approach where there is no such link  or reliance on the presence of the processing centre on Nauru and it’s really  based now on mutual respect and understanding and a move towards a  Partnership for Development.

Question:   Minister Smith, what hope can you offer your counterpart on the suggestion of  a pilot program on workers coming to Australia skilled or unskilled?

Smith:   Well we’ve made it clear that the Prime Minister will advise the leaders at the  Pacific Leaders’ Forum in Niue about our attitude to a possible pilot program  for labour mobility purposes.  We came to office indicating that we would  carefully examine the New Zealand pilot program which has been up and  running for a couple of years.  We have been doing that.  I’ve been to New  Zealand and had discussions about that pilot program as have both the  Parliamentary Secretaries, Mr Kerr and McMullan.

So we’ve been giving very careful consideration to that and we’re expecting  that the Prime Minister will be able to indicate to the leaders at the Forum in  August what we’re proposing to do so far as a possible pilot program is  concerned.  Any announcement will be from the Prime Minister either in the  run-up to or at the Forum itself.

Question:  Dr Keke, would you have been hoping for more . . . [indistinct] . . . considering  that the Processing Centre in Nauru contributed a significant amount to the . . .

Keke:   The economic activity generated by hosting the Processing Centre was a  significant contribution to our economy.  However the assistance that is  provided under this MOU and I think importantly the long-term commitment  that we now have and the long-term understanding that we have with Australia  is of far greater value to Nauru.  The assistance as provided under this MOU  targets key areas of need both in the immediate term as well as developing a  platform for our longer term sustainability.

So I think in dollar values this is still a very significant amount and is actually  greater than our own internal revenues that we’re able to generate at this time.   But importantly it provides a strong platform for the future combined with a

longer-term commitment.



Smith:   Can I just add to that.  When Dr Keke and I first met early this year, the thing  which really impressed me about the attitude that Dr Keke had and the attitude  that Nauru had was that they wanted to put Nauru onto a firm financial basis  for the future, not dependent upon income that came either from development  assistance or, as it had in the past, from the Offshore Processing or Detention  Centre.  So the aspiration that Nauru has is to seek to put Nauru onto a firm  financial and economic basis for the future.  Obviously we want to assist in  that.



6

We came to office with a strong commitment to close down the so-called  Pacific Solution, to close the Offshore Processing Centre at Manus and at  Nauru, and we’ve done that.  But we didn’t want that closure to cause a short-term difficulty for Nauru.  And even more attractive to us was Dr Keke’s  attitude of a firm financial and economic basis for Nauru for the future.  And  that’s what we’re trying to do both through the Memorandum of  Understanding but also, importantly, through the Pacific Partnership for  Development.

That attitude and the stability that we now see in Nauru is a very attractive  outlook so far as Australia is concerned and it gives us optimism for the future.   Of course there will be difficulties but we think that the Memorandum of  Understanding starting the Pacific Partnership for Development process and in  some respects most importantly the attitude of Nauru to want to get itself onto  a firm financial and economic basis for the future really augurs well for  Nauru’s future but also for our future relationship.

Question:   Mr Smith, what’s the latest information you’ve got about the two cousins and  the incident in Mykonos?

Smith:   Well can I say firstly that we regard the incident as very serious and our  concern of course is for the two men and to their families and our expressions  of sympathy go to them.  They’re receiving all the usual consular assistance,  I’m satisfied of that.  They’ve also been receiving medical assistance and we’re  satisfied that appropriate medical assistance is being rendered.  And we’re also  very satisfied that the relevant police authorities are pursuing and investigating  the matter.



It is a, frankly a disturbing event, a serious assault, and our thoughts and  sympathy are with the two men and their families.  But on the basis of the  advice I have early this morning, everything that we are in a position to do is  being done and we’re entirely satisfied with the response so far as the police  authorities are concerned.

Question:   I had a question about the procedures today from Minister Fitzgibbon about  potential military advisors in Pakistan.  Have you spoken to your counterparts  in Pakistan and what level can you regard that as being?



Smith:   Well I spoke to my counterpart, the Foreign Minister for Pakistan in Paris in  the context of the Afghan Donors’ Conference.  And I made a couple of points  to him.  Firstly that we regarded the circumstances on the Afghanistan-Pakistan border as having very serious implications not just for Australia and  our forces in Afghanistan but also for the region - that in Australia’s view this  was not just a bilateral issue between Afghanistan and Pakistan, it was an issue  that had regional and international implications.  And I indicated to Pakistan  officials in Singapore recently that that remained our view, that we wanted to  have a dialogue with Pakistan about that and we were open to considering



7

what assistance, if any, we could bring to bear.  That obviously, of course, not  including a combat or a troop commitment.

So we’re giving consideration to what we might be able to do to assist.  But as  the Defence Minister made clear yesterday that’s at a very, very early stage of  consideration.  We have to go through our own processes of what we may be

able to do to assist and then we’ve got to have a serious dialogue with Pakistan  about that.  So these suggestions are at a very early stage.  What it does  underline, though, is we have nearly a thousand troops in Afghanistan.  We  regard that area of the world - the Afghanistan-Pakistan border - as essentially  being the hotbed of international terrorism at this point in time and it does  require not just a response from Afghanistan and Pakistan but a response from  the regional and international community.  And we’re very conscious of that  and we’ve made that point clear to both Pakistan and to the international  community.  What we can do in conjunction with Pakistan is, as I say, at a  very early stage but we’ll be considering that both in the context of the  Government’s own deliberations but also in future discussions with Pakistan.

Question:   Have you got any comment on what’s happened in China with internet access  and [indistinct]?

Smith:   Well, I don’t want to comment or give a running commentary too directly on  the International Olympic Committee and what it’s been doing.  But to simply  say that so far as communications into and out of China are concerned the  Australian Government has made the point to China on a regular basis we  believe China should be open and transparent.  That includes its  communications, and online communications, this point’s been made to China  on a regular basis including as part of the regular human rights dialogues that  we have with China.



I haven’t followed the matter with precise detail but I do see this morning the  representatives of the Olympic Committee apologising for their conduct.  On  the basis of what I’ve read that apology seemed like it was well worth giving

and required to be given.



[ENDS]











