PW 212/09 6 August 2009  TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW, ABC2 NEWS BREAKFAST  SUBJECT: PACIFIC ISLANDS FORUM, CARBON POLLUTION REDUCTION SCHEME  E & O E - PROOF ONLY  JOURNALIST: Penny Wong, good morning.  WONG: Good morning to you both.  JOURNALIST: Now we ran a story earlier this week on people from the Carteret Islands having to leave now - this is happening now - they have to leave their homes because of rising sea levels for Bougainville. They say they haven’t had any help. Is Australia already neglecting a duty of care in the Pacific for these people?  WONG: We want to work very closely with the Pacific Islands on the issue of climate change because as you rightly point out many of these regional neighbours, people in our own region, are at the front line. And we have been talking, engaging, with the Pacific island nations about how to proceed down this path. But can I just be very clear about what is the most important process here. The first is we have to start to reduce the impact of climate change. That means we actually have to have to start reducing Australia’s emissions. That means passing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Pacific Island nations have been very vocal in this Forum and in international negotiations about the need for strong action on climate change. That starts at home and that starts with the Australian scheme which is voted on in the Senate in a week’s time.  JOURNALIST: But the more immediate problem is these people are being forced off their islands as we speak without help from rich nations like Australia. Shouldn’t Australi a be in there now helping these people?  WONG: Well we have invested and we are investing $150 million on adaptation needs in the Pacific. That is working with Pacific Island nations on what are the most pressing issues for them and that does vary from nation state to nation state. For some you are looking at issues, as the Prime Minister said, of sea walls. For others it is looking at how you change your cropping practices and for others it is even more immediate - issues such as fresh water supplies because of course sea level rise means salt water intrudes into water supplies. So there are a whole range of different concerns, pressing issues facing Pacific islands and we want to work through these issues with them. We have an election commitment of $150 million for assistance on adaptation which is primarily focused in our region. In addition, we have $200 million for action on forests which is of course another issue that many Pacific Island nations are concerned about.  JOURNALIST: Has that money already gone to those countries and if it has, it’s obviously not getting through to the people who need it. Are you concerned about that?  WONG: I am concerned about the issue of climate change and I think if you were in the Forum…

JOURNALIST: No I mean the money getting through to these people who are being forced from  their homes now  .



WONG:



Well my view about that is we need to roll out the aid that we are providing, the  assi  stance that we are providing sensibly and in consultation with Pacific island nations. I think that  is key

because remember we need to work with them to ensure they can prioritise what is most  important to them. But I think at today’s Forum and certainly at yesterday’s, Australians were  reminded of the real life impact of climate change on our neighbours. We see it in Australia, we  know w

hat will happen and is already starting to happen in the Murray-Darling Basin as just one  example. We know about the vulnerability of the Great Barrier Reef to climate change but we also  have neighbours in our region for whom this is a very real and pressing issue now. As a regional  power we do have a responsibility to work with them. We launched a paper yesterday that talked  about our engagement with the Pacific. We will continue to work with them. But remember the first  thing

we must do is try to reduce the risk of climate change. If we allow climate change to continue  unaba

ted it will worsen the situation for Pacific island nations, for Australia and for the world.

JOURNALIS



T:  Will Australia agree to take any refugees from a nation that has to evacuate  bec  ause of rising sea levels?

WONG:



It was an interesting press conference yesterday because that question was asked and the  representative from Kiribati, which is a nation state that really has some extremely difficult  pr

oblems, she made the point that they weren’t asking for refugee status. She made the point that  what they did want was assistance with developing skills in their population so if migration had to  occur later they could do so on a merit basis. I think it’s really important that we listen to Pacific  island nations about what it is that they want. Some of them do want to look at internal migration;  others want to deal with this in a different way because they do have those opportunities. And  Australia’s responsibility in the region is to work with each of these nations to work out what their  priorities are and to support them in that.

JOURNALIST: And you’ll be doing a lot of that listening today up in Cairns I’m sure. Senator  Pe  nny Wong, thanks very much for talking to us this morning.

WONG



: Good to speak with you.

END



S





