

Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship





Extra funding to combat people smuggling

The Australian Government has provided more than $18 million to the United  Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the International Organization for  Migration (IOM) to combat people smuggling and manage irregular migration.

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Senator Chris Evans, said that more  than $10 million will be provided to the UNODC to fund three projects specifically to  target transnational crime and people smuggling activity throughout Asia.

The first of these UNODC projects will fund computer-based training designed to  equip border staff with the knowledge and skills to detect and stop people smuggling  activities. In delivering training through the computer-based model, the government  anticipates these modules will reach significant numbers of staff across a broad  range of locations.

The second project will finance the creation of a coordination and analysis unit to  gather, examine and distribute statistics on people smuggling across the region. The  third project will fund the expansion of UNODC's border liaison officer network to  strengthen cross-border cooperation and to elevate the issue of people smuggling  within the network.

The three projects will be delivered over four years to Cambodia, China, Laos,  Burma, Thailand and Vietnam. The coordination and analysis unit and computer-based training project will also be implemented in Indonesia.

The $8 million commitment to IOM will enable the organisation to maintain its  network of outreach offices in Indonesia over the next four years.

'The IOM commitment will boost efforts between Australia and Indonesia to combat  irregular migration and ensure the suitable treatment of irregular migrants,' Senator  Evans said.

'The funding will enable IOM to continue to assist Indonesian authorities to monitor  and manage irregular migration flows and gather information on people smuggling  activity.'

'The IOM will also undertake training with local authorities and information  dissemination through its network of offices to raise awareness about people  smuggling issues.'

IOM has offices located throughout Indonesia, from Medan in the west to Kupang in  the east, adjacent to the main people smuggling routes.

'Conflicts in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka as well as ongoing problems in Iraq and  Africa have forced millions of desperate people to flee their own countries and seek  safety elsewhere around the world,' Senator Evans said.

'We will continue to see boat arrivals in Australia while people continue to flee war  and persecution and people smugglers will continue to exploit the vulnerability of  these people.'



See:  Index of Media Releases

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09085.htm   Last update: 15 September 2009 at 09:32 AEST



