





THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND  INTERCEPTS VESSEL

[29 December, 2009] Border Protection Command has provided assistance to a vessel  140 nautical miles north east of Gove. The people on board the vessel are safe and  have indicated that they wish to come to Australia.

HMAS Launceston, operating under the control of Border Protection Command,  boarded the vessel at 7:30am (AEST).

The vessel was initially sighted by a Customs and Border Protection Dash 8 aircraft,  operating under the control of BPC.

Initial indications suggest 30 passengers and 3 crew are on board the vessel.

Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking  for settlement and can be targeted by, and fall prey to, people smugglers.

According to the UNHCR 2008 Global Trends report, there were 42 million forcibly  displaced persons worldwide at the end of 2008, including 15.2 million refugees.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional  problem. The commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the  Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational  Crime, is critical to addressing this most serious issue.

The Australian Government has an orderly and planned migration program and places  a high priority on protecting Australia’s borders from irregular maritime arrivals by  maintaining an effective and visible tactical response program of aerial, land and sea-based patrols.

The Australian Government’s Border Protection Command uses a combination of  Customs and Border  Protection and Defence assets to deliver a coordinated national response to security  threats in Australia’s maritime domain.

The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s  borders and today’s successful boarding by Border Protection Command continues to  demonstrate the effectiveness of the proactive response program in place.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security,  identity and health checks and their reasons for travel will be established.

Media Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02)  6275 6793

-----------------------------

To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au

