Tue, 10th November 2009



TURNBULL INTERVIEW WITH TIM COX (ABC RADIO HOBART) - RUDD’S  FAILED BORDER PROTECTION POLICIES, JOHN HOWARD, ETS

The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP

Leader of the Opposition

E&OE

TIM COX:

Mr Turnbull very good to talk to you again, good morning.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Great to be with you Tim.

TIM COX:

Did you get to watch Four Corners last night?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

I certainly did, yes.

TIM COX:

Apart from Ian Macfarlane eating an orange… I don’t know, did you sleep well after watching that because I don’t

know, it is always interesting for people like me to see what is happening behind the scenes, to get a better

sense of the depth of what goes on, but also of course with your Wilson Tuckeys that we know well enough and

Barnaby Joyce, but also the Cory Bernardis etc, the difficultly you are going to have in bringing together a

Coalition who will be part of the debate?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well Tim I’m not going to be deflected from the big issue of the moment which is Kevin Rudd’s absolutely

colossal failure on border protection. The reality is that he unpicked the policies that were working at the time he

came into office. He said it would have no impact on unauthorised arrivals and people smuggling. And we are

now seeing an extraordinary surge in people smuggling and unauthorised asylum seekers.

We have an Australian Government vessel, the Oceanic Viking, which is heading into its fourth week now, sitting

up off Indonesia when it should be doing work elsewhere. I mean, as you know, there is a big issue about the

illegal fishing in the Southern Ocean, you know with these gillnets set on the bottom up to 10 kilometres long.

That is something that the Oceanic Viking should be dealing with but they can’t because thanks to Kevin Rudd’s

colossal policy failure it is essentially operating as a floating hostel off the coast of Indonesia.

TIM COX:

When it is resolved though, isn’t it just the Pacific Solution in another location, the Indonesian Solution, isn’t it

exactly the same as the former Coalition government….

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Tim, Kevin Rudd doesn’t have any solution. I mean the fact of the matter is - and I am not saying something that

is contentious or subjective; this is just a fact - there was a set of policies in place as of the middle of last year,

following the election, which had been put into place and refined and developed and evolved under the Coalition,

which had had the result of no boats, very little or no boats for many years. So it was successful. Kevin Rudd

unpicked that. He was advised by the Federal Police not to do it. They said the people smugglers would use this

as a marketing tool to get more customers.

The Indonesian Ambassador made a similar warning. The International Organisation for Migration made a similar

warning. But he went ahead recklessly and now we have as of right now we have close to 50 boats since August

of last year and over 2200 unauthorised arrivals to the point where we are going to be spending tens of millions

of dollars to double the size of the detention centre facilities on Christmas Island, which were built by the Howard

Government and which were described only a year ago by the Labor Party as a white elephant because they

would never be needed.

TIM COX:

Now if the Sri Lankan asylum seekers do leave the ship - they say they won’t go to Indonesian soil - but is there

a difference though in them going to Indonesia to if they were taken to Nauru instead, as they would once have

been?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well look I think the colossal failure of judgement on Kevin Rudd’s part Tim is that he apparently - assuming, you

know, just accepting what he said - he apparently reached some form of agreement with the Indonesia President

that they could be disembarked in Indonesia. But he obviously did not turn his mind at all to how he was going to

persuade them to leave the boat. And so as I understand it the Indonesians are happy for them to disembark -

again I am only relying on what I’ve been told in the press.

You know we have asked for a briefing on this sometime ago and the Government has said we won’t give you

any briefing on the situation until it is resolved. So this is why when people ask me ‘what would I do with the

people on the boat’ - the Government has put us in a position where we know no more than you do. They are

refusing to share any information on this situation, no doubt because it is such a colossal policy failure.

TIM COX:

Although I note the ever helpful Senator Joyce, the aforementioned Senator Joyce had a solution of marching

them back to Sri Lanka which would of course, as he said, send a strong message. Why not send a strong

message then?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well the reality is you cannot do that. That would be contrary to the UN Convention on Refugees. The fact is that

they are seeking asylum from a situation in Sri Lanka, that is their claim - of course you know there’s a lot of

question marks about at least one of them, this fellow Alex, who admits to having been living in Canada for some

time, quite a considerable time and having had a fairly colourful criminal record there - so nonetheless they are

entitled to have their claims processed by the UN High Commission on Refugees.

The appropriate place for them to be disembarked is Indonesia. There is no question about that. But of course

Kevin Rudd’s problem is that they are on an Australian boat and he obviously hasn’t given any thought as to how

to get them to leave.

TIM COX:

Well if Indonesia’s the right place then Mr Turnbull, isn’t Kevin Rudd doing the right thing and endeavouring to get

them to land on Indonesian soil?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Tim he is certainly not succeeding in getting them to come off the boat and he is in a position now where the

asylum seekers are dictating terms to Australia. And the fact is that we cannot continue with a set of policies that

effectively are outsourcing our humanitarian immigration program to the people smuggling industry. That is what

Kevin Rudd has done.

Now it is a colossal, catastrophic failure of policy. And it is his own doing because we know that we had, if you go

back to 2002-03 there were no boats; in 2003-04 there were three; in 2004-05 there were none; 2005-06 there

were eight; 2006-07 four; 2007-08 three. So there were little or no people smuggling activity going right back for

seven years and that was the result of good policies, successful policies. Now Kevin Rudd threw those policies

out the window and we’re now, as I said, in a situation where we have had over 2,200 arrivals since August last

year.

TIM COX:

Malcolm Turnbull here on ABC local radio.

Are you happy to see John Howard, the former prime minister, returning to the political debate, the public

discourse in the last week or so? Of course he’s kept a pretty low profile over the last two years or so.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well I think it’s good. I think it’s good for him to be out and about and expressing, making a contribution. John’s

experience is unparalleled. There’s no longer serving prime minister in our history apart from Robert Menzies. So

there is no one alive in Australia today that has a longer experience in government than he has had and so he

has a very valuable contribution to make and it’s important, and he provides plenty of advice when asked. He

plays a very constructive and positive role in the Liberal Party.

TIM COX:

Alright, well can we finish where I tried to get us going and that was on the Four Corners program last night.

Of course whilst it’s a very difficult humanitarian issue the asylum seeker question is one that’s very popular in

the public domain Malcolm Turnbull but this other question of climate change and how the Coalition will have its

seat at the table, and as I said, we saw the diversity, the difficulty with which you’re dealing last night. How will

you overcome that?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well, very simply Tim, we have a process. We are in good faith negotiations with the Government. I’m not going

to be deflected from those negotiations. They will have an outcome. At the end of that we will then decide

whether we as a Shadow Cabinet agree with the outcome and then we will either recommend its acceptance or

not to the party room.

Now the fact of the matter is the Australian people expect us to take a constructive approach to this and that is

exactly what we’re doing. I mean the Prime Minister’s outburst last week was not consistent with those good faith

negotiations. But I can assure you we will not be deflected by him and the negotiations are continuing and they

will have a conclusion and then we will consider it.

TIM COX:

Do you envy the solidarity that appears to exist in Labor ranks on this issue? There’s not the, well the difficulty,

with respect, that you have.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well, Tim, look I understand your interest in it but really I can’t go any further than…

TIM COX:

It’s not my interest Mr Turnbull, it’s my listeners’ interest as you well know - as a former environment minister you

well know.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

I’m sure your listeners are interested in it but I’m not going to run a commentary on good faith negotiations which

are going on at the moment. And when they reach a conclusion we will then be able to, both the Government and

the Opposition, will be able to be quite clear about our positions going forward. But we are having good faith

negotiations.

And really when I was talking to Steve Titmus this morning, our candidate in Bass, and Steve is there on the

ground taking up the fight to Labor and the issues that people are talking to him about are certainty for jobs, aged

care, they are talking about the concern about saving the Australian Technical College in Launceston and Burnie,

they’re talking about the lack of GPs in Tasmania. I mean those are the issues that people are talking to Steve

about and those are the on the ground, at the coal face issues that politicians like myself and Steve Titmus have

to address, and he’s taking that fight up to Labor very emphatically there in Bass.

TIM COX:

There would be though… people that Steve would be campaigning would be hoping to represent, primary

producers in particular, that are hoping that the Coalition will talk common sense and oppose an ETS.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

The position that we have put and our position is that agriculture emissions should be excluded from an

emissions trading scheme but agricultural offsets, green carbon offsets, should be included. And that is the

position, by the way, that is being followed in the United States and will be followed in Europe, so it’s a very

responsible approach that we’re talking. That offers enormous benefits to farmers.

The ability to create carbon credits if you like by more sustainable methods of cultivation and grazing by

environmental forestry, increasing levels of soil carbon, is a very big opportunity. And you will have noticed that

the National Farmers’ Federation have strongly supported the position that I’ve taken on behalf of farmers in

these negotiations.

TIM COX:

Malcolm Turnbull, good to talk to you as always. Many thanks for your time.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Great to talk to you Tim. Bye.

