1









LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. MALCOLM TURNBULL MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

13 November 2009

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. MALCOLM TURNBULL MP  JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH THE HON. SHARMAN STONE MP,  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  ELECTORATE OFFICE, SYDNEY

Subjects: Coalition’s strong stand on border protection.

E&OE…………………………………………………………………………………………………………...

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Now the Coalition takes the national government’s responsibility for border protection very seriously.  Australians know that the Coalition has always been prepared to take the tough decisions on national  security and border protection. We are determined to keep our borders secure, to prevent and discourage  asylum seekers from risking their lives on perilous journeys and to protect the integrity of our very generous  immigration program.

Our border protection policy is to stop the boats. We have done this before and we will do it again. We are  prepared to take the tough decisions that Kevin Rudd has failed to take. The only way to deter people  smugglers is to have tougher laws. Only tougher laws send the right signals to the people smugglers and to  their prospective customers. By recklessly unpicking the policies of the previous government, that had  successfully stopped the people smuggling trade, Mr Rudd has given those people smugglers a powerful  marketing tool where they can offer the near certainly of permanent residence in one of the richest countries  in the world to those who have the cash and the contacts to buy a seat on the boat.

Now having done this, the Rudd Government has created the reality and the perception that Australia is a  soft target. Lives are placed at risk and the integrity of our borders and our immigration program are being  compromised. I am setting out today, here with the Shadow Minister, principles that will reduce the ability  of the people smugglers to market the certainty of permanent residence in Australia and these principles will  therefore deter unauthorised arrivals. We will not shirk this responsibility in the way Labor has done. We  will announce further details of the policy closer to the election. But here are the four core principles.

Firstly, we will once again secure our borders. Our aim is to stamp out people smuggling and effectively  deter unauthorised arrivals while at the same time treating refugees compassionately in accordance with our  obligations under the UN Convention.

Secondly, we will ensure that unauthorised arrivals seeking asylum are intercepted and processed offshore at  Christmas Island, not on the Australian mainland as Mr Rudd is planning to do.

2

Thirdly, we will introduce a non-permanent visa for asylum seekers who arrive without authorisation.  Asylum seekers who arrive without authorisation will be granted this safe haven visa rather than Labor’s  permanent residency. It will be reassessed after a specific period not longer than three years, and if they are  found to be in need of continued protection they will then be eligible for permanent residency. If they are  found not to be in need of such protection they will be returned to their country of origin.

A Turnbull Government will maintain Australia’s substantial humanitarian program for refugees who come  to Australia through the legitimate and conventional processes. This intake will always favour those most in  need.

Last year Australia took the second largest number of refugees through the UN process as documented by  the UNHCR. We have a very generous refugee program. We must not, cannot outsource it to the people  smugglers as Mr Rudd is doing.

Now these principles are at the core of our border protection policy. They represent the tough decisions the  Rudd Government is not prepared to make. Labor has weakened our border protection regime and caused a  surge of unauthorised boat arrivals.  Kevin Rudd has truly rolled out the Rudd carpet to the people  smugglers.  He has encouraged people smugglers.  He has given them a powerful marketing tool that has  compromised the integrity of our borders and our generous immigration program.  Only the government I  will lead after the next election can stop the boats and secure our borders.

Now let me make some specific comments about the Oceanic Viking and the situation there. Mr Rudd must  disclose today what special offers he has made to the Sri Lankans on the Oceanic Viking.  What are the  special deals?  It would appear that he is trying to lure them off the boat with a special deal that will see  them rush off to the airport and come down to Australia.  He appears to be offering them a better and faster  passage to Australia than people arriving at Christmas Island are offered.  It is a catastrophic signal of a  policy failure that has said to the people smugglers around the world, Australia is a soft target.

Truly he has rolled out the Rudd carpet to the people smugglers.  He cannot keep on sending this signal.  It  is compromising the integrity of our borders and compromising the integrity of our refugee program.  He is  outsourcing the refugee program that we, the people of Australia, through our government should be  administering, to the people smugglers, to the criminal people smugglers.  Any questions?

QUESTION:

Are you advocating any return to opening other detention centres I guess in other islands in the Pacific such  as Nauru?  Is this a return to the Pacific Solution?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

No, we’re not making any proposal to that effect.  We have an offshore processing centre at Christmas  Island and it should be the focus of the offshore processing.  But certainly our commitment is that  unauthorised asylum seekers should be intercepted and processed at Christmas Island.

QUESTION:

Are you expecting any, I guess, dissent within the party, particularly from people like Petro Georgiou,  particularly around the issue of having this temporary visa for asylum seekers?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Look, we understand this is a tough decision.  Kevin Rudd has not made one tough decision on the border  protection issue - not one.  He claims to be tough - he has been soft.  He has shown himself to be weak and  indecisive and he has allowed himself to be stood over by people smugglers and stood over, in fact, by the

3

asylum seekers on the Oceanic Viking.  That weakness has been telegraphed around the world in letters a  mile high.  He has rolled out the Rudd carpet to the people smugglers.  Now that has to stop.

What we have to do is reduce the ability of the people smugglers to market the certainty of permanent  residency in Australia, and this is a means of doing that.  It is humane, it is just, it’s in accordance with the  Convention. It its perfectly fair and Australians will recognise it as such.  It will not please everybody I grant  you, but we have to have a tougher policy on the border.

Kevin Rudd’s experiment of weakness, indecision, softness has failed.  It’s been a proven failure by nearly  50 boats and 2,200 unauthorised arrivals since he changed, recklessly changed, the policy of the previous  government.

QUESTION:

You’ve been saying for a few weeks that it’s not the Opposition’s job to say what you would do in terms of  the Oceanic Viking asylum seekers but now that you’ve announced your policy, what would you do in this  case?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well we have sought, but been refused a briefing on the Oceanic Viking situation.  In our view they should  be disembarked in Indonesia without any special deals.  That is clearly what Mr Rudd should be seeking to  achieve.  I mean, let’s face it: he is the one who said he had the arrangement with the Indonesians to  disembark them in Indonesia.  He is the one who caused the boat to go to Indonesia and he is the Prime  Minister who apparently failed to give any consideration as to how he was going to persuade them to leave  the boat.

But we have not been briefed on the situation.  Sharman and I do not know the details of who is on the boat,  where they’re from, any of the details that are relevant to a decision as to exactly how to deal with it on the  spot.  We haven’t been given that information.  Only the Government has that. They have to take  responsibility for the consequences of their actions.

QUESTION:

With the non-permanent visas, will there be a major difference in terms of people being able to see their  family or bringing their family over here unlike the temporary visa situation?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Our policy would be that, except in special circumstances, family reunion would not be permitted during the  period of the safe haven visa, which would be likely to be a period of several years, certainly not more than  three years, and they would be entitled to work. So it would have some differences from the previous  arrangements. But the principle is the same. The details are important obviously. But the critical issue is the  element of conditionality.

What it does is it reduces the ability of the people smuggler to market the certainty of permanent residency  in Australia. We’ve got to think very, very clearly about this. We are talking about people smugglers who  are in a criminal business. They are seeking from those people who want to come to Australia large sums of  money, large sums of money in any country but particularly in a developing country - 10, 15 thousand  dollars - and they are offering them a product and that product is, as it currently stands, a near certain  permanent residency outcome. What we have to do is design a policy or restate a policy that will reduce the  certainty of that offered product by the people smuggler, and that therefore will serve both to undermine his  business and of course deter unauthorised arrivals.

4

The problem that we face with Mr Rudd is that he has no policy. Remember, let’s be quite clear about this,  Mr Rudd unpicked the policy of the previous government that worked. The proof was there. There were  little or no boats. In some years, there were no boats; in other years, a handful. So it was working. He said he  could change those policies and it would make no difference to the rate of boat arrivals. And then the boats  started coming. He said it was just push factors. That nonsense has been disowned by everybody - by the  Indonesians, by the Sri Lankans, by the International Organisation on Migration, by the Australian Federal  Police.

It is blindingly obvious that the change in Australian domestic policy has acted as a powerful pull factor and  what we have to do is to diminish the strength of that pull factor otherwise we will continue, under Mr  Rudd’s approach, to outsource our generous immigration policy to the people smugglers.

QUESTION:

The previous government was often accused I guess by its critics of having an inhumane approach to asylum  seekers. In returning to some of the policies of the previous government, are you afraid that you’re going to  attract the same criticism?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Look this is a very appropriate policy response and let me just make one very important point, as a matter of  fact. When the United Nations talks about outcomes for refugees, they talk about what is called a durable  solution which means essentially repatriation - going home to your own country where the conditions have  improved so that you can live there without fear of persecution - or being resettled in another country such  as Australia.

Over the last ten years, less then one per cent, less than one per cent of all of the durable solutions, all of the  satisfactory outcomes were from resettlement. The vast majority were from people being able to go back to  their own homes to live there safely because the security situation has improved. So that is always going to  be the overwhelming object of policy with respect to refugees. So this is an appropriate, it’s a fair response  and it will serve unquestionably to deter people smuggling because it would reduce the certainty of the  permanent residency outcome that the people smuggler is charging individuals a very large amount of  money for.

Okay. Thank you very much.

[ends]

