Thu, 31st December 2009

ABBOTT INTERVIEW WITH ANDREW MOORE (RADIO 2GB) - ETS  COMPENSATION, ASYLUM SEEKERS, PETER SPENCER

The Hon Tony Abbott MP

Leader of the Opposition

E&OE

ANDREW MOORE

Mr Abbott, good morning. Nice to talk to you again and happy new year.

TONY ABBOTT

Yes Andrew, good to be with you and happy new year to you as well.

ANDREW MOORE

Now, on this issue, Treasury modelling shows low income households would get $610 in cash compensation but

will only have to pay out $410 in high prices. Now you say that’s fishy.

TONY ABBOTT

Well, what is this? Is this an environmental scheme or is this a scheme to reward Labor’s voting base and Kevin

Rudd kept telling us that climate change was the great moral challenge of our time but the way Labor presents it,

it’s actually ‘have we got a deal for you, Labor voters.’ Now, they’re very mixed messages that the Government is

sending out.

The other point I should make, Andrew, about this ‘modelling’ - in inverted commas - that was released

yesterday by Peter Garrett is that it wasn’t really modelling that was released. It was just a press release that was

put out and one of the real problems here is that the Government keeps telling us how much better off most

people will be under their money-go-round but it won’t give us the detailed work that sustains that argument and

when you’re going to make very big changes that will basically cascade through the whole of our society and the

whole of our economy, you’ve really got to be a lot more upfront with people than this Government seems to want

to be.

ANDREW MOORE

The strong reaction we were getting from listeners yesterday was this is a blatant attempt to try and buy votes

and it seems to me that after the chronic failure of the Copenhagen summit that this is where they’re at now, that

this has turned more political then environmental.

TONY ABBOTT

Well, exactly right. I mean, obviously if you are going to make big changes you’ve got to try to make sure that

people are properly looked after. But why make big changes that are designed to alter people’s behaviour if at

the same time you’re giving them so much compensation that they don’t need to alter their behaviour.

So, at all sorts of levels this whole thing seems very misconceived. It’s again, I think, typical of our Prime Minister

that he uses moralistic language to clothe what is a blatantly political attempt to keep buying his way into

popularity and ultimately buy his way back into office.

ANDREW MOORE

Why is this coming out in dribs and drabs and it’s been the case ever since and ETS was announced. We don’t

have a clear picture, we don’t have details of the cost, not certainly released by the Federal Government. We

don’t have details on how people above low incomes are going to be affected financially by this. Why is it all

coming in such dribs and drabs?

TONY ABBOTT

Again Andrew, I think this is much to the Federal Government’s discredit. It suggests to me that either they

haven’t thought the whole thing through or they’re concerned if they did release all of this so that we could have a

proper debate about it people would be much more alarmed than they already are.

ANDREW MOORE

Well, they’re claiming that 50 per cent of households will be no worse off. What about the other 50 per cent?

TONY ABBOTT

Yeah, which is code for saying that 50 per cent…

ANDREW MOORE

Will cop a hammering.

TONY ABBOTT

…will probably be worse off. So, this is the difficulty that they’ve got and the more they say about this the more

questions they raise and when you’ve got senior ministers who are repeatedly unable or unwilling to answer

questions about the impact on household budgets or on ordinary families, they’ve just got a terrible problem and I

just think it’s high time the Prime Minister fronted the media about this.

ANDREW MOORE

Well that was, he never does. He never gives the details, he never wants to be in a position where he answers

questions and if it’s not him, which it very rarely is about any of the ETS, it’s Penny Wong, now it’s gone to Peter

Garrett.

TONY ABBOTT

You wonder what’s happened to the Prime Minister since he’s come back from Copenhagen. I mean, he

disappeared except for turning up at the cricket the other day briefly and I think he turned up to help turn a sod at

the new Sydney Cancer Institute and apart from that he’s more or less gone into the bunker since coming back

from Copenhagen and people are more concerned about his great big new tax than ever before and instead of

being out there explaining it, justifying it, defending it, giving us all the details, he seems to have gone into what

for a politician amounts to hiding. I just think this doesn’t inspire confidence in people either.

ANDREW MOORE

Well, a caller to this program, John, has alluded me to a poll on the NineMSN website. It’s a poll that says ‘will the

ETS benefit low income earners’. The ‘yes’ vote is 8,100. The ‘no’ vote - 44,749. So people aren’t being fooled, I

don’t think.

TONY ABBOTT

Well, I think that’s a good point. I mean, you know, I was a member of a government, and I don’t want to

encourage cynicism about government because government is necessary and I think that good government has

helped Australia over the past 25 years or so. But we all know the way government works. You do something and

you put in place a compensation package. What you have done by way of a new tax or charge tends to be

permanent. The compensation tends to be temporary because you’ve always got the boffins in Treasury and

Finance looking at ways to cut spending and this is why I think people are quite rightly suspicious of governments

that say ‘look here’s your new tax and here’s your compensation package’ because they know that government

will be tempted as time goes by to claw back the compensation while leaving the tax in place.

ANDREW MOORE

Now you’ve been accused of coming up with fraudulent figures by the Government when you say that Australians

are going to be more than $1000 a year worse off. Do you stand by those figures and how did you come up with

them?

TONY ABBOTT

Well, I do stand by the figures which were drawn from reports based on Government modelling. But in the end it’s

not my job, Andrew, to say what the Government’s scheme will cost. It’s the Government’s job to say what the

Government’s scheme will cost families and we’ve been saying, based on these reports for quite a few weeks

now, that the Government’s scheme is going to cost middle income families $1100 a year and they’ve never

denied it. I mean, they’ve asked us to justify it but they’ve never denied it. Now if they’ve got a problem with our

figures let them fully release their own figures and we can see just who’s right.

ANDREW MOORE

Well, I assume that the Coalition’s and your personal anti-ETS way of thinking is going to continue when this

comes back up again in February?

TONY ABBOTT

Oh yes, you can have no doubt at all about that. I mean, if anything our opposition to the ETS has hardened over

the last few weeks. I don’t think anyone watching Copenhagen could have any confidence that unilateral action

by Australia along these lines…

ANDREW MOORE

Well, a caller, Pamela, earlier this morning raised a good point. Do you have any idea what the ball park figure is

on how much money that exercise cost Australia?

TONY ABBOTT

Well, I don’t. But it certainly is a very good question and it’s one that again the Government should answer. I

mean, to take 114 officials to Copenhagen would of itself be a gargantuan exercise because I don’t imagine they

would have stayed at a youth hostel, and I’m not saying they should, but the fact is it would have been a very

expensive exercise.

ANDREW MOORE

And all the research, it would have cost millions and millions of dollars. Now, changing tact a little, asylum

seekers. Fifty-nine boat loads of people being caught in Australian waters this year, so we’re up averaging more

than one a week. Kevin Rudd, as you pointed out yesterday, promised at the end of the election campaign to turn

boats back which hasn’t been happening and you’ve said your position will be that.

TONY ABBOTT

Well, what we’ve got to do is deny people the prospect of the great prize of permanent residency in Australia

because if they think that by getting on a leaky boat, taking the terrible risks involved and getting to Australia they

are almost certain to become permanent residents of this country, they will keep coming.

So, there are four things, Andrew, that we need to do. First of all we have to have very strong and effective

relationships with source countries and stage countries. We’ve got to have a policy of rigorous offshore

processing. We’ve got to have a temporary visa for people who come in an unauthorised way and finally, as

Kevin Rudd said before the election, in the right circumstances we do have to be prepared to turn boats around.

ANDREW MOORE

It’s not an easy thing and you face risks when you do turn boats around. We’ve already seen a case of that this

year because people if they are legitimately desperate are setting fire to boats, they don’t want a bar of it. So, it’s

not an easy solution but I think what Australian’s are crying out for is a bit of toughness here, as you say making

it a much tougher choice for people to decide to take that route to get to Australia and no guarantee that you’re

going to get in.

TONY ABBOTT

Well, this is right, Andrew. Now, there are no easy answers here but telling the world how compassionate you’re

going to be just encourages the people smugglers and their potential clients and sure, if we are as

compassionate as the refugee advocates would want us to be, once people come to Australia they will be, I

suppose, feted. But a lot of them are going to suffer terribly on the trip and you’ve got to ask yourself why is that

more moral than saying to people, ‘look, don’t take anything for granted’ and not having them take to sea in leaky

boats and not taking the terrible risks that are associated with that.

ANDREW MOORE

Now, one other issue before we run out of time. Peter Spencer, a lot of our listeners want to know your take on

this. He’s the man we’ve been following very closely. Day 39 of a hunger strike. I’ve spoken a couple of times

with your frontbencher Barnaby Joyce who has been out to see him. The Prime Minister refusing to meet with

him. What’s your take on it?

TONY ABBOTT

Well, look, it’s a hard one. I mean, I don’t think that people should threaten self-harm but on the other hand I don’t

think the government should basically ride roughshod over people’s financial interests and we shouldn’t lightly do

things which cause people’s asset values to crash. So, look, I have a lot of sympathy for him and I do think that

both the state and the national government have been very poor in the way they’ve handled this. But I do, like

Barnaby Joyce, think it would be in everyone’s best interests if he called off the protest because no one wants to

see this bloke come to harm and he can’t go on like this without coming to harm, obviously.

ANDREW MOORE

No, and look, we all want Peter Spencer down, none of us want him to do harm to himself or worse, day 39 of a

hunger strike, damage isn’t far away. But as I’ve been saying I think if any one Australian needs to hear from the

Prime Minister at this time, it’s Peter Spencer. We’re out of time. Tony Abbott, look we’ve had so many people

that want to ask you questions, maybe in the new year we can organise a time where we can have half an hour

together to talk to everyone again.

TONY ABBOTT

Andrew, I’d be very happy to come into the studio one morning and take talkback.

ANDREW MOORE

Good on you. Tony, happy new year.

TONY ABBOTT

And to you.

