The Hon Stephen Smith MP  AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Transcript E&OE

27 October 2009

Interview with ABC2 Breakfast

Subjects: Oceanic Viking; Asylum seekers.

HEATHER EWART: The top story on ABC News Breakfast. Seventy-eight asylum seekers  on board an Australian Customs boat are today expected to be handed to Indonesian  authorities.

The Oceanic Viking arrived in Indonesia last night, but remains anchored 10 nautical miles  off the island of Bintan.

JOE O’BRIEN: The Federal Government says Indonesian officials will process the asylum  seekers while they're still on board. Meanwhile, Defence Minister, John Faulkner is  currently in Indonesia for talks on the issue of people smuggling.

HEATHER EWART: And for more, Foreign Minister Stephen Smith joins us from  Canberra.

Good morning, Minister.

STEPHEN SMITH: Good morning, Heather.

HEATHER EWART: Now can you give us the latest on what's happening with the Oceanic  Viking?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well it's the early hours of the morning in Indonesia. It's about 4am.  Inclement weather yesterday evening and last night prevented any further work between  Australian and Indonesian officials to transport the asylum seekers on board from the  Oceanic Viking to Indonesian territory. But subject to weather-conditions today, Indonesia  time, we hope that that process starts.

HEATHER EWART: And will that process actually begin on board? How is it going to  unfold?

STEPHEN SMITH: That'll be a matter for the Australian officials and Indonesian officials

Page 1 of 5 Interview with ABC2 Breakfast

9/12/2009 http://www.foreignminister.gov.au/transcripts/2009/091027_abc2.html

on board to determine. We expect there will be some preliminary processing on board. But  in the end the formal processing of applications by the Sri Lankans for asylum I anticipate  will be effected on Indonesian territory through the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees (UNHCR), which is the standard process in Indonesia. But we expect there will be  some preliminary processing on board, identification and the like. Again, that will be a  matter for Australian and Indonesian officials to determine.

This matter started as a rescue at sea operation. We want it to conclude safely as a rescue at  sea operation and leave it in the end or in the final analysis that processing to be effected by  the UNHCR on Indonesian soil.

HEATHER EWART: Nevertheless, is there any suggestion that force may have to be used  here and what would be the Government's attitude to that, the Australian Government's  attitude to that?

STEPHEN SMITH: On the basis of the advice I've received to date, I'm confident and I'm  expecting that this will be an orderly transfer of 78 people from the Oceanic Viking to the  Indonesians and then for processing by Indonesia. In the end, of course, that's a matter for  Australian officials on board, Indonesian officials, and also for the asylum seekers  themselves. But on the basis of the information I've received, I'm expecting there will be a  peaceful and an orderly transfer done safely at sea, subject of course to weather conditions  which I've referred to earlier.

HEATHER EWART: So is this the so-called Indonesian solution at work?

STEPHEN SMITH: We need to very carefully remember how this matter commenced. This  matter commenced with Australia being asked to assist a search and rescue on the high seas  in the international search and rescue area. A boat was in distress, Indonesia didn't have  any vessels in the area and Australia was asked to assist, which of course we did to  discharge our humanitarian and our safety at sea obligation. There was then no obligation  on Indonesia to take the asylum seekers, but they agreed to, and that's what we've been  effecting over the last week or so. Ultimately, where the asylum seekers go to, how they are  transported to Indonesia is a matter for Indonesia to determine. That's what our officials  have been closely cooperating about.

There's a separate and more general issue which of course is asylum seekers travelling  through Indonesia trying to get to Australia. We've been cooperating with Indonesia very  closely in recent time. We face heightened difficulties with additional push factors,  particularly from Sri Lanka. We're now working very closely with Indonesia to see what  more we can do together, looking at more information and intelligence sharing, and  cooperation on disrupting people smuggling activities. But also giving further assistance to

Page 2 of 5 Interview with ABC2 Breakfast

Indonesia for detention and facilities for detention and for processing and settlement and  re-settlement. This is a problem which our region faces and we're working closely with  Indonesia just as we are, for example, with Malaysia and also Sri Lanka which are also the

transit and source countries.

HEATHER EWART: But aren't you relying perhaps too much on Indonesia to get your  government out of a very big bind over the asylum seeker issue?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well what we want to do is to make sure that there is an orderly  processing to this. We want to stop the boats from coming. That's going to be very difficult  given the push factors that we see from Afghanistan, the Afghanistan-Pakistan border area,  and also now most recently from Sri Lanka. But we can only do that in conjunction with our  neighbours. That's why, yes, we're working very closely with Indonesia, but we're also  working closely with Malaysia, also with Sri Lanka and other countries in our region, both  bilaterally, but also through the Bali Process, which is the regional institution to deal with  people smuggling matters.

This is not an area where we are saying or whether there's any expectation that we are  leaving Indonesia to bear the burden of this. People smugglers use Indonesian territory,  abuse Indonesian territory, seeking to get people to Australia. Indonesia doesn't want to be  regarded as an easy transit country and that's why it's been taking a range of measures in  conjunction with Australia to stop and disrupt the people smuggling activity. In the last  three or four years, they've disrupted over 80 people smuggling activities and the most  recent one we've seen, a boatload of some 200 Sri Lankans now in Merak Harbour. So the  Indonesian authorities have been working very hard on this and they've been working  closely with us on this very difficult issue.

HEATHER EWART: Do you accept that there is confusion and dismay in some sections of  your party about what the Rudd Government's policy really is here? Some refugees  advocates, for example, are claiming that it's no different to Howard's Pacific Solution  which was so condemned by you in Opposition.

STEPHEN SMITH: That's complete nonsense. We are working very closely with Indonesia,  which is a major transit country and Indonesia is cooperating with us. This is completely  unlike the so-called Pacific Solution where the Howard Government paid Nauru and Papua  New Guinea through Manus Island, substantial sums of money to do processing in the  Pacific, not transit countries...

HEATHER EWART: But you accepted the distinction...

STEPHEN SMITH: ...not source countries...

Page 3 of 5 Interview with ABC2 Breakfast

HEATHER EWART: The point I'm making is the distinction is becoming a little blurred  perhaps for some people in the electorate and for some in your party.

STEPHEN SMITH: I just don't accept that at all. When you look at what is causing large  numbers of people to move throughout the world - we've got over 40 million displaced  people. Estimates are that up to a third of those may well be in our region or heading  towards our region. This is a substantial regional problem.

This is a problem for Malaysia, for Indonesia, for Thailand, for Sri Lanka, and for Australia.  That's why we've been working very closely together. It's qualitatively different from the  approach that John Howard took which was effectively to seek to not discharge our  international legal obligations and humanitarian obligations under the Refugee's  Convention by having people processed in Papua New Guinea and in Nauru and in the  event, 80 to 90 per cent of those people came to Australia anyway.

What we're trying to do is to make sure that we've got orderly migration systems, and that  we've got border protection which keeps integrity to our borders. We know that there is  always a risk of boats coming, that's why we've substantially increased border protection  and customs control. But given the large numbers of people who are displaced and the large  numbers of people, particularly most recently from Sri Lanka, who are endeavouring to get  to either Malaysia or Indonesia and very many of them ultimately to Australia, we have to  be working in close cooperation with these countries including Indonesia.

That's why we've made it clear so far as Indonesia is concerned that we want to be and are  in discussions with them about what more assistance Australia can bring to the facilities in  their detention centres, to assistance on processing, and to assistance on disruption of  people smuggling activity. And why we are also open to increasing our assistance to the  United Nations High Commission for Refugees, for their work in Indonesia, and the  International Organisation for Migration for their work — the two international  institutions, who throughout the world, deal with these very difficult problems in  conjunction with individual countries like Indonesia.

HEATHER EWART: And just on the question of detention centres, which you just raised, is  Christmas Island here to stay?

Because when some in your party first went on a tour of that facility, they were horrified  about it.

STEPHEN SMITH: We went to the last election with a commitment that Christmas Island  would be the processing point for asylum seekers and that will continue. The Minister for  Immigration, Senator Evans, has made that absolutely clear. Processing of asylum seekers  will continue to occur on Christmas Island and that was an election commitment and we're

Page 4 of 5 Interview with ABC2 Breakfast

not proposing to deviate from that.

HEATHER EWART: Stephen Smith, thank you very much for your time this morning.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks Heather, thank you.

[ENDS]

Media Inquiries: Foreign Minister's office (02) 6277 7500

Page 5 of 5 Interview with ABC2 Breakfast

