



Tue, 3rd November 2009



TURNBULL INTERVIEW WITH GEOFF HUTCHISON (ABC PERTH) -  MELBOURNE CUP, BORDER PROTECTION, AUSTRALIAN ECONOMY

The Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP

Leader of the Opposition

E&OE

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

And for another informed opinion on the Melbourne Cup, I am joined by the Leader of the Opposition, Malcolm

Turnbull. Good morning to you.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

There could never be a less informed opinion than mine.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

Are you on the Bart Cummings bandwagon today?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well I am certainly picking Viewed so, you know, well proven, won the race last year, won the Caulfield Cup and

of course a Bart Cummings horse and in good shape.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

Malcolm Turnbull, Newspoll offers an interesting assessment perhaps of the Federal Government’s border

protection policies today. It shows that support for the Federal Government has slumped seven percentage

points on a two party preferred basis. The Coalition has jumped to 48 per cent. Kevin Rudd remains a long way

ahead of you as preferred prime minister, but do you think the issue of asylum policy is biting the Government

hard?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

The Government’s policy on border protection has comprehensively failed. If we just drain all of the emotion and

rhetoric out of this, let’s just look at the hard facts of life - every Australian government’s policy should be to

secure our borders and to ensure that people smuggling does not occur and that there are no, or as few as

possible, unauthorised maritime arrivals of asylum seekers. That is the objective. Every government should have

that objective.

Now Kevin Rudd in August last year started to unpick the fabric of the Coalition’s border protection policies which

had stopped the boats for some years and had been proven effective. He unpicked those policies and since then

we have had this surge of boats, 46 boats and more than 2100 arrivals, unauthorised arrivals. So his policy

objective has failed comprehensively and Kevin Rudd nonetheless firstly says it is not his fault, says it is has got

nothing to do with him when plainly it has. And secondly, he says he is not going to do anything about it. So he

seems to be committed to having a larger and larger number of unauthorised arrivals and doing more and more

to outsource our immigration policy to people smugglers.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

So if you were in charge of the Oceanic Viking situation, what would you do with its human cargo?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well I don’t like talking about humans as cargo, by the way. There are 78 human beings on that boat. Kevin Rudd

is… he has got himself into a very difficult situation there. He has got to find a way to persuade them to leave the

boat to go on to Indonesia, go back to Indonesia. It sounds - from what we have read in the press - it sounds like

a large number of them have actually been living in Indonesia for five years which demolished the whole claim

that their arrival is a result of…

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

Okay, but what would you do? Because if we accept that the Oceanic Viking with 78 Sri Lankans on board just off

the Indonesian coast waiting to find out if it can arrive or not, it is not a situation governments can control easily.

What would you do if that was facing you?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well what I would do is I would have all of the information to hand from the Customs officials on the boat, I would

know exactly what was going on, I would know exactly what was going on with the Indonesians, and I would be

able to make an informed decision. What I don’t want to do is provide off the cuff advice on specific, delicate

security situations to the Government when I simply do not have access to all the information at hand that Kevin

Rudd does. He is the Prime Minister. He is the one that has to fix it. I could make a suggestion and then Kevin

Rudd could say, oh well that wouldn’t work because of these facts that were only known to the Government so it

is up to him.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

Would you ever consider forcing these people off the boat as Wilson Tuckey, your backbencher, has suggested?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well, again, I am not going to give Kevin Rudd advice on how to deal with this specific, delicate security situation

that he has got. I mean there are obviously a number of options available to him. We all understand that but he

has got to make that decision in the light of the advice he has from Customs, from the Federal Police, from the

Indonesian security people and presumably from the intelligence that they are gathering from the people that are

actually on the boat.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

But with respect, Mr Turnbull, throughout this debate you have had the easy ride, to some extent, of not having to

say what you would do, not having to promise a return of temporary protection visas or a Pacific Islands solution.

So under a Turnbull Government, specifically, what of the old Howard border protection policies would be

reinstated and what would you abandon?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well under a Turnbull Government we would put in place measures that would, over time, stop the people

smugglers. Now we have done it before and we will do it again. Our policy is our record, and we will tailor our

policies. Geoff, I know you want me to answer the question that Kevin Rudd is incapable of answering even

though he is Prime Minister.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

Would you be incapable of answering that question as prime minister too?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

No, if I was Prime Minister - that is the big difference you see - if you are the Prime Minister, you have access to

all the intelligence about what is going on in the people smuggling trade, who the players are, what marketing

methods they are using, what impact particular changes in policies have made. Remember this, Geoff, that we

inherited when we came into government, the Coalition in 1996, we inherited the whole system of mandatory

detention, you know, women and children in detention centres. All of that stuff that Kevin Rudd tries to pretend

was John Howard’s idea. We inherited all of that and those policies were changed and evolved in the light of

experience and in response to events, and they were… the women and children were taken out of detention

centres in 2005 by the Howard Government. So Keating put them in; Howard took them out. Again, you don’t

hear much of that from Kevin Rudd.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

With respect, Mr Turnbull, I don’t think Mr Howard’s policy was seen as particularly sensitive or humane at

different times but it was very popular and I don’t know why you’re unable to tell me what a Turnbull Government

would do on issues of asylum or border protection. Would you provide us with things like the Pacific Solution?

Would there be temporary protection visas reinstated? If everything worked so well under Mr Howard’s

stewardship, why wouldn’t you return to the same kind of policies?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well, we will certainly review all of the policies that worked in the past and consider past policies and alternatives

in the light of the security situation and the position at the time we come back into government after the next

election, assuming the Australian people vote us back in. Now that is the responsible answer. The fact is that you

talk about reinstating the Pacific Solution. Well if by that you mean reinstating processing at Nauru and Manus

Island, that would require negotiation with and the consent of PNG and Nauru.

Now when we were in government, we moved our focus of off-shore processing to Christmas Island. We built the

Christmas Island facility, you have got to remember. So the Pacific Solution itself evolved into processing at

Christmas Island. I guess what I am saying to you Geoff is, the question is one of commitment. You know, and

the Australian people know, the Coalition is committed to stamping out people smuggling. We have used in the

past a range of policies that have changed from year to year and time to time and that have proved, some would

say as a result of trial and error, but nonetheless that have proved to be effective and we will do that again.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

Finally Mr Turnbull, we’re likely to hear from the Reserve Bank probably at pretty much the time the gates fly

open at Flemington that there will be an interest rate increase perhaps of .25 of one per cent. Whilst that will put

pressure on our mortgages of course, is that indicative of an economy that is in better shape, that is up and

running again?

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Well the Australian economy is certainly doing well, particularly relative to other developed countries. But the

problem is, of course, that inflation is being fuelled by the Rudd Government’s reckless spending. Now they,

notwithstanding that the economy is in much better shape than they anticipated when they set up their fiscal

stimulus and when they committed to spend all these billions of dollars in such a poorly targeted way,

notwithstanding the economy is better, they aren’t prepared to trim back or recalibrate or alter in any way their

spending. In fact, according to the MYEFO document, the Mid Year Economic and Financial Outlook document

published yesterday, they appear to be spending more in this current financial year than was planned in the

Budget.

Now they say, of course, that their spending has got no impact on interest rates but I just remind you and your

listeners that on the 20th of February in 2008, last year, Wayne Swan criticised the Howard Government saying,

and I am quoting him, “one of the reasons the Reserve Bank have been backed into a corner” - he is referring to

interest rates - “is that you” - meaning the Howard Government - “spent and you spent and you spent and you

spent”.

And the question is who is doing the spending now? It is Wayne Swan and Kevin Rudd, and they are the ones

that are putting the upward pressure on interest rates today.

GEOFF HUTCHISON:

Malcolm Turnbull, thank you for your time this morning.

MALCOLM TURNBULL:

Thanks so much Geoff.

