Home

RSS |  Feedback | Search

Biography

Media Releases

Speeches

Photo Album

Contact

Australian Labor Party

Subscription Service

Parliamentary Secretary for Western and Northern Australia

Launch of the ASPIRE UWA Project

GS17/2009  21 September 2009

University Club  University of Western Australia  Hackett Drive, Crawley

z Firstly, I would like to acknowledge the Noongar people, who are

the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and pay my  respects to their elders and ancestors.   z I would also like to thank Dr Richard Walley for the wonderful  welcome to country'. Thank you.

Acknowledgements:

z Professor Alan Robson AM, Vice Chancellor, University of  Western Australia   z Ms Sharyn O'Neill, Director General, WA Department of Education  and Training   z Dr Bernadette Barry, General Manager, The Smith Family

z Mr Craig Pasche, General Manager, Indigenous Affairs, Woodside  Energy Ltd   z Ms Valerie Gould, Deputy Director, Independent Schools Assoc.

z Mr Clement Mulcahy, President, Catholic Principal's Assoc. of WA

z Ms Alison Whitelaw, WA Program Manager, Australian Business &  Community Network (ABCN)   z Cr Brad Snell, Shire President, Roeburn Shire Council

z Mr John Dumbill, GM HR, Rio Tinto Iron Ore

Speech:

It is a pleasure to be with you this morning, representing the Deputy Prime  Minister and Minister for Education, Julia Gillard, at this launch.

A good education allows young Australians from all backgrounds to realise  their full potential.

Higher education is essential to achieving a stronger, fairer Australian  society, equipped to meet the challenges of the future.

Quality higher education, the kind of education offered here, is open to  everyone - and in turn, it can open doors for everyone.

When we were elected, the Minister commissioned Denise Bradley to  conduct a thorough review of Australia's Higher Education system.

Page 1 of 3 Launch of the ASPIRE UWA Project

22/09/2009 http://www.minister.infrastructure.gov.au/gg/speeches/2009/GS17_2009.htm

One important area the Review highlighted was the difficulties faced by  regional students and students from disadvantaged backgrounds in  accessing higher education.

Students from high income families are three times as likely to attend  university compared to a student from a low socio-economic status area.

However it is an established fact that students who experience  disadvantage are, once they have completed their university studies, just  as likely to succeed as the rest of the student population.

Yet too often, a person's formal education finishes during secondary  school.

The Rudd Government wants to see more students from disadvantaged  backgrounds access higher education.

International experience shows that outreach activities in the early years of  secondary school are very effective at encouraging students to attend  university.

Today UWA is launching the ASPIRE UWA project to assist students from  regional and disadvantaged schools and communities, including  Indigenous and refugee communities - with  little exposure to a university  education - to aspire to get one.

The project will also connect with some of our remote communities,  including some in the Pilbara.

I am delighted to see principals, staff and student and community  representatives from some of those schools here today.

The Australian Government will provide more than $100 million over four  years to support links between schools and vocational education and  training providers so students who have not thought about university study  before may now do so.

We are proud to contribute to ASPIRE UWA and glad to see that other  organisations have committed to this important project.

It is always a good sign when a project has broad community, business  and government support. ASPIRE UWA definitely ticks all of these boxes

Of course for some students, the transition from school to higher education  will be challenging.

Moving to a new location can be difficult too.

And sometimes students need extra academic support, mentoring from  older students or help with establishing new peer groups.

There will be some distinct challenges facing these students.

To this end, the Government has allocated additional funding of $325  million over four years so that universities can provide intensive support  services to help students stay enrolled at university and complete their  studies successfully.

Keeping young people at school and getting them into higher education,

Page 2 of 3 Launch of the ASPIRE UWA Project

22/09/2009 http://www.minister.infrastructure.gov.au/gg/speeches/2009/GS17_2009.htm

training and into the workforce is central to our Social Inclusion Agenda.

The ASPIRE UWA project, with Year 9 students as its special focus, will  complement our aims.

My congratulations to UWA on today's launch, and to all the teachers,  principals, community and industry partners who will be involved in  ASPIRE UWA in the years to come.

And I particularly congratulate the students who connect with the ASPIRE  UWA project.

Through it they will have new and greater choices in further education and  help with finding their place in world.

It is my great pleasure to launch ASPIRE UWA.

Thank you

Last Updated: 21 September, 2009



Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government







© Copyright | Disclaimer | Privacy

Page 3 of 3 Launch of the ASPIRE UWA Project

22/09/2009 http://www.minister.infrastructure.gov.au/gg/speeches/2009/GS17_2009.htm

