

Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship





Explanation sinks like a stone

The Opposition's Immigration spokeswoman, Sharman Stone, attempted to rewrite  her own history when making a personal explanation in Parliament today.

Dr Stone is denying her unambiguous support for the Rudd Government's  immigration detention reforms, the abolition of Temporary Protection visas and the  Pacific Solution. But the public record shows that Dr Stone has been caught trying to  play with the truth.

Dr Stone offered her unequivocal support to the Rudd Government's risk-based  detention reforms, which maintain mandatory detention for irregular maritime  arrivals, when she told Radio 2SM: 'Labor is very much echoing what we did'  (1/12/08).

Dr Stone was a member of the Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Migration  which in December 2008 unanimously recommended that:

'As a priority, the Australian Government introduce amendments to the Migration Act  1958 to enshrine in legislation the reforms to immigration detention policy announced  by the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship.'

When asked on Sky News if she welcomed the committee's recommendations Dr  Stone said: 'I do…..but let me say Coalition policy was the same: to minimise time in  detention, to have it risk-based.' (2/12/09)

Was Dr Stone misleading the public when she put her name to the Joint Standing  Committee report? Or is she so eager to play politics with the issue that these  embarrassing contradictions are now everyday occurrences?

Dr Stone also misled the ABC Australia Network when she said: 'Enough is enough  you've got to reinstate the strong measures that the coalition had in place in 1999,  2000 and 2001 and put the smugglers out of business. We have opposed every one  of those measures starting with the Temporary Protection Visa.' (5/10/09)

That simply is not true. The Liberal Party and Dr Stone made no attempt to disallow  the regulations which scrapped Temporary Protection Visas in August 2008.

The Liberal Party was also silent when the Government announced the ending of the  Pacific Solution with the closure of detention centres on Nauru and Manus Island,  however Dr Stone has since made the Opposition's position clear several times.

'I don't think we need to again have Nauru and Manus Island operating, because  we've got of course Christmas Island.' (Radio 2SM - 1/12/08)

'We no longer have that requirement because we've got an alternative place which is  in our excised migration zone, Christmas Island.' (The Australian - 16/04/09)

When it comes to a policy on immigration and asylum seekers, Dr Stone and the  Liberal Party are empty vessels. Their only solution is to call for an inquiry.



See:  Index of Media Releases

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/media-releases/2009/ce09099.htm   Last update: 27 October 2009 at 13:03 AEST



