

25 June 2009

APPOINTMENTS TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL

Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, today announced seven appointments to the  Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

“It is with great pleasure that I appoint Professor Robin Creyke, Robin Handley and Jill  Toohey as new AAT members,” Mr McClelland said.

“The new AAT members come from diverse backgrounds including Professor Creyke from  academia, Mr Handley from the legal profession and Ms Toohey from the Western Australian  State Administrative Tribunal.

Mr McClelland also announced the re-appointment of current Deputy President Ray Groom,  Senior Members Narelle Bell, Bruce Pascoe and Member Simon Webb.

“These positions were filled following the transparent appointment process introduced by the  Rudd Government last year,” Mr McClelland said.

The Government sought expressions of interest and nominations through the national media  and appointed a high level panel to assess and recommend suitable candidates.

“This process gives the public confidence that these appointments have been made on merit.”

“I thank outgoing members of the AAT for their significant contribution to ensuring good  governance in Australia.”

Mr Handley, Ms Bell and Ms Toohey will be based in Sydney, Professor Creyke and  Mr Webb in Canberra, Mr Pascoe in Melbourne and Mr Groom in Hobart.

Short biographies of the appointees can be found below.

Media Contact: Adam Siddique 0407 473 630



Appointees to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal

Mr Robin Handley  Mr Handley holds a Bachelor of Laws from the University of Warwick and a Master of Laws  from the Australian National University. He has previously been a Deputy President and

Senior Member of the AAT, Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University of Wollongong and  a member of the Social Security Appeals Tribunal.

Mr Ray Groom  Mr Groom holds a Bachelor of Laws from the University of Melbourne. He has been a  Deputy President of the AAT since 2004 and is a former Premier and Attorney-General for  Tasmania and an accredited mediator and arbitrator.

Professor Robin Creyke  Professor Creyke holds a Master of Laws from the Australian National University, a Bachelor  of Laws from the University of Western Australia and a Graduate Diploma in small group  learning and teaching from the University of Western Sydney. She has been a Professor of  Law at the Australian National University since 2002 and the Alumni Chair of  Administrative  Law since 2003. She has also held the position of Integrity Adviser to the Australian Taxation  Office.

Mr Bruce Pascoe  Mr Bruce Pascoe was appointed as a Member of the AAT in 1991 and Senior Member in  1995. He has a background as a general chartered accountant, arbitrator and mediator and is a  taxation specialist.

Ms Narelle Bell  Ms Bell holds a Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Laws from Macquarie University. She was  appointed to the AAT as a Member in 2001 and a Senior Member in 2004. She has also held  appointments on the Social Security Appeals Tribunal and the NSW Administrative

Decisions  Tribunal.

Ms Jill Toohey  Ms Toohey holds a Bachelor of Jurisprudence and Bachelor of Laws from the University of  Western Australia. She has been a Senior Member of the WA State Administrative Tribunal  since 2005. She has served on the Refugee Review Tribunal and was the Commissioner of  the WA Legal Aid Commission. She is also an accredited mediator.

Mr Simon Webb  Mr Webb was appointed to the AAT as a Member in 2001. He previously held positions at  the Office of Film and Literature Classification and the Arts Council of Australia. He is an  accredited mediator.



