Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference

9 October 2009

I would like to begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of  the land on which we are gathered today, as well as the  continuing challenges faced by Australia’s Indigenous people and  our national responsibility to rectify their deprivation.

It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to address Australia’s  foremost group of migration experts.

As parliamentary secretary for multicultural affairs and settlement  services I meet many of Australia’s new migrants. I am always  struck by the significant and valuable contributions they make to  Australian society.

Today I want talk to on Australia’s migration and humanitarian  programs. I will then outline our thinking on issues of concern to  you as migration agents.

The Migration Program

Australia’s migration program is an ever-evolving and often  controversial subject.

When our immigration and population future is discussed, several  key issues are usually raised:

z labour force and economic growth;

z the environment;

z urban development and infrastructure; and

z population growth and distribution across Australia

z diversity and difference.

When this government was sworn in on 3 December 2007, our  economy was booming.

Industry was experiencing capacity constraints as growth in a  number of sectors was outpacing growth in the labour force.

Despite the fact that our migration program was at historically high  levels the labour market was facing significant skill shortages - for  example our hospitals could not attract enough nurses and  doctors.

Since this time we have seen things come full circle - and as a  nation we have experienced the worst global economic crisis  since the Great Depression.

As we went into the crisis we saw demand for both temporary and  permanent skilled migration fall significantly.

Laurie Ferguson MP  Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services

Page 1 of 7 Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference

A good barometer of the fall in demand for skilled workers during  that period was the relative demand by employers for temporary  skilled (subclass 457) workers.

From September 2008, there was a clear downward trend. The  number of 457 visa applications received in June of this year was  40 per cent lower than in September last year.

Indeed, the number of offshore applications fell by 51 per cent  from June 2008 to June 2009. Likewise, onshore applications fell  by 35 per cent.

In response, the Government moved quickly to reduce the  permanent skilled migration program. In the current program year  we have cut the intake of skilled workers to 108 100 places from  the previous year’s original planning level of 115 000.

I can say unashamedly that this measure was squarely aimed at  protecting local jobs.

The decision was not taken easily and the government recognises  the need to ensure that businesses and employers can fill critical  skill shortages.

We also recognise that the demand for skilled labour in some  regions and sectors of the economy is on the rise.

A good example of this is the Gorgon Gas Project. This is the  largest resource project ever proposed in Australia and at its peak  is expected to create around 6000 jobs.

The Gorgon Project is one of around 80 planned projects  throughout Australia, which are likely to see demand for skilled  resource sector labour increase by 70 per cent over the next  decade.

If all these projects proceed, there could be an additional 70 000  construction jobs and 16 000 ongoing positions generated by  2020.

It is for this reason that this government has announced that it will  establish a National Resource Sector Employment Taskforce to  help secure up to 70 000 skilled workers required to build and  operate major resource sector projects over the next decade.

Nevertheless it must be explained that our priority is to provide  training and job opportunities for Australians.

The minister issued a media release several months ago to  reinforce this point and outline new measures to ensure that  temporary skilled overseas workers are not employed ahead of  local workers, or used to undermine Australian wages and  conditions.

New worker protection laws came into effect on 14 September.  They require that all new workers on subclass 457 visas are paid  market salary rates.

Moreover, the laws enable the Australian Taxation Office to  disclose information to the Department of Immigration and

Page 2 of 7 Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference

Citizenship in order to ensure correct salary levels are being paid  to visa holders.

These laws also allow for information to be shared with other  enforcement bodies, including the Fair Work Ombudsman and  occupational health and safety agencies.

Australia’s migration program must continue to meet skilled labour  shortages, and offset the impact our ageing population will have on  the labour market and economy over the coming decades.

Targeted skilled migration is a key contributor to a suitably skilled  and sized workforce, without which Australia would not be able to  maintain or improve productivity.

A key question is how we can best address longer term labour  market requirements.

As you know, applicants whose occupation is on the Migration  Occupations in Demand List, or MODL, receive additional points  which count towards reaching the threshold for approval under a  specific skilled visa class.

The MODL is not as flexible as we would like it to be in addressing  a rapidly changing and uncertain global environment.

At the start of this year, the minister introduced a series of reforms  to better tailor the skilled program to our needs during this period  of weak labour demand.

These reforms further shifted the focus of the program to employer  and state sponsored migration.

The introduction of a Critical Skills List, or CSL, ensured that  unsponsored applicants whose nominated occupation was on this  list were given priority ahead of other applicants.

The minister has emphasised that the Critical Skills List will be  constantly reviewed, allowing for the government to remove  occupations if demand for those skills can be satisfied by local  labour.

Given the importance of maintaining flexibility in our response to  variations in the demand for skilled labour, a review of the MODL is  being undertaken.

This is aimed at developing a better link between skilled migrant  employment outcomes, the national training agenda and the work  of Skills Australia.

We want to ensure our skilled migration programs are responding  to longer-term skill needs which cannot be addressed through  domestic training and skills development.

The other key component of the migration program - the family  stream - increased in the 2008-09 program by some 3800 places  to 60 300 places.

The top source countries in 2008-09 for the permanent migration  program were headed by the United Kingdom with an outcome of

Page 3 of 7 Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference

more than 30 000 and this was up by around 7000 places on the  previous year. Then India and China on more than 20 000 places  apiece.

We are currently planning for consultations on the 2010-11  migration program to be held in late November or early December,  and this will feed into the Government’s consideration of the  2010-11 budget.

The Humanitarian Program

Australia’s humanitarian program is based on some very Australian  values - compassion and respect for the dignity and freedom of the  individual.

It reflects our commitment to our international obligations, our  shared responsibility to protect refugees and to resolve refugee  situations.

We do this in collaboration with our international partners, such as  the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other  resettlement countries including the United States and Canada.  We also consult with communities and local agencies in Australia.

The program must also be responsive to emerging situations.

We will resettle 13 750 people this year, an increase of 250 places  on last year, and comprising 6000 places for refugees and 7750 for  the special humanitarian program and for people who apply for  protection from within Australia.

This year, as with the past year, it is expected that the program will  include a significant number of people from Iraq and Afghanistan in  the Middle East region, from Burma and Bhutan in the Asian  region, and from a number of African countries such as Sudan,  Ethiopia, Somalia and the Congo.

Along with the special program for women and their families who  are particularly at risk, the program will include refugees in  protracted situations who are considered to be particularly  vulnerable - such as the Rohingya refugees who have been living  in camps in Bangladesh since 1992.

Long-term planning framework for migration

It is undeniable that our migration program contributes to the social  and economic wealth of our nation.

Additionally, given the ageing of the Australian population,  migration has immediate benefits in lowering the age profile of the  population as a whole.

We need the right level of immigration to offset the impact of our  ageing workforce and maximise our productivity levels.

This is a developed world phenomenon. In the last few months I  have engaged with Japanese academics and been interviewed by  Korea’s major public television company on the same issue of  ageing and migration demand.

Page 4 of 7 Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference

More broadly, Australia’s permanent and temporary migration  programs must be managed in careful consideration of the long  term effects of migration and population growth.

For this reason, the government has begun the task of constructing  a long-term planning framework for migration that will contribute to  our nation- building.

Development of this framework will make an important contribution  to our understanding of the optimum levels of immigration and  population, taking into account all factors including the budget, our  existing population, the labour force, the environment, our national

infrastructure and our social welfare.

Office of the MARA

I know there will be considerable interest at this conference in the  establishment of the Office of the Migration Agents Registration  Authority, or MARA.

As many of you are aware, on 1 July 2009, responsibility for the  administration of the MARA was transferred from the Migration  Institute of Australia (MIA) to the Department of Immigration and  Citizenship.

The new Office of the MARA is a discrete entity attached to the  department and is responsible for the regulation of the migration  advice profession.

The minister’s primary purpose in setting up the new arrangements  was to ensure that the regulatory framework provides consumers  of immigration assistance with confidence in the services.

The minister believed it was in the interests of consumers, the  government and the profession to address the concerns raised in  the 2007-08 Review of Statutory Self-Regulation of the Migration  Advice Profession.

He was very conscious of concerns in the profession, and the  wider community, that bringing the MARA function into government  may raise some conflicts of interest.

The Department of Immigration and Citizenship worked closely  with a probity advisor to ensure that any probity issues raised  either during the establishment or as part of the ongoing  operations of the Office were appropriately addressed.

This work was reviewed and endorsed by Sir Laurence Street, one  of Australia’s leading jurists.

The minister also appointed an advisory board to support the  Office of the MARA.

The advisory board includes a range of representatives, including  a nominee from the MIA.

It is independently chaired by the former Secretary of the  Attorney-General’s Department, Mr Robert Cornall, who reports  directly to the minister.

Page 5 of 7 Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference

Mr Cornall’s public and legal sector expertise will be fundamental  to the success of the new advisory board and regulatory  arrangements.

The advisory board will be integral in guiding the Office of the  MARA, and the government, in its program of reform for the  migration advice profession.

As Ms Christine Sykes, CEO of the Office of the MARA, will  highlight tomorrow, the program of reform ahead of us all is an  ambitious one. Work has already begun on a range of immediate

strategies.

In addition to these, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship  is working in close consultation with the MIA, with the Office of the  MARA, and with other key stakeholders to progress a range of  legislative amendments over the coming years to support the new  arrangements.

Many of these amendments arise from the recommendations of  the Review and many are based on feedback from the MIA and the  Office of the MARA.

The minister has approved a bid for legislative change. Some of  the short term amendments include:

z beginning to simplify the legislation governing the regulation

of migration agents   z enabling certain qualifications held by agents to be listed on

the public register of migration agents   z clarifying the definitions of “immigration assistance” and

“immigration legal assistance”   z clarifying legislation surrounding continuing professional

development activities   z empowering the Office of the MARA to suspend or cancel

an agent’s registration and obtain client files and documents  in circumstances where an agent deserts or abandons a  client   z exempting incapacitated migration agents from liability in

circumstances of non-compliance to Notices issued under  section 306D of the Migration Act   z amending registration provisions in the Migration Act to

address concerns for agents seeking to be re-registered  more than 12 months after the lapse of their previous  registration.

The advisory board’s comments will be sought on this draft  legislation to ensure a wide range of views are considered before it  is finalised.

The government is also working on a longer term program of  reform, which will be informed through consultation with the  advisory board, the MIA, and other key stakeholders.

This will include amendments relating to the English language  requirement for registration, reviewing and enhancing the code of  conduct, and introduction of a graduate diploma for entry to the  profession.

Migration agents play an important role in facilitating the movement  of individuals to Australia.  As such, we are keen to work with you

Page 6 of 7 Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference



to ensure the profession has the highest standards and continues  to support the development of Australia through migration.

It is in the interests of the profession, as well as of consumers and  the government, that the program of reform ahead is implemented  with a high level of commitment and cooperation from all key  parties.

I recognise that you face considerable challenges in delivering  your services in an ever changing environment, and view this  conference as a valuable opportunity to discuss ways to address  such challenges.

Thank you.

See:

Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /parlsec/media/speeches/2009/lf091009

Last update: 22 October 2009 at 10:35 AEST

Page 7 of 7 Keynote address - Migration 2009 Conference

