Prime Minister of Australia



Interview

Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

24 April 2009

Subject(s):  First  Home  Owners  Boost,  Global  Economic  Recession, Budget,  Computers  in  Schools,  People  Smuggling,   James Hardie, Election

E&OE

MITCHELL: Mr Rudd, good morning.

PM: Good morning Neil.

MITCHELL: There seems today to be massive confusion about the first homebuyers grant. Now will it be dropped, will it be cut, will it be extended?

PM: Well, as in times past, Neil we don’t speculate on contents of Budget. But as I said yesterday in Perth at a community gathering, or the day before actually, all good things must come to an end.

This  has  been  an  important  boost  for  first  homebuyers.  I  understand  the representations  made  to  us  by  the  housing   industry about its continuation. We’ve also got to make judgments about long term financial sustainability of this scheme  from the Government’s point of view as well.

MITCHELL: That’s a pretty big hint though. ‘All good things must come to an end’.

PM: Well don’t they?

MITCHELL: Isn’t it?

PM: Well we could keep going this way as you’d like, but I think it’s been a big help. I’ve looked at how many people have  been helped with this so far. The figures I’ve got here are about 30, I think it’s got a total of 36,000 across the country.  Here  in  Victoria,  8,600.  That’s  quite  a  lot  of  people  who’ve  been  out  there  supported  with  this  trebling  of  the  first homeowners boost, to enable them to get their first home.

MITCHELL: But what about the arguments it’s just put up the market, it’s just put up the price?

PM: Well I notice some have said that. But, let’s go to the core of where we are with the global economic recession.

When we looked at this decision for government last October, it was very practical. How could you reduce the impact of  this recession on Australia?

Two  big  areas  which  have  an  immediate  impact  on  jobs  in  Australia.  One  is  retail  and  that’s  why  we’ve  provided   unapologetically payments to support pensioners, carers and veterans in order to boost sales in the retail sector, when if  you look around the rest of the world, hundreds of thousands of jobs being slashed, and one and a half million Australians  - and many people listening to this program this morning - work in retail, first thing.

The second is, an immediate action we took was given the enormous number people also employed in housing and the  residential construction sector. And this boost, as the industry’s told us and many people have told us, has helped keep  our housing construction figures up when the rest of the world has actually been falling in reverse.

I  noticed  Mr  Hockey  today  has  said  that  this  first  homeowners  boost  of  the  Government’s  represent  a  distortion  of  the   market.

Now we have the Liberal Party attacking the first homeowners boost. This is extraordinary. I thought they were supposed

Page 1 of 7 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

to be supporting it, and there are 36,000 Australians, many young Australians out there benefiting from this program.

MITCHELL: But has it inflated the market? I mean it might be creating jobs but is it actually helping the first homebuyer, or are they just paying it over to the building industry or to the vendors?

PM: Neil, the difference in prices around the country and around the city of Melbourne and around Victoria, as you know, each region’s different, each locale is different. I can’t give you a direct response on price fluctuations in a given area.

What  I  do  know  is  this.  When  the  Housing  Industry  Association  come  into  us,  and  the  other  construction-related   associations come into to say to us that this has been essential to keeping employment up in the construction sector, we take that advice seriously. That’s why we’ve done it, and we think it’s been an important part of cushioning Australia from  the full impact of the global recession.

MITCHELL: There seems to be a misunderstanding about - you extended it. I’m assuming when you say all good things  come to an end, you’re talking about extension. You wouldn’t do away entirely with the first homebuyers grant.

PM: You’re right to point that out. The continuing grant which is $7,000 has been the case in the past and will be the case in the future. What we’re talking about is the boost which is to double that if you’re buying a home which is already built; to  triple it, if you are buying a new home.

And again the intention is to keep up the level of activity in the housing sector and again I draw people’s attention, if you  looked at our housing construction figures in Australia relative to practically every other developed economy, it’s chalk and  cheese.

MITCHELL: What about all other subsidies and levies. Are they under review?

PM: In the Budget, we look at everything, Neil. Not knowing where your next question’s going to go -

MITCHELL: Neither do I?

PM: - but I have a sense of it. I thought this was going to be a come in spinner question. But, no look. We take a serious expenditure  review  committee  process  to  everything  the  Government  does,  led  by Lindsay  Tanner,  a  Melbourne  bloke   who’s the Finance Minister. And he’s very serious about this, so we go over everything both in terms of what spend and what we raise.

MITCHELL: The point I am getting at generally is that obviously we’ll see some subsidies cut and some levies increased.

PM: All I can say Neil, and consistent with the bloke you used to interview in this studio from time to time in times past,  John Winston Howard, we don’t speculate on the content of the Budget.

But this is tough. If you stand back and look at what the International Monetary Fund has said to us all, which is that this is  the  worst  global  economic  recession  since  the  Great  Depression  in  the  1930s,  what  we’re  faced  with  is  framing  in  the   most difficult global economic circumstances possible, this Australian Budget.

It’s going to be very tough. We have spent a lot of time working our way through this and we’ve still got some work to do.

MITCHELL: I think before the last election you said no new taxes. Does that promise stand?

PM: What we’ve always said is that we would not increases taxes as a proportion of gross domestic product. That’s been  our commitment and -

MITCHELL: In income tax or overall tax?

PM: No, total tax as a proportion of gross domestic product, because what are you concerned about in the economy? Not  allowing taxes to consume too much of economic activity. And we think that’s a reasonable discipline to apply on average  over the cycle. And we have done that.

MITCHELL: But that doesn’t rule out new taxes though, does it?

PM:  What  we’ve,  well  there’s  always  going  to  be possible  changes  at  any  time  to  the  taxation  mix,  but  the  aggregate   discipline remains which is how do you actually keep the lid on the overall, shall we say, creep of taxation over time?

You  see  our  challenge  also  is  in  dealing  with  the  global  recession,  and  also on  how  we  provide  necessary  economic   stimulus now to support jobs today, and build the infrastructure we need tomorrow, like the school building program, is that

Page 2 of 7 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

we have to engage therefore in a temporary deficit and temporary borrowing.

That’s  what  governments  are  doing  right  around  the  world,  and  therefore,  it’s equally  important  that  you  have  an  exit   strategy from temporary deficits and temporary borrowing which means that the way to do that is to ensure that once the  economy returns to normal growth, that taxation is able to recover and you are able to use that then to restore the Budget  to surplus, and you’re able then to use that to pay the temporary borrowings.

That’s the way in which -

MITCHELL: So how do you do that? Do you have it ready to go, do you have it in place?

PM: Well we have a clearly stated fiscal sustainability strategy reflected  in the last statement we made on the financial outlook.

And that goes to return to trend growth which is when the economy recovers from this current economic recession which  is why global economic coordinated action has been so necessary through the G20 and others.

Secondly, allowing taxation to recover. And thirdly, also keeping a cap - and we say this quite plainly - on two per cent on  future spending growth as well.

Put  those  things  together,  you  have  the  necessary  elements  of  a  return  to Budget  surpluses  and  to  repaying  down  on   temporary borrowings.

MITCHELL: Are you willing to extend the deficit beyond $200 billion?

PM:  We  have  said  that  we  need  to  ensure  that  we  can pay  first  of  all  for  the  impact  which  the  recession  has  brought about, through the collapse in taxation revenues.

That means, for example what we’re doing already, more than  two-thirds  of temporary  deficit,  temporary  borrowing  are   arising from a pure collapse in taxation revenues. That’s company tax, that’s income tax and all the rest.

Happens to governments around the world. And I’ll come straight back to your question in a minute.

The alternative is to say there’s been this massive collapse, so far $115 billion collapse in taxation revenues. We’ve been  upfront about that. That’s what happened. And with these new growth figures which have come out from around the world,  there’ll be a greater reduction in taxation revenues as well looking forward.

You’ve got two alternatives under those circumstances. Either you completely slash and burn everything government does  and throw tens of thousands of extra people onto the unemployment queues and cut funding for hospitals and schools, or  you engage in temporary borrowing.

Mr Turnbull has said the collapses in taxation revenue, he would borrow as well. And that represents more than two-thirds  of what we’re doing at the moment.

The other bit is what you do by way of, let’s call it discretionary economic stimulus. The investments we’re making in the  school modernisation program, social housing and the rest. And of course we engage in temporary deficit and temporary  borrowing for that.

We believe that it is important always to calibrate the amount that we need for our future expenditures and therefore our  temporary deficit and temporary borrowings based on, most primarily, what happens with future changes in the tax base.

MITCHELL: So will you go beyond $200 billion?

PM:  We  don’t  see  the  need  for  that  at  this  stage. But  we  are  very  concerned  about  what  happens  in  the  future  about further collapses in taxation revenue.

That is the key variable here. As I said, it represents two-thirds of our problem up until now. If taxes collapse further, we  have a continuing problem and the alternatives are as I’ve just described.

MITCHELL: So there’s a mixture there, you borrow more if necessary and you increase taxation?

PM: Well, there is, on the question of taxation which we discussed before, our discipline is don’t allow taxes to get out of control because you don’t want to strangle an economic recovery.

Page 3 of 7 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

That’s important, that’s why we stick to this principle of not increasing taxes as a proportion of the economy. But as I said  within that, then of course there’s always possible to have changes in the taxation mix.

But I say again Neil, we’re still working our way through this. The Budget’s still some ways off. It’s hard, it’s difficult and it’s  very hard to frame a Budget in the circumstances which we’re presented with, the worst global economic recession since  the Great Depression.

MITCHELL: Well is it time for those who are still well off to pay more? To pick up more of the load?

PM: Well, I think, this is not a comment in relation to the upcoming Budget, but as a general principle, we’ve just got to be  very  mindful  for  example  of  how  do  we  pay  for  pensions.  You  and  I  have discussed  this  many  times  on  your  program   before.

I don’t think anyone listening to your program would believe that our pensioners are being overpaid at present.

Therefore, if you’re going to have fundamental pension reform, and make sure it is possible for people on the pension to  deal with the costs of living, then we’re going to have to have long term reform, and we’ve committed to do that.

But you know? You’ve got to therefore undertake other measures to offset that. And that is why the Finance Minister, the  Treasurer, and myself have been going through line by line elements within the Budget to see what we can do to make the  necessary savings by what you send, by what you spend, and also what other measures may be necessary to support  pension reform.

MITCHELL: I gather the principle is, if pensioners get more, the well off have to pay for it.

PM: Well pensioners get more or we can make savings elsewhere, okay, when in terms of other programs which may not be essential, or longer term you have to look at what can be afforded by way of additional support from those who are  better off.

MITCHELL: What is better off? $100,000, $200,000?

PM: Well we’ve, as you know, how long is a piece of string? But as you saw from our Budget last time, we introduced some  changes  in  relation  to  $150,000  threshold.  Which  in  terms  of  various  welfare  related  reforms  which  we  thought   began to be a reasonable, not inviolate, not permanent, not you know, cast in stone, but way of delineating.

And  if  you’re  looking  at  a  pensioner  who’s  you  know,  not  out  there  earning  $150,000  a  year,  there’s  a  question  about   fairness in Australia as to how you balance it out.

MITCHELL: So if I’m earning over $150,000, I could be a target?

PM: Well, nice segue from what I said to your last question Neil. But I’ve got to say, we think that Australia is all about fairness. People who are at the upper end over time perhaps could be in a position to provide greater support. Perhaps.  And I again make no specific comment in relation to the upcoming Budget.

But if you are going to engage in a fundamental pension reform, then the rule of thumb we’ve used in the past is between  every $10 a week you increase the pension, that’s about $1 to 2 billion a year by way of extra funds which have to be  found in the Budget. It doesn’t grow on trees, you either achieve it through savings or you achieve it by other means.

MITCHELL: You have made the point that you want to be honest with the Australian people. So in this climate, before I move onto other matters, deal with a couple of things very quickly. But there is pension reform promised, that you’re not  backing -

PM: Remember I said before, in the Budget we would commence pension reform. And we are upfront about that. I’m also  being equally upfront that it costs a truckload of money to do it.

And I note also that the attacks from the Liberals on our allocations to pensioners, carers and veterans, one-off payments  recently, I don’t think demonstrate that they are any way in touch with how difficult it is for pensioners to make ends meet.

MITCHELL: Just another quick one on the economy. In that spirit of honesty, will unemployment go beyond 10 per cent?

PM: Our internal figures, which you saw produced last time we put out our economic forecast, projected seven. You’ve  seen the figures contained most recently in the International Monetary Fund which are higher than that. Look, as we’ve  said  very bluntly in  recent weeks, unemployment  is going to go higher. I wish  I had a perfect crystal ball on this Neil. I don’t. But our projections are as contained in the last forecast, the IMF has slightly up on that, I think from memory 7.8,  hence underpinning the need for economic stimulus.

Page 4 of 7 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

Can  I  make  one  point  about  where  we  are  relative  to  the  rest  of  the  world? International  Monetary  Fund  put  out  these   appalling  figures  for  the  global  economy  for  2009,  all  advanced  economies  to  shrink  by  3.8  per  cent  in  2009.  This is  a   massive figure.

The projection for Australia is a contraction of 1.4. We are doing almost three times better than the rest of the advanced  economies.  And  a  core  reason  for  that  is  the  economic  stimulus  strategy  we’re  engaged  in  is  out  out  there pumping   demand into the economy.

We’re  trying  to  do  it  in  what  the  economists  would  describe  a  counter-cyclical  way,  working  against  the  cycle  of  the   economy. Where the private sector is in retreat, Government steps in temporarily and then once the economy recovers, let  me tell you I’d much rather be out of there.

MITCHELL: We’ll take a break, come back with other issues for the Prime Minister.

[advertisement break]

MITCHELL: The Prime Minister is with us, we’ll take a quick call, Richard go ahead please.

RICHARD: Good morning.

PM: Hello Richard.

RICHARD: Just before I ask you a question. When are the kids going to get their computers that you promised? But you know, if you want stimulate the economy Mr Rudd, you’ve got to do something about these local councils. You try and get  a planning department planning permit and you can’t get it, it takes-

MITCHELL: Is that to build a house or something? Alright. Two questions there, the computers and local councils which is  I suspect a state issue.

PM:  Two  rounds  of  the  Computers  in  Schools  have already  gone  out  and  the  Deputy  Prime  Minister  Julia  Gillard  is working through the schools of the country systematically. Each area that I’ve been to in last week in Western Australia  and South Australia, I’ve gone to communities where literally thousands of communities, computers have been distributed to those local schools.

In terms of your school sir, can I suggest that through the program you let us know what the school is and we’ll get back to  you in terms of when your school will actually come within the program but we’re doing it round by round by round across  the country and it’s the right thing to do.

Second part of the question was? Local authorities?

MITCHELL: Was local authorities. That’s a state one.

PM: Look, local authorities operate in Victoria and elsewhere under State Government law and of course under their local  ordinances but you talk about stimulus. Yesterday - key fact - in Perth I launched the first project under the community,  local community infrastructure program; $2.4 million there for improvement of a park reserve adjacent to the Swan River. These are now rolling out to the tune of $800 million right across Australia wide. Local authorities are very good at rolling  out  quick,  immediate,  short  term  stimulus  projects  which  build  local  community  infrastructure  for  tomorrow  and  provide   jobs today.

MITCHELL: Okay thank you for calling Richard. The AM program today interviewed an asylum seeker who has actually  got approval as a refugee, an Iraqi man in Indonesia. I’ll just play you very briefly what he said but he’s effectively, he’s  saying that your policies have encouraged him to try and sneak into Australia.

ASYLUM SEEKER: Kevin Rudd. He changed everything about refugee. If I go to Australia now - definite, definite, maybe  accepted but when John Howard (inaudible) Australia he said come back to Indonesia.

MITCHELL:  Okay  well  obviously  the  perception  there is  among  some  of  them  at  least  that  your  policies  are  softer  and therefore they get a better deal.

PM:  The  UNHCR,  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner for  Refugees  recently  in  Indonesia  actually,  described  our  policies  as  tough  and  hardline.  The  bottom  line  is  that  with  this  global  push  in  illegal  immigrants  coming  out  of  global   insecurity, people are going to have a range of different perceptions all the time.

I ran into a bloke the other day who hopped on a boat in 2001 in the midst of Mr Howard’s Prime Ministership and, as I  was  advised,  was  informed  that  once  he  got  to  Australia  under  Mr  Howard  there’d  be  two  free  houses  and  three  free

Page 5 of 7 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

tractors, there you go. I mean look it’s a rumour mill out there. What’s the key thing?

MICTHELL: But haven’t you added to the rumour mill with the different policies?

PM: Can I say that the key question here is having the best, most hardline deployment of our defence, maritime, aerial surveillance assets in the air-sea gap in Australia, doing their job. And these vessels have been interdicted and taken to  Christmas Island. That’s the key thing.

All our folk on the beat up there and I’m proud of each and every one of them, they’re doing a very professional job in  Australia.  Look  at  how  cast  the  archipelago  is,  look  at  the  civil  war  in  Sri  Lanka  and  when  you’ve  got  civil wars  in  Sri   Lanka, a rolling war in Afghanistan and cross, instability across the Middle East and this vile trade of people smuggling still  rolling on out there, you’re going to continue to have all these push factors affecting every country in the world. Our job is  to maintain strong border protection in the air-sea gap.

MICTHELL: Well have you seen the, an Australian Federal Police Report saying the same as this man is saying, saying that the policies will lead to a new influx?

PM: I’m unaware of any such report. But-

MICTHELL: Not because you would have seen it if it existed, presumably?

PM: Neil, there are literally a large number of federal police, intelligence officers and those involved in the broader national security  policy  establishment  who  at  any  given  time  will  have  a  range  of  views  on  what  should  or  shouldn’t  be  done.  I   accept-

MITCHELL: Did you ask to see it after it was reported that it existed?

PM:  Neil,  the  advice  that  I  receive  on  these  sort of  questions  comes  from  the  National  Security  Adviser  of  the Commonwealth of Australia, Mr Duncan Lewis. And when I speak with Duncan about these matters we seek to calibrate  our responses to the emerging threat. There is no silver bullet here when global -

MICTHELL: If this report existed, exists and we don’t know that it does, Did you ask if it exists because it’s been reported that it exists?

PM: Our responsibility also Neil is to say this; on any report relevant to intelligence matters we do not comment publically.

MITCHELL: But you said you hadn’t seen it? Did you ask if it exists?

PM:  The  responsibility  that  I  have  through  the,  the arrangements  I  have  for  national  security  are  through  the  National Security Adviser. As I said, in any given day, there will be an avalanche of reporting from around the world. We have an  extensive police intelligence network and on these sort of questions we also depend on those reports being distilled and provided by the National Security Adviser -

MICTHELL: Yes but I’m not asking  you  what’s in or if  it  exists.  But  it  was front page  of a newspaper, this report exists  saying that your policies, you’ve been told, the federal police believe your policies will lead to an influx of asylum seekers.  Did you not at any stage say, does that report exist?

PM: As I said to you before Neil, I am unaware that it exists. If there are concerns about elements of our policy we’ll work  our way through that in response to advice as I said through the channels that we’ve established. Any individual officer  across our police and intelligence agencies will have a different view at different times about what should be done. That’s just normal, that’s them doing their job.

MICTHELL: The James Hardie people are saying they mightn’t have enough in their fund to pay compensation because of  the global financial crisis. What can be done about that?

PM: I was appalled at seeing that report last night, absolutely appalled. Now your program has been very good on this question, others have been in Sydney as well. We intend to now, work very closely on this question. I will not tolerate any  of those workers who have been affected by this appalling disease and have been treated so badly by this company to run  short.

MITCHELL: When is the election due?

PM: Last time I remember we were elected at the end of 2007, plus three, we haven’t changed the Electoral Act since  then.

Page 6 of 7 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

MITCHELL: What are the chances of going full term?

PM: I believe that  it’s important for governments to serve out their mandate and we were elected for three years. But I would say this about Mr Turnbull and the Liberals, it’s very important that they don’t block everything in the Senate as a  matter of course.

MITCHELL: Thank you for your time.

PM: Thanks Neil.





Page 7 of 7 Prime Minister of Australia - Interview - Interview with Neil Mitchell - Radio 3AW

