Interview  21 April 2009

Doorstop Interview

City of Cockburn, Western Australia

Subject(s): Jobs, Global Recession, Extradition of Hadi Ahmadi, People Smuggling, Richard Pratt, 2020 Summit

PM: Thanks, I’ll say a few things and then happy to take your questions.  Firstly on the economy and employment and what we are doing here locally  and then secondly on a further development in relation to people smuggling.

On the, it’s good to be here in the City of Cockburn with our local member  Melissa Parke and to be discussing with this local community how we can  make a difference with the impact of the global recession on jobs in this part  of Australia.

And the purpose of our gathering today in this local jobs forum, here at the  City of Cockburn, is to work out practical ways in which we can make a  difference.

The truth is this. The global economic recession makes it inevitable that we’ll  have a recession in Australia which means that as we frame the budget we’re  going to have to make even stronger our economic stimulus strategy because  unemployment will rise even further.

Therefore, the whole point of that is to cushion this community and  communities like it from the full impact of the recession.

We’ve been speaking today in this gathering about the global strategy which  the Government has been engaged in through the G20, to support stability in  global financial markets and support local economic stimulus.

We’ve spoken also about what we’re doing nationally through our support for  stability in Australian financial markets, the bank guarantee and short,  medium and long term economic stimulus including our investment in  infrastructure to generate jobs.

Page 1 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

But we’ve also been here today talking about local initiatives and how we  partner with communities such as this to make a difference. And our  appointment today of a priority employment coordinator in this part of Perth  to work together with the local jobs fund to make a difference with local  government, local church and charitable and community organisations, local  small businesses, local unions, in order to again provide additional jobs and  training opportunities here at the local level.

As Prime Minister of Australia I can’t wish this global economic recession  away. As Prime Minister of Australia what I can do is work with local  communities through our local members, through our priority employment  coordinators, to make a difference to reduce the problem, to reduce the  impact, to cushion local communities from the full force of the global  economic gale.

The second point I’d like to touch on concerns people smuggling. Last night,  President Yudhoyono approved the extradition to Australia of alleged people  smuggler Hadi Ahmadi.

This is a major and very welcome development in the fight against people  smuggling.

This extradition comes soon after the third prosecution this year of a people  smuggler in Perth here on Friday afternoon.

Mr Ahmadi, believed to be a dual Iraqi and Iranian national, is wanted in  Australia to face prosecution for a range of extremely serious people  smuggling crimes.

Mr Ahmadi is accused of organising four boat arrivals into Australia from  Indonesia on 25 March 2001, 22nd of April 2001, 4 August 2001 and 22  August 2001, collectively carrying over 900 unlawful non-citizens to Australia.

Mr Ahmadi was arrested by Indonesian authorities on 29 June 2008 at  Australia's request, and has since remained in police detention.

Australia's formal extradition request was presented to Indonesia on 29 July  2008.

Mr Ahmadi's extradition proceedings were heard in the South Jakarta District

Page 2 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

Court - the Court found that Ahmadi was eligible for extradition to Australia.

The matter then turned to President Yudhoyono to consider whether to  extradite Ahmadi to Australia.

President Yudhoyono's decision last night clears the way for Ahmadi's  extradition to Australia.

This action further demonstrates the absolute importance of the closest  possible cooperation between the Australian and the Indonesian Governments  in dealing with the scourge of people smuggling.

Also, effectively prosecuting people smugglers is the most effective way of  dealing with the problem of illegal movements of persons around South East  Asia and more broadly.

Finally, our approach simply is this - tough border protection regime and  reinforced also by the professionalism of our police services, our border  protection personnel, and our naval and military staff as well.

This is the best and most effective strategy for dealing with the challenges of  the future.

Working closely with our regional partners and friends, working effectively to  provide proper resourcing and support for our naval assets, our military  assets, our police assets and our surveillance assets, and getting on with the  business of dealing with this global push of unlawful movements of people  from around the world.

Can I say this as I conclude. This approach on the Australian Government’s  part stands in absolute contrast with the shambles on border protection  policy we see from Mr Turnbull and the Liberals.

Mr Turnbull and the Liberals policy on border protection could be summed up,  I believe in three words, chaos, confusion, and opportunism.

Chaos, confusion and opportunism. That’s what we see from dawn till night  with every statement by the Liberal Party on border protection policy.

It’s driven by political opportunism. The Government’s getting on with the

Page 3 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

business of making sure that our border protection forces are properly  resourced, properly supported and properly engaged with their partners  around the region to do their job, which is to maintain this country’s border  protection, and to do so in a manner consistent with our international legal  obligations.

Over to you folks.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

PM:  The policy of the Australian Government has been consistent on this  and that is consistent with that policy, our naval assets will continue to  interdict vessels as appropriate on the high seas.

We’ve done that in the past, we continue to do that and we continue to  deploy all of our military, naval and other surveillance assets in pursuit of  that mission and to do so consistent with our international obligations.  Nothing has changed on that front.

What we are dealing with are new global factors at work which are pushing a  greater number of people out of the Middle East, out of South Asia, out of Sri  Lanka, out of Burma, and governments right across the region are having to  deal with these additional new push factors.

Our challenge is to make sure that our military, naval and air assets continue  to reinforce a strong approach to border protection, a hard line approach to  border security and to do so consistent with our international obligations.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) Prime Minister (inaudible). Banks are starting to  raise their fixed interest rates. Is that an appropriate action given the current  economic climate?

PM:  I saw some reports of this morning. What I’d say to all Australian  consumers is that they should vote with their feet. If they are finding their  banks are unacceptably raising interest rates for fixed term deposit - for fixed  term loans or fixed interest rate loans, then customers will make up their  minds as to what’s the best deal for them.

I say again what the Australian Government has done through the provision  of bank guarantees is to make it possible for our banks to effectively operate

Page 4 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

in a very difficult set of global economic circumstances, given the  contractions occurring in global financial markets.

Banks therefore have a social and community obligation with the Australian  community. But for individual consumers I’d say, if the rate’s been jacked up  for the future, as I’m advised that it is in the case of a couple of banks, than  individual customers should vote with their feet if those arrangements are  unacceptable to their family budgeting arrangements.

JOURNALIST: Why are you now saying it’s inevitable we’ll go into recession  given you previously refused to pre-empt official economic forecasts?

PM: Well it’s quite plain that we have seen most recently economic data  from China, it’s quite plain that we have also seen the fact that during the  first quarter of 2009, a range of data emerge from various economies around  the world which have a direct influence on Australia, that most of that data  has been negative. That’s the first point.

The second is, the International Monetary Fund is obviously currently  analysing and will report again I think later this week on the state of the  global economy. Australia is not an island. Australia is directly impacted by  global economic factors and the first quarter of 2009. Most of those economic  data coming out of those economies which directly affect Australia were  negative.

Therefore, as night follows day, it affects Australia. Therefore the global  economic recession is making it inevitable that there will be a recession in  Australia, and the challenge for framing the Budget is to do as much as  possible through continued economic stimulus to cushion Australia from the  effect of rising unemployment coming off the back of this global recession.

JOURNALIST:  What form will that further economic stimulus take in the  Budget and are we likely to see another stimulus package?

PM:  We have maintained a consistent strategy of economic stimulus right  back to the events of the fourth quarter of 2008. And we have, as consistent  by my remarks in the City of Cockburn local jobs forum today, outlined and  implemented strategies to support one and a half million jobs in the retail  sector through what we have done through payments to pensioners, veterans  and carers and others.

Page 5 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

Secondly, invest in the biggest school modernisation program in the country’s  history. In Western Australia, injecting some $2.6 billion worth of additional  investment and infrastructure.

And thirdly, getting on with the business of long term infrastructure, rolling  out a National Broadband Network.

What I’m saying today is that because the global economic recession means  that a recession is inevitable in Australia, unemployment will therefore rise  further and, as a result, continued strong economic stimulus will be necessary  through the Budget.

JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister, are you talking more about the chances of  Australia falling into recession to detract from the asylum seeker issue?

PM:  The International Monetary Fund will be reporting in a few days’ time  about the state of the global economy, and the state of various economies  within it.

Furthermore, if you look at the recent conclusion, obviously of the first  quarter of 2009 following on from the negative quarter which was the fourth  quarter of 2008, if you have two quarters in succession of negative growth,  technically therefore you are moving into recession. That’s the technical  definition.

If you look at the data that’s emerged from all those economies which  directly affect Australia, it follows inevitably that this huge impact of global  economic forces on Australia is going to have an effect.

And if you look most recently at the China data, while it wasn’t falling  through the floor and there was some turning or at least arresting of the  collapse, the impact on Australia of China’s economic performance - given it  is our single largest trading partner - is clear.

I believe dealing with forums like this around the country, it’s very important  to be upfront and direct about the emerging problem of the global recession,  its impact on unemployment at the national level and the local level. I’d much  rather have a continuing conversation with local communities about that,  rather than pretending that things are better than they are.

Page 6 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

JOURNALIST:  Can I get a quick comment about Richard Pratt, reports that  he is gravely ill. How do you see to date his contribution to Australia?

PM:  I’ve seen those reports. I’d rather not comment on that further, until  I’ve had the opportunity to confirm personally with his family his  circumstances.

The thing about Mr Pratt is that he and his wife Jeannie have been significant  philanthropists over a long period of time. And that’s been particularly  reflected in the state of Victoria but beyond that as well.

But in terms of Mr Pratt’s health, I would not comment on that further until  I’ve had the opportunity to confirm it.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you set to release your response to the  2020 findings any time soon?

PM: Yeah, we think it’s appropriate to get that up and out there. And the  reason is, that it’s about a year since we gathered Australians from right  across the nation to plan our future, and to do so in a way which we’ve  sought to do here again reflecting the spirit of 2020, with this community in  the City of Cockburn today.

What we did a year ago was say, here’s the next decade plus, here are 10 big  challenges the nation faces, and what therefore are our strategies for making  sure that Australia realises its full potential.

What we said is that we would then deliver the outcome from the 2020  Summit by year’s end last year. What interrupted that of course was the  impact of the global financial and economic crisis.

And as a result therefore, there’s been a delay of some three months in  concluding that report. But we’ll be releasing it very soon. And I say this in  conclusion.

Our challenge is dealing with the impact of the recession in the here and now.  Also, maintaining fairness in Australia to make sure that we’re looking after  those who are least able to look after themselves. And thirdly, to make sure  we’re also laying out a strategy for the long term future as well.

Page 7 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

The big challenges on education, the education revolution, on health and  hospitals, as well as the future of clean green energy - these remain with us.  And they need to be addressed, embraced and planned for and acted on as

well.

Our strategy as a government is to move ahead on all these three fronts. It’s  a necessary course of action for the future.

And I believe I’ve got to zip because I’ve got to catch a plane to Esperance.

See you folks.







For optimum printing results please use the website printer icon  located at  the top of www.pm.gov.au

Page 8 of 8 Interview | Prime Minister of Australia

