Tue, 8th December 2009

A RESHAPED COALITION TEAM FOR AUSTRALIA’S FUTURE

The Hon Tony Abbott MP

Leader of the Opposition

Today, I announce a reshaped Shadow Ministry that will give the Coalition a strong team to take the fight up to

the Rudd Government and deliver a real alternative at the next election.



I am pleased that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Hon Julie Bishop MP, has elected to retain the

Shadow Foreign Affairs portfolio. Julie will continue to build on her hard work over the past year in this portfolio

and ensure that the Coalition maintains its relationships with the diplomatic community in Australia and with our

key neighbours and allies.

The Leader of the Nationals, the Hon Warren Truss MP, will also continue as Shadow Minister for Trade,

Transport, Regional Development and Local Government. Warren will ensure that regional Australia has a strong

voice. He will also be working hard to ensure that the Rudd Government is made to deliver on the integrated

national land transport network commenced by the Coalition under Auslink.

Senator the Hon Nick Minchin will move to the position of Shadow Minister for Resources and Energy. In his

former role as Shadow Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Nick successfully

brought significant scrutiny to the Rudd Government’s $43 billion dollar ‘no business plan’ national broadband

network. As a former Cabinet Minister for Industry, Science and Resources, Nick brings extensive industry

understanding to the role as well as considerable financial expertise as a former Finance Minister.

The Hon Ian Macfarlane MP will take on two of the most important issues facing Australia as Shadow Minister

for Infrastructure and Water. As the most senior Queensland member in Shadow Cabinet, Ian knows first hand

the infrastructure challenges facing Australia. Successive state Labor governments have failed to plan for growth

and as a consequence, productivity is being held back and communities are failing to get the local services they

need at a grass-roots level. In addition to infrastructure, I am pleased that Ian will take on water issues. As a

farmer for many years, he has an intimate understanding of issues surrounding water and will provide a strong

voice for rural and regional Australians.

Senator the Hon Eric Abetz will become the new Shadow Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations.

Eric has served a minister in government. As a senior member of shadow cabinet, he has a long-interest in

employment issues and his record of standing up for the rights of employees and small business in the area of

workplace relations. Eric replaces Mr Michael Keenan MP. I appreciate his work in this area particularly in the

significant amendments he was able to deliver to the Rudd Government’s recent Fair Work Act.

I look forward to working closely with the Hon Joe Hockey MP who will continue his outstanding work as Shadow

Treasurer. Joe and the Coalition have been successful in highlighting Labor’s Budget waste and

mismanagement. As we enter the election year, the work of Joe and the Opposition Shadow Treasury team will

be critical to protecting the interests of all Australian taxpayers.

The Hon Christopher Pyne MP will continue to act as Shadow Minister for Education, Apprenticeships and

Training. His outstanding work, providing a voice for parents and families who want to see Australia return to

strong standards in education for their children, has been critical. Christopher’s work highlighting the waste and

mismanagement of the Government’s so-called ‘Education Revolution’ has put pressure on the government to

deliver what communities need and not the ‘identikit’ buildings of education bureaucrats. Christopher will also

continue in his role as Manager of Opposition Business in House.

I am pleased that Senator the Hon George Brandis SC will remain in his role as Shadow Attorney-General.

George has an outstanding legal mind and commands enormous respect across the Parliament and in legal

circles more generally. I look forward to his continuing good counsel.

Senator the Hon David Johnston has performed strongly as Shadow Minister for Defence. He will continue to

ensure that the national interest is at the heart of Australia’s defence and strategic engagement and that the men

and women of the Australian Defence Force are well-resourced and supported in the critical work that they do

both here and overseas.

It is clear after yesterday’s COAG meeting that the Prime Minister has broken his election promise to fix public

hospitals. I am pleased that Hon Peter Dutton MP will continue in this critical portfolio. As a Queenslander with a

young family, Peter knows first hand how the failure of state Labor governments to adequately invest in health

infrastructure and critical services to meet the demands of a growing population is affecting all Australians. Labor

must be held to account for their broken promises in health. This portfolio area will be a key focus of the

Coalition’s efforts.

After successfully managing the Coalition’s policy review process, I am pleased to promote Hon Kevin Andrews

MP to the shadow cabinet to replace me as Shadow Minister for Families, Housing and Human Services. Kevin

brings significant experience, energy and policy rigour to this critical portfolio and he will ensure all Australian

families are put at the centre of our policy-making.

The Hon Greg Hunt MP will take on responsibility for the Coalition’s Climate Action Plan to cut carbon emissions

while protecting jobs and the Australian economy in his role as Shadow Minister for Climate Action, Environment

and Heritage. Greg’s is engaged with key environmental stakeholders and he is committed to ensuring

Australians are encouraged to make practical contributions to reduce carbon emissions.

As a Senator for the Northern Territory, Senator the Hon Nigel Scullion has long been personally involved in

issues affecting indigenous Australians. Nigel brings a practical focus to his new role as Shadow Minister for

Indigenous Affairs. As a special interest of mine, I look forward to working closely with Nigel in this important

policy area.

National Party Senator Barnaby Joyce will also be promoted to the frontbench. Barnaby will serve as the

Shadow Minister for Finance and Debt Reduction. Before entering Parliament, Senator Joyce was an accountant

and ran his own small business. I know that he takes the responsibility of looking after the interests of all

Australian taxpayers seriously. He replaces Senator the Hon Helen Coonan who has announced that she will be

leaving the Shadow Ministry. I want to thank her for her extensive and very capable service both in government

and Opposition.

The Hon John Cobb MP will continue his advocacy for farmers and allied agricultural sectors in his appointment

as Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry. I have included Food Security in his responsibilities

as the Coalition sees this as a critical challenge for Australia’s future.

The Hon Bruce Billson MP will serve as the Shadow Minister for Small Business, Deregulation, Competition

Policy and Sustainable Cities. A dogged advocate for small business and the interests of everyday Australians, I

am pleased that Bruce is now in a portfolio that marries his long-standing policy interests with his considerable

energy.

The Honourable Tony Smith will serve as the new Shadow Minister for Broadband, Communications and the

Digital Economy. I believe that Tony’s considerable financial skills will increase scrutiny on the government’s $43

billion broadband network which is being foisted on Australian taxpayers without even a business plan.

Mr Scott Morrison MP has been appointed Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship. Scott brings

energy and considerable policy talents to this portfolio. He will ensure that the Rudd Government is held to

account for its recent changes to Australia’s immigration policy that have seen a dramatic surge in people

smuggling activity and unauthorised boat arrivals.

I am delighted that Mrs Sophie Mirabella MP will serve in my shadow cabinet as the new Shadow Minister for

Innovation, Industry, Science and Research. Sophie is a strong advocate for Australian industry and as a regional

member, she brings a unique perspective to this portfolio.

I am pleased to continue the appointment of the Hon Andrew Robb AO MP to the Shadow Cabinet and I

acknowledge his commitment to good policy and his outstanding political acumen. I thank Andrew for agreeing to

take on the heavy responsibility of Chairman of the Coalition Policy Development Committee and look forward to

working closely with him as we develop the policies necessary to provide clear and responsible alternatives to

Labor at the next election.

Finally, I am pleased that the Hon Philip Ruddock MP, a distinguished former Cabinet Minister and grandfather

of the House, has agreed to act as my Shadow Cabinet Secretary. Philip’s experience, judgement and wise

counsel will provide a wider resource to the Coalition in his new role and I thank him for his ongoing commitment

to the Coalition.

The Hon Bronwyn Bishop MP will take a new policy portfolio Shadow Minister for Seniors. This portfolio

represents a new era in the way I want to see government interact with seniors. Rather than deliver services

through layers of bureaucratic channels, I believe senior Australians need a dedicated advocate for them.

Bronwyn will ensure seniors are at the forefront of what we do, right across government. In this important role,

Bronwyn will take on policy challenges such as pension adequacy, the interests of self-funded retirees, mature-aged employment, community security and active living.

Senator the Hon Michael Ronaldson will serve as Shadow Special Minister of State with oversight of the

Coalition’s Scrutiny of Government Waste Committee. This committee will continue under the Chairmanship of

Senator Guy Barnett. A determined advocate of transparent government, Michael has used the Senate Estimates

process to shed light on wasteful government expenditure.

The Hon Dr Sharman Stone MP will take on portfolio of Shadow Minister for Early Childhood Education and

Childcare as well as assuming responsibility as the Shadow Minister for the Status of Women. Sharman has

significant background in advocating for women in public policy, especially marginalised and migrant women. I

look to working closely with Sharman to give Australian families and women real choices in this critical policy

area.

Mr Steven Ciobo MP will serve as the Shadow Minister for Tourism and the Arts and as Shadow Minister for

Youth and Sport. Steven provides a voice for the tourism sector and Australia’s arts community and with his new

responsibilities in youth and sport. I look forward to his ongoing contribution.

Mr Michael Keenan MP will take on the portfolio of Shadow Minister for Justice and Customs. In this role,

Michael will work closely with Scott Morrison to highlight Labor’s border protection failures and ensure we return

to a policy of strong border protection. As a West Australian member, Michael knows the pressures placed on his

home state by the Rudd Government’s recent failure to protect our borders.

As a former Director of the Australian Taxation Office, the Hon Sussan Ley MP brings practical experience to the

role of Shadow Assistant Treasurer. I know Sussan will work hard to ensure that taxpayer money is not wasted

and is best used to deliver the services and infrastructure that people need in their local communities.

The Hon Bob Baldwin MP will continue in his role as Shadow Minister for Defence Science and Personnel and

Shadow Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence. Bob has worked tirelessly in this portfolio since 2007 and I

look forward to his continued advocacy for defence personnel and their families.

Mr Luke Hartsuyker MP will serve as the Shadow Minister for Consumer Affairs, Financial Services,

Superannuation and Corporate Law. Luke will retain the role of Deputy Manager of Opposition Business in the

House. Luke replaces the Honourable Chris Pearce MP who has announced previously announced he would not

contest the next election. I wish Chris and his family all the very best for the future. He will be fondly remembered

as the ‘hero of Aston’ for his Aston by-election win in 2001.

Mrs Louise Markus MP will continue to serve as my Shadow Minister for Veterans’ Affairs. Louise’s commitment

to the portfolio and Australia’s war veterans’ is tireless. I want to see a renewed commitment to issues facing the

veteran community and I will work closely with Louise to see that genuine assistance is provided to these

Australians to whom the country owes so much.

Senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells has been promoted to serve as Shadow Minister for Ageing. Connie will

bring her considerable policy talent and enthusiasm to this role. She replaces Mrs Margaret May MP who recently

announced that she will not stand at the next election. A tireless advocate for senior Australians, I thank Margaret

for her service to the Liberal Party and hard work.

Senator Marise Payne has been promoted to the outer shadow ministry. Marise will take up the newly created

role of Shadow Minister for COAG and Modernising the Federation. There is no doubt the Australian people are

being let down by the way in which essential services like health and education are delivered due to the broken

nature of Commonwealth State relations. I look forward to Marise bringing her strong intellect to this new

challenge.

Senator Mathias Cormannhas performed an outstanding job in his former role in the health portfolio and I am

pleased to promote him to the position of Shadow Minister for Employment Participation, Apprenticeships and

Training. It is essential that we keep Australians in jobs and help those out of work to get a job and this will be the

key focus for Mathias.

Finally, there have been a number of changes to the Shadow Parliamentary Secretaries ranks.

Senator the Hon Ian Macdonald has been re-appointed to his role as Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for

Northern Australia. This role has been enhanced to take on responsibility for remote Australia also as Shadow

Parliamentary Secretary for Northern and Remote Australia.

As a former doctor, I am pleased that Dr Andrew Southcott MP will serve as the Shadow Parliamentary

Secretary for Regional Health Services, Health and Wellbeing.

Senator the Hon Brett Mason will serve as the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Education and School

Curriculum Standards as well as Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Innovation, Industry, Science and

Research.

Senator Mitch Fifield has performed with distinction as a staunch advocate of people with a disability and will

continue to serve as the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities, Carers and the Voluntary Sector.

I have been impressed with the advocacy of Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck in the fisheries and forestry area

and I am pleased that he will continue to serve as the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture, Fisheries

and Forestry

Senator Cory Bernardi has been appointed my Shadow Parliamentary Secretary and the new Shadow

Parliamentary Secretary for Infrastructure and Population Policy. Population policy and a sustainable Australia is

a debate that must be held and I know that Cory will provide a voice for everyday Australians who feel that Labor

is making decisions in this critical area without giving them an adequate say.

Mr Don Randall MP will continue to serve as the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Roads and Transport. Don

is an outstanding advocate both locally and nationally and he will continue to contribute to policy debate on these

important national infrastructure issues.

I am pleased to promote Senator Simon Birmingham as my Shadow Parliamentary for Climate Action and as a

South Australian his new role as Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for the Murray Darling Basin will be critically

important to ensuring the livelihoods of people all along this great Australian waterway are central to our policy-making.

As a former Army Officer, I am delighted to appoint Mr Stuart Robert MP as my Shadow Parliamentary

Secretary for Defence. With his experience in the Australian Defence Force, Stuart will deliver some practical

reality into defence policy making and provide a strong voice for defence service men and women.

One of the most experienced Senate committee members in the Coalition team, Senator Gary Humphries will

bring his long experience and advocacy in the social policy area to his new role as Shadow Parliamentary

Secretary for Families, Housing and Human Services and the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Citizenship. I

welcome him to the team and look forward to his contribution.

I am pleased that Mrs Jo Gash MP will take on the role as Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Tourism. As the

local member for one of the most picturesque coastal regions in Australia, she knows firsthand how important

tourism is to jobs and the local economy.

Mr Jason Wood MP will continue in his existing role but will have a renewed focus on policing. As a former

police detective and senior sergeant in the counter-terrorism coordination unit, Jason will serve as my Shadow

Parliamentary Secretary for Public Security and Policing and I make it clear that we see a restoration of safe

communities as a key focus of the Coalition as we head towards an election.

Mr Mark Coulton MP will move to a new role as my Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Regional Development

and Emerging Trade Markets.

