The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister

14 October, 2009

Transcript

Transcript - Television Interview Sky News - Victoria

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS [VICTORIA]  WEDNESDAY  14 OCTOBER 2009

ISSUES:  Immigration; Climate Change; Building the Education Revolution

DAVID SPEERS: Julia Gillard, thank you for your time. You began the process of crafting  Labor’s immigration policy back when you were Shadow Minister, some years ago. Given  the influx we’ve seen of arrivals this year, more than 1700 this year, do you still think Labor  has the balance right between a humane approach but also providing some deterrence?

JULIA GILLARD: I think we do have the balance right and I started crafting Labor’s  immigration policy after the 2001 election which became famous, of course, for children  overboard. And since that children overboard affair I don’t think any Australian has believed  a Liberal Party member like Philip Ruddock when they’ve gone out and made claims in the  public domain about asylum seekers.

What they said then was wrong and obviously many of the things that have been said by  Opposition members now are wrong.

DAVID SPEERS: When he says, today for example, there are fewer displaced people  around the world than there were when the Howard Government was in office, are you saying  that’s wrong?

JULIA GILLARD: He would know, I mean he is not going to say it publicly, but he would  know that there are push factors which drive people out of countries, including for example,  violence in Afghanistan including the situation in Sri Lanka.

But what Mr Ruddock and the Liberal Party generally isn’t saying to the Australian people is  that the Howard Government’s solutions, so-called, were failed solutions. We actually saw  large numbers of unauthorised arrivals under the Howard Government, more than 13,000  under the life of the Howard Government.

DAVID SPEERS: But after the Pacific Solution was brought in we did see a drop and those  push factors that you talked about were still there; in Afghanistan, in Iraq, in other parts of

the world. So isn’t it clear if you do make the border protection policy more humane you are  inevitably going to reduce some of the deterrence.

JULIA GILLARD: I think we’ve got to be a bit careful about the numbers of arrivals, as I  understand what parts of the Liberal Party are saying now because different bits of it are  saying different things. Different bits of it seem to be saying let’s go back to temporary  protection visas. Well the statistics show that after the Howard Government introduced  temporary protection visas, we saw increasing numbers of unauthorised arrivals.

Now, I think, when we’re talking about the Liberal Party’s view about all of this and its  criticism of what the Government is doing, it actually has to speak one view to the Australian  people. We’ve got Malcolm Turnbull not clearly articulating a position. We’ve got people  like Petro Georgiou saying temporary protection visas and the Pacific Solution were the  wrong way to go. We’ve got Alexander Downer and Philip Ruddock out saying no;  apparently all of the Howard Government policy should be back. Now, before the Opposition  can really participate in this debate, and it is an important issue for this country, they need to  speak with one voice.

What we’ve done is we’ve got the balance right, we’ve got unauthorised arrivals, should they  come into Australian waters, being dealt with at an excised place, Christmas Island. But our  focus is further up the pipeline dealing with the factors that push people and start them  moving and of course dealing with co-operation with our near neighbours like Indonesia.

DAVID SPEERS: But if Christmas Island does become full, even with the 200 new bunk  beds that are going in, you are going to have to start processing arrivals, people who arrive  here, on the mainland aren’t you?

JULIA GILLARD: We are expanding capacity at Christmas Island, and obviously  Christmas Island is the processing area where we want people to go. It’s an excised place, we  kept that deliberately, and claims can be processed there.

DAVID SPEERS: Why is that, just briefly, why does it have to happen there? Is that part of  the deterrence?

JULIA GILLARD: It has to happen there because as an excised place we can use  international law and arrangements for the processing of refugees, asylum seekers, so the  message should be to people that trying to move across dangerous water is of course, risking  life and limb and particularly risking the life and limb of family members if people are  travelling with children.

We obviously want people to register with UNHCR in the countries where they’re in. They  can do that for example, in Indonesia and be processed there. And our message is very clear  to people that processing arrangements here, if people aren’t found to be genuine refugees,  then they will be returned to their country of origin. That happened very recently with the  return of Sri Lankan people who had arrived and weren’t found to be genuine refugees.

DAVID SPEERS: So what happens when Christmas Island is full? What happens then?

JULIA GILLARD: We are in the process of expanding capacity there.

DAVID SPEERS: Can you keep doing that?

JULIA GILLARD: The Minister for Immigration is obviously making arrangements to  expand capacity there.

DAVID SPEERS: So you don’t want to process anyone on the mainland?

JULIA GILLARD: Obviously our aim is to have processing happen in one place and have it  happen at Christmas Island. We are co-operating with Indonesia to deal with arrangements.  We obviously want to disrupt people movement before it happens. We want to catch and  punish people smugglers who are profiting off the misery of others, a despicable thing to do.  And we are working with Indonesia on those things.

But I would make this point too, I mean, I think some of this debate just needs to be grounded  in a few facts. We have former members, or current Liberal Party politicians, saying let’s go  back to the Howard ways. Well I think that they need to be clear that even when the Howard  Government was operating the Pacific Solution and temporary protection visas, large  numbers of people were processed and found to be genuine refugees and ended up in  Australia.

The much vaunted Tampa boatload of asylum seekers, many of them ended up in Australia  despite Mr Howard’s chest beating at the time.

DAVID SPEERS: I’ll shift to climate change, you’ve just returned in the last few days from  the United States. There’s concern amongst the Europeans that the Americans are reluctant to  sign up to any legally binding enforceable targets and that’s really going to jeopardise the  chances of a global deal at Copenhagen. Do you think the Americans are dragging their feet?

JULIA GILLARD: I think President Obama continues to be focused on the issue of climate  change. Clearly with the American system of trying to work legislation through Congress, the  focus has been on getting the healthcare package through. That’s very important to the  American people, and I think Australians would understand if we were in a world where we  didn’t have a Labor inspired universal healthcare system, like Medicare, we’d be pretty  focused on sorting that out too.

But when you talk to people generally in America they’re focused on climate change, focused  on the need for the planet to get a cooperative arrangement to deal with emissions.

They are also very focused too, on the economic opportunities that the new green economy  can bring to America. And one of the powerful messages I picked up there is: in this country  we also have to be thinking about the opportunities that dealing with the challenge of climate  change will give us for new jobs, new ways of working, new innovations and green jobs for  the future.

DAVID SPEERS: The clock is ticking for the Copenhagen meeting and we still don’t have  targets, we still don’t have any firm offers on the table from arguably one of the two biggest  players, the United States, surely there is an onus on them to reveal their hand now?

JULIA GILLARD: I think there is onus on countries around the world to be working  cooperatively together to deal with climate change and that does require clear talking and I’m

sure the American administration is going to move to that clearer and clearer discussion as  we move towards Copenhagen.

Here in Australia we obviously want to deal with the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in  the Parliament. That’s about being able to go to Copenhagen certain of what this nation is  doing but it’s also quintessentially about our country organising our arrangements and giving  our business community certainty so that they can keep investing for the future knowing what  the rules and regulations are going to be.

DAVID SPEERS: You talk about the certainty of Australia’s position to reduce emissions.  The front page of the Melbourne Age today carries the story of the Brumby Government  wanting to open up exports of brown coal to the world. Now this of course is the dirtiest form  of fossil fuel, does the Federal Government have a problem with that?

JULIA GILLARD: We’re a country with a lot of coal and we’re going to continue to mine  and use coal. We’re going to continue to mine and export coal. What we’re doing is investing  in the technologies that will make a difference to emissions when coal is used, clean coal  technology is one possibility and obviously carbon capture and storage being another  possibility; that we can capture the emissions and store them in a safe place.

DAVID SPEERS: There’s none of that restriction on this brown coal. It’s not like the  countries that buy it will have to use those cleaner technologies.

JULIA GILLARD: Around the world obviously the focus is moving to these cleaner  technologies. We’re a nation with a lot of coal, many other nations rely on coal generated  power and the conversations in those countries are turning to clean coal, to carbon capture  and storage. The Prime Minister has been very successful with the launch of the Global  Carbon Capture and Storage Institute; in interesting countries overseas in joining us in this  venture, because they realise that we will continue to use coal but we want to use it in a  cleaner and more environmentally friendly way.

DAVID SPEERS: Just a couple of other issues quickly in your portfolio. The schools  funding, here in Victoria another school has claimed that they haven’t been able to access the  full $3 million grant their entitled to, to build a gym. This is a local primary school in  Victoria. They say that they’re having to fit with the state education funding model for how  much they can spend on this gym. Are you worried that the State departments are creaming  money off the billions of dollars being spent on this program?

JULIA GILLARD: The way the Building the Education Revolution program works is  primary schools have an entitlement to money depending on school size. If they are going to  forgo a significant part of that entitlement then the principal of the school needs to sign off on  that. So it can’t happen without local consent.

If there is, in this school or indeed any other school, a problem - we’ve said that people  should, if they need assistance, lodge a complaint with our co-ordinator of the Building the  Education Revolution program. And I’ve made the point before but I think its an important  one; we’re talking about the biggest school modernisation program the nation has ever seen  urgently supporting jobs during the days of the global recession; 9500 schools, more than  24,000 projects and to date we’ve received less than 60 complaints to our Building the  Education Revolution co-ordinator.

Now in all human activity there will be days when people are confused or get the wrong  information or something goes wrong. That’s why we’ve got a complaints mechanism to  work through issues. But I think anybody looking at those figures would say this is a program  overwhelmingly rolling out well. To the extent people have concerns we seek to address them  but that’s a very low complaint number given the size, scale and speed of this.

DAVID SPEERS: Just finally, Peter Costello’s seat in Higgins. The Liberals have already  pre-selected Kelly O’Dwyer. She’s hit the ground running in the campaign there. Has Labor  decided whether to run in that seat?

JULIA GILLARD: These decisions are taken by the party organisation through our national  secretary, so the party organisation will work on that. If I’ve got my electorate history right, I  hope I won’t be proven wrong, but I don’t think Labor has ever had the seat of Higgins.

DAVID SPEERS: But a by-election, if circumstances change somewhat would you have a  chance?

JULIA GILLARD: I think people would know of course that Higgins in Melbourne covers  some of our very wealthy suburbs. People interstate would recognise the name of Toorak I  think, and I don’t think we’ve ever held the seat.

DAVID SPEERS: Julia Gillard, thank you.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.

ENDS

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



