

The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations  Minister for Social Inclusion  Deputy Prime Minister

18 October, 2009

Transcript

Transcript - Television Interview Today On Sunday -  840AM Sunday

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY ON SUNDAY  840AM SUNDAY  18 OCTOBER 2009

ISSUES: Jessica Watson; Asylum seekers; Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme  legislation

LAURIE OAKES: Ms Gillard, welcome to the program.

JULIA GILLARD: Good morning, Laurie.

LAURIE OAKES: Jessica Watson, the 16 year old yachtsperson is about to head off on her  round the world solo attempt.  Have you got any words for her?

JULIA GILLARD: Yes, she’s just about to set sail.  I suppose my words at this stage would  be, Laurie, the best of luck.  The seas are obviously a dangerous and lonely place but I think  we’d all be wishing Jessica well and if there’s one thing I would wish it’s to keep safe, do  everything she needs to do to keep safe and if that means that at some point she’s got to  abandon the journey, then the most important thing here is a young person’s life.

LAURIE OAKES: Should she be going?

JULIA GILLARD: Well ultimately people have to make their own decisions.  I think a lot  of Australians are nervous for Jessica.  I’m nervous for her but my words at this stage, given  she’s determined to go, would be to wish her the best of luck and to urge to keep safe.

LAURIE OAKES: OK, asylum seekers.  Can you bring us up to date with the situation with  the two boats that are in distress of Malaysia and Indonesia?

JULIA GILLARD: Well there are two boats that our search and rescue people have been  made aware of.  One is off the coast of Indonesia, one is off the coast of Malaysia.  They are  in the Indonesian search and rescue zone and in the Malaysian search and rescue zone.  So  our role, Laurie, is to assist if our assistance is asked for or required by the Indonesian or  Malaysian authorities but they are ones in control of the efforts here.

LAURIE OAKES: But they were apparently trying to get to Australia so I assume we have  some responsibility.  What happens if HMAS Armidale has to pick up some of these people?

JULIA GILLARD: Well I don’t think the evidence is in yet, Laurie, about what these  people were trying to do. What is known is that there is a boat near the coast of Indonesia that  is in some form of distress and we believe the same is true of the boat off the coast of  Malaysia.  Obviously the Indonesian and Malaysian authorities are responding.  The  Armidale is in the vicinity of the boat off the coast of Indonesia and if we’re required to  assist, then obviously we will.

LAURIE OAKES: Well I suppose two asylum seeker boats in trouble at the same time, I  suppose focuses attention on what Warren Truss said on Friday when he claimed the  Government was responsible for people risking their lives in these boats.

JULIA GILLARD: Well, Laurie, this is one of the most irresponsible and dangerous  statements I think I’ve ever heard in Australian politics.  Warren Truss is not a junior  backbencher in the Coalition.  He’s the man who, if Mr Turnbull was elected as prime  minister, would have my job.  He’s the man who would act as prime minister when Mr  Turnbull was away and what Mr Truss has done is he appears to have just got on google and  looked in the dark recesses of the internet, cobbled together some figure and then accused the  Government of causing that loss of life, accused the Government of causing the loss of 25  lives.

Well there’s no evidence to support this figure; it’s Mr Truss on google making the same kind  of irresponsible allegations that this Liberal Opposition has become characterised by.  We  saw the fake email affair and they’re still at it today.  And what’s even worse than the man  who wants to be deputy prime minister would conduct himself like this is the man who wants  to be prime minister, Mr Turnbull, backed him yesterday.  Well Mr Turnbull needs to have a  change of heart today, he needs to repudiate this conduct by Warren Truss, he needs to  reprimand him and require Mr Truss to apologise for this ridiculous and vile slur.

LAURIE OAKES: I’ve got here a shadow minister’s press release headed ‘another boat on  the way, another policy failure.’  Do you agree that every boat of asylum seekers that arrives  represents a policy failure by the government?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, what I believe Laurie and what I think we can see from the  conduct of the Opposition is they’re all about playing politics with this issue.  They say a lot  of inconsistent things.  Some days they’re in favour of temporary protection visas, some day  they’re against them, some days they’re in favour of the Howard Pacific Solution, some days  they’re against it, but each and every day they’re playing politics.

LAURIE OAKES: What about you?  What about you?  Another boat on the way, another  policy failure - is that right?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie, I think what Australians know and what the Government knows  is that we live in a world where people get displaced from their home countries for a variety  of reasons.  We’re seeing the aftermath of a civil war in Sri Lanka, for example, so people  move because of that kind of violence.  What obviously the world wants is for people if they  have to flee their homes to then stop when they can get in contact with responsible authorities  like the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and have their claims processed.   What we don’t want is we don’t people risking long and dangerous journeys overseas where  they might get into distress and get into real difficulty.

LAURIE OAKES: You see that press statement was dated April 23, 2003 and it’s issued by  the shadow minister, Julia Gillard.  Why was one boat arrival then a failure of government  policy but 30 plus arrivals this year is not a failure of government policy?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, Laurie I think what we know is we live in a world where people  do end up displaced for a variety of reasons.  The Howard Government confronted that; we  confront that.

What we’re responsible for is getting our domestic policy settings right and we live we’ve  done that.  We believe we’ve got the balance right through protecting our borders and  deterring people from making risky and dangerous journeys whilst treating people humanely.   We don’t want to see, for example, children in endless detention.

As a shadow minister I was very critical of the Howard Government’s policy.  I don’t think  they did get the balance right and, Laurie, I wasn’t alone in that.  Many members of the  Howard government backbench also were very critical of Mr Howard’s policies.

But when we looked at the effect, what we know is some of the measures taken by the  Howard Government, for example, enacting temporary protection visas, didn’t make a  difference to arrivals.  We saw around 8,500 asylum seekers arrive in the two years after Mr  Howard and the Liberal Party adopted temporary protection visas.

LAURIE OAKES: What you’re criticising there specifically was the Howard Government’s  failure to conclude an agreement with Indonesia on people smuggling.  Is that what Kevin  Rudd will be trying to do when he speaks to the Indonesian President in Jakarta on Tuesday?

JULIA GILLARD: Kevin Rudd is obviously going to Jakarta on Tuesday of the  inauguration of the President of Indonesia.  He will be there for bilateral discussions as well.   Laurie, we cooperate with Indonesia each and every day on a variety of topics including on  dealing with people smuggling.  This is a challenge for Indonesia as it’s a challenge for us.   That’s why we want to work together with Indonesia and we have been working with them  very cooperatively to address the problem of people smuggling.

LAURIE OAKES: But are you seeking an agreement on this issue with Indonesia, as you  said John Howard should have done?

JULIA GILLARD: Well what the Prime Minister will talk to President of Indonesia about is  a matter for their discussions.  But I do want to say, Laurie…

LAURIE OAKES: Well I think the Australian people have got a say in this.

JULIA GILLARD: Well the Australian public of course always has a say in issues in the  national interest and national policies but I don’t want to give the impression that somehow  nothing is happening how.  There is very close cooperation with Indonesia now which is  meant that we have been able to disrupt some people smuggling activities. It has meant that  our Australian Federal Police have been able to charge more than 40 people with people  smuggling offences and I think at base, Laurie, we all know that people smuggling is a  despicable trade. It’s trying to profit off the misery of others and it’s in our interest and in  Indonesia’s interest to work together against this criminal activity.

LAURIE OAKES: The emissions trading legislation will dominate the next few weeks of  Federal Parliament.  Coalition MPs are meeting today to discuss amendments that will form  the basis of negotiations with the Government on that legislation.  What is the   Government hoping to come out of that Coalition party meeting?

JULIA GILLARD: Well I think there’s one clear thing that needs to come out of that  Coalition party meeting.  Mr Turnbull will only have succeeded today at that party meeting if  he comes out able to commit to having a vote on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in  November.  That is the test for Mr Turnbull.  If he fails that test then clearly climate change  sceptics are in control and though they’re going to do some pantomime about amendments,  they’re not serious about voting on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.

So we want to see Mr Turnbull come out of that meeting saying that he’s acted as the leader  and he now has his party room behind him to have a vote on the Carbon Pollution Reduction  Scheme in November.

LAURIE OAKES: But why should he agree to a vote in November before he even knows if  you’re going to agree to his amendments?  I mean what’s so sacrosanct about November  apart from the fact that it’s a bit of a wedge political issue by the Government to undermine  Mr Turnbull?

JULIA GILLARD: Two big things are important about November, Laurie.  First and  foremost, the Government, the Rudd Government has said consistently since we promised a  Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, when we ran for election in November 2007 we said we  would deliver that scheme to give Australian business certainty about the future.  Australian  businesses want this issue resolved.  They are making investment decisions on a five, 10, 15,  20 year time cycle, depending on the nature of the investment.

LAURIE OAKES: So you expect Malcolm Turnbull to commit to a vote in November on  legislation basically sight unseen before he knows what you’ll accept?  That’s unreasonable,  isn’t it?

JULIA GILLARD: Laurie, sight unseen?  I’ll have to disagree with that.

We’re talking about a scheme that has been in negotiation and working through over two  years involving extensive public consultation including many documents and details that the  Liberal Party have had access to over not just months now but over the years since we were  elected in November 2007.  And Mr Turnbull doesn’t come to this as a novice.  He himself in  government was working through an emissions trading scheme so all of the details have been  there for a long period for time.

This legislation has been to Parliament once.  We’ve said to Mr Turnbull we’re prepared to  negotiate in good faith.  Get your house in order about what amendments you want to move.   Mr Turnbull is now in a last ditch effort to try and get his house in order about what  amendments he wants to move.  We’re saying we’ll consider your amendments in good  faith.  Bring them to us, tell us you’ve got your party room behind you and tell us that you are  committed to a vote in November.  Now after all of this dialogue, all of this political  processes, Laurie, that seems a very, very reasonable thing to ask for.

And Laurie, if I can put the question in the reverse - what is going to be gained by further  delay?  Australian businesses want certainty.  The more nations that can go to Copenhagen  clear about their positions, the more momentum there is for a worldwide agreement to deal  with this profound challenge for our planet.  If Mr Turnbull can’t sort this out today, what  would give you any confidence that he can sort it out any day in the future?

LAURIE OAKES: Well I think like most people I can’t see the relevance of November, it  seems to be entirely artificial, but let me ask you this: there’s a leaked Coalition document in  the Sunday Age suggesting almost two thirds of Coalition senators would defy Mr Turnbull’s  wishes on this.  Does that surprise you?

JULIA GILLARD: Well it doesn’t surprise me that there are big divisions in the Coalition.   I mean all I’ve got to do, Laurie, is read the newspapers to work that out.  What Barnaby  Joyce and Wilson Tuckey say is quite different from what Mr Turnbull says.  That’s why  today is an important test for Mr Turnbull and an important test of his capacity to lead the  Liberal Party and indeed the Coalition, the National Party as well. And there’s one clear test  here: can he come out committed to a vote on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in  November?

LAURIE OAKES: Ms Gillard, we thank you and we’ll wave goodbye to Jessica Watson.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you, Laurie.



ENDS.

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



