



PW 95/09         19 April 2009



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW, MEET THE PRESS

SUBJECT: BORDER PROTECTION, CLIMATE CHANGE, EMISSIONS TRADING  SCHEME, JOB SECURITY

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

MEET THE PRESS PRESENTER, PAUL BONGIORNO: Good morning and welcome to Meet  The Press. This week the political debate went overboard when a boatload of Afghan asylum  seekers tragically exploded. It overshadowed the increasingly fraught struggle the government is  having as it pushes its global warming agenda through the parliament. Just as a senate inquiry  began dissecting the government's plans to cut carbon emissions, Qantas joined the ranks of  businesses cutting back and sacking workers.

LIBERAL LEADER, MALCOLM TURNBULL (Wednesday): You destroy jobs in Australia  and the emissions just simply are exported - you export the jobs and you export the emissions,  and there in lies the problem.

GREENS SENATOR, CHRISTINE MILNE (Wednesday): With Australia's leading scientists  now saying "that is not enough", that it will not even go near a 50% chance of avoiding  catastrophic climate change, it would be irresponsible for anyone really serious about climate to  support 5%.

CLIMATE CHANGE MINISTER, PENNY WONG (Wednesday): Ultimately, the choice for all  senators, including the Opposition, will be legislation, which for the first time turns around the  growth in Australia's emissions and sets us on a path to a cleaner economy, a lower pollution  economy of the future.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Climate Change Minister Penny Wong is a guest. And later, what about  the workers? The national secretary of one of Australia's biggest unions, Paul Howes joins us.  He's also the convenor of Labor for Refugees. But first, what's making news in the nation's  papers this Sunday, April 19. 'The Sunday Age' says, "Rudd funds smuggler fight". The Federal  Government is set to announce a massive subsidy for Indonesian police and immigration  officials to combat a surge of asylum seekers from the Middle East. 'The Sunday Telegraph' has  "survival hangs in the balance". Doctors fear that not all the asylum seekers being treated for  their injuries will survive. And the Federal Government is warning more will come, as desperate  people flee worsening situations in Afghanistan, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. 'The Sunday Mail'

reports "banks face exit fee ban by Federal Government". Unfair exit fees could be outlawed in  response to rising anger over the failure of Australian banks to pass on official interest rate cuts.  And the 'Sun Herald' has the headline "executives must cut salaries: Swan". The Treasurer is  demanding all bank chiefs slash their pay packets to buy faith with the public. And welcome  back to the program, Senator Penny Wong.

MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER: PENNY WONG: It's good to be with  you.

PAUL BONGIORNO: And Minister Penny Wong. Going to the boat people issue, in your view,  are we facing a new asylum seeker crisis?

PENNY WONG: Well, what we know is that the challenge of people smuggling is always there  and it is an evil trade. An evil trade run by people who are willing to exploit people who are  desperate, and that's what we have to focus on. We focus on strong border protection, on  ensuring that our surveillance and coastal protection is strong and that's where our policy focus  is. There is no doubt this is a challenge. It's a challenge that the government is going to continue  to work to meet.

PAUL BONGIORNO: It's a challenge, but is it already a crisis?

PENNY WONG: Well, we know that as the UNHCR said there is a whole range of global  factors which are causing more people globally to seek asylum but the reality is here, we have a  challenge. That challenge is to disrupt people smuggling, the evil trade that is all about  exploiting people who are desperate. The government will continue to focus on that.

PAUL BONGIORNO: The Opposition says that Labor's softening of the Howard Government's  border protection policies has encouraged people smugglers. The evidence is already there, isn't  it?

PENNY WONG: Well, look, the Opposition again, has their facts wrong. I mean, we know for  example that a range of the asylum seekers intercepted in the last few days from Afghanistan in  fact left Afghanistan when John Howard was still prime minister. But if the Opposition takes this  view, what I'd ask them is 'well, what is your policy?' because the reality is they are split on this  issue as they are on so many others. We've already seen today the South Australian Liberal Party  bickering with each other. They are split on this issue and are unable to come forward with a  solution. We're focused on real solutions - strong border protection and disrupting people  smuggling.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, going to the emissions trading scheme and your battle to get it  through the parliament, hasn't the government's case for an ETS been severely damaged by your  own Climate Change Adviser, Professor Ross Garnaut? This is what he told the senate inquiry.

CLIMATE CHANGE ADVISER, PROFESSOR ROSS GARNAUT (Thursday): If there were  no changes at all, I can only repeat what I said to Senator McDonald that it would be a line-ball

call, whether it's better to push ahead or say "we still want the ETS at the centre of our mitigation  effort but we'll have another crack at it and do a better one when the time is right".

PAUL BONGIORNO: 'Another crack at it and do a better one when time is right' - it's hardly a  vote of confidence.

PENNY WONG: The time is right now, Paul. The reality is we have been talking about  responding to climate change for years now. We saw years of inaction under the previous  government. The longer we wait, the harder it will be. The time is right now and look, this is not  an easy challenge. We understand that reducing Australia's carbon emissions is a big challenge,  It will require a transformation of the Australian economy. It's a bit like getting fit. You don't get  fit by saying you want to get fit. You get fit by having a plan to get there. Similarly, Australia  needs a plan to reduce its emissions. That's what we've put forward.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, the time is right, but is the plan the best plan that you can put  forward? Or does it need a radical re-work?

PENNY WONG: Look, we have made decisions on the design of the carbon pollution reduction  scheme and what we believe was in the national interest. We sought to balance a range of  different considerations, supporting today's jobs but at the same time giving the incentives to  business to invest in the renewable energies, the clean technology and the jobs of the future. This  is an economic transformation. People may have different views about decisions that were made.  What I can say is the government very much kept its focus on the national interests when making  these decisions.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, there was a minority report from the senators' economic committee  during the week. The Liberal senators believe - the Coalition's senators believe that we shouldn't  rush it. That we should wait, at the very least, to see what the United States of America is going  to do given that it's by no means certain that President Obama can get an ETS through his  congress.

PENNY WONG: But we know what the United States wants to do. We know that President  Obama has called for cap and trade legislation from the Congress. He's made a commitment in  his election campaign to reducing US emissions, to putting in place a target, both for mid-century and earlier and I can also say to you today, that I will be attending, this time next week I  will be in Washington, attending the Major Economies Forum that President Obama has  announced. It's clear that the Obama Administration is willing to provide the leadership the  world wants when it comes to climate change and Australia wants to be there with them.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Time for a break. When we return with the panel - the sceptics give an  icy reception to global warming claims. And Liberal front bencher Peter Dutton wound himself  up for the insult of the week, taking aim at the Prime Minister.

LIBERAL FRONTBENCHER, PETER DUTTON (Friday): He's up on top of that stairs,  hopping into the VIP flight, another flight overseas, waving like Dame Edna Everage once he's  on board he turns into Barry Humphries, he turns into the pig of Australian politics.



PAUL BONGIORNO: You're on Meet The Press with Climate Change Minister, Penny Wong  and welcome to our panel. 'The Sydney Morning Herald's, Marian Wilkinson. Good morning  Marian.

THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD, MARIAN WILKINSON: Good morning, Paul.

PAUL BONGIORNO: And from the 'Daily Telegraph', Malcolm Farr. Good morning, Malcolm.

DAILY TELEGRAPH, MALCOLM FARR: Good morning, Paul.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Professor Robert Carter doesn't accept that human activity is contributing  to climate change, nor is he convinced that the proposed scheme can do anything to slow it or  stop it.

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENTIST, PROFESSOR ROBERT CARTER (Wednesday): Australia  introduces an Emissions Trading Scheme, what is the diminution of temperature that is going to  result, in degrees centigrade, from the measure you are putting in place? I do not see how you  can make a decision on this unless you can answer that question. I am astonished I cannot find  that figure in any of the science advice that's come to this committee

MALCOLM FARR: Minister, that's a pretty fundamental and valid question. What sort of  reduction, in degrees, would your measures bring about?

PENNY WONG: Well, let's remember climate change is a global problem, it's a global challenge  and what we are saying is we have to act domestically but we also have to act internationally in  the part of a global solution. The CPRS, the carbon pollution reduction scheme, will enable  Australia to reduce its emissions, but of course we've always said it has to be part of a broader  global agreement and I'll be talking more about international agenda at the Lowy Institute  tomorrow, but we have always said ‘we understand this is a global problem, but we have to do  the right thing in Australia as well if we are going to do the best we can'…

MALCOLM FARR: So you don't even have a target.

PENNY WONG: We have said very clearly, we believe it is in Australia's national interests to  have…

MALCOLM FARR: No, no, in degrees.

PENNY WONG: Oh well, because the degrees target is what the globe can manage. What we  have said is it is in our interest to have an ambitious agreement that enables stabilisation at 450  parts per million and we have put out there our targets. But again, what I say is this, we can't  advocate for and we can't be part of an effective global agreement, which is the only way we are  going to respond to climate change if we are not prepared to do something in Australia as well.

MARIAN WILKINSON: Senator Wong, what you are prepared to do though, it now looks like  it's got very few friends apart from you, really. The Opposition now seems to be clearly opposed  to your carbon pollution reduction scheme in the Senate, as do the Greens, as do the  crossbenchers. Is it dead?

PENNY WONG: Well, you know, in this debate there are a lot of strong views and often it is the  extreme voices at either end of the debate that are the loudest, but we will continue to progress  this reform. Obviously we are going to have to talk to the senate, that is self-evident, but the  reality is, despite whatever people say, despite all the media commentary and so forth, Malcolm  Turnbull and every Senator is going to have to make a decision whether they will vote to allow  Australia's carbon pollution to continue to rise, or whether they will finally say it's time for us to  turn this around and start to reduce Australia's emissions. That is the decision that senators are  going to have to make.

MARIAN WILKINSON: But senior people in your own party, in your own cabinet indeed, don't  think this is going to get through and so I guess what people are asking now is, is this an exercise  in politicking for you so that this legislation can go up and be knocked over?

PENNY WONG: Absolutely not. No, absolutely not. We made a commitment to the Australian  people that we would respond to climate change and that was in the context of an election. And  let's remember where people made very clear in this country that they were tired of the climate  change sceptics that had ruled the Liberal Party, those that were still advocating for no response  on climate change. We will put this up and the challenge for Malcolm Turnbull will be whether  he is as good as his word, because Malcolm Turnbull, before he bowed to the more extreme  elements in his own party room, he said that they would support an Emissions Trading Scheme,  he said action on climate change was important. But at the moment, they have no policy, they're  simply saying 'no'.

MALCOLM FARR: Well, let's go to Malcolm Turnbull and he said, talking about what he saw  as the consequences of your legislation, "we will mine and export less coal in Australia, they will  mine and export more coal in Indonesia". He's pretty right, isn't he?

PENNY WONG: Well, look, this is the issue, the challenge of carbon leakage that we have been  very, very clear about from the start and the government's had criticism from those on the other  side of the debate who said we've given too much to the so-called 'big polluters'. And I have said  very clearly the provision of assistance, such as free permits, is about ensuring we support jobs in  Australia today, but at the same time we need to provide business with the incentives to invest in  the clean technologies of the future.

MALCOLM FARR: That's a long way off, the clean technology…

PENNY WONG: But Malcolm, I want to reference what Greg Gailey said, President of the  Business Council of Australia and he described climate change as a multi-decade investment  challenge. The BCA has also called for bipartisan support on these issues, a bipartisan approach  to these issues because this is a nation building issue. So what we say to the Opposition is this is  a challenge that is key to Australia's future. Stop bickering amongst yourselves and simply

saying 'no' to everything. You should front up to the task Malcolm Turnbull, as you did when  you were Minister for the Environment, and put your policy on the table.

MALCOLM FARR: But you are only giving the coal industry a restructuring package over 5  years, so that's not multi-decade. How many coal mines do you believe your legislation will shut  in Australia?

PENNY WONG: Look, we are giving the coal industry $750 million and we will continue to talk  to them about these transitional issues. The other thing we are doing, and this is very important  Malcolm, is that we are putting a substantial amount of energy into establishing the global  carbon caption storage initiative…

MALCOLM FARR: But that's not going to appear in any practical form for years and years.

PENNY WONG: This is important Malcolm because what we know is eventually the world will  move to a global carbon constraint. If we are going to preserve the value of our exports, we are  going to have to find a lower emission solution for coal. So the reason the government is putting  so much effort into carbon caption storage technology is twofold. One is you cannot respond to  climate change and reduce your emissions globally unless you find a lower emissions technology  for coal and the second is, as a coal producing nation we have an economic interest in developing  that technology.

MARIAN WILKINSON: It's all very well to say that that technology is very important, clean  coal technology is very important, but as Climate Change Minister, a lot of climate scientists are  saying now that there should be no coal-fired power stations built in western countries like  Australia until clean coal is onboard. As Climate Change Minister, do you think Australia should  build new coal-fired power stations without clean coal being onboard?

PENNY WONG: What we should do is put a price on carbon so we can try and trap the costs of  climate change into all our economic decision-making. What we should do also, and this is what  the government is going to do, is massively expand our investment in renewable energy through  a four-fold increase in our renewable energy target, but the fact is coal will remain, whether for  this country or for the globe, in the foreseeable future a major source of energy. We're not going  to change that but what we have to find, what we have to put resources into is a low emissions  technology for coal.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Minister, we have some viewer feedback. This viewer says "an ETS will  be an insidious tax penetrating every aspect and fabric of our economy. It will suck billions from  everyone to be poured into programs that make the Greens feel and look good". What do you say  to that?

PENNY WONG: Well, what I say to that is that climate change is the insidious challenge. It is  the big challenge and we know what climate change will mean, not just now, but for our children  and our grandchildren. So we do have to put a price on carbon. We have to reflect some of the  cost of climate change into the decisions that we make, whether in investment or production. We  have to make a transition from being a very highly carbon intensive economy to a low carbon

economy over time. And as I said before, we know this is not easy, this is a big challenge, but  this is a key challenge for the nation's future.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Thank you very much for being with us today. Climate Change Minister,  Penny Wong.



