PW 100/09 21 April 2009  TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW, ABC 2 BREAKFAST  SUBJECT: CARBON POLLUTION REDUCTION SCHEME, INTERNATIONAL NEGOTIATIONS ON CLIMATE CHANGE, PEOPLE SMUGGLING  E & O E - PROOF ONLY  JOURNALIST: Senator Penny Wong joins us now from Canberra.   Minster, good morning and thank you for joining us.    WONG: Good morning, good to be with you.  JOURNALIST: Now in your speech to the Lowy institute overnight you asked whether the opposition leader Malcolm Turnbull was to simply revive Mr Howard’s legacy on climate change or create a legacy of his own. He is standing firm against your legislation but you desperately need the opposition to get on board in order to pass this one don’t you?  WONG: Well look, Australia desperately needs an opposition leader who is prepared to take a responsible course of action when it comes to this great challenge. The point I made yesterday is that those who argue - and Mr Turnbull is one of them - that we need a global agreement on climate change need to understand that the passage of the CPRS legislation, the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation, is key to a global agreement in Australia’s national interests.   I mean if Mr Turnbull persists on taking the irresponsible position and wants to vote this down what it will send is precisely the wrong signal to the global negotiations at precisely the wrong time. It will signal to other countries that Australia’s targets have no credibility because we have no plan to meet them and it will ensure it will be very difficult for Australia to implement any agreement because we would not have a plan to meet them. So if Mr Turnbull is serious about action on climate change he’s going to have to front up to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as the plan to ensure we can reduce Australia’s carbon pollution.  JOURNALIST: Just returning to the politics of the matter though for a moment and my original question. He needs to front up to actually get on board and support this legislation, or at least the opposition does, or you can’t get it through. That’s the reality of it, isn’t it, because you have no friends when it comes to the Greens and the other minors.  WONG: Look, we’ll continue to talk to all parties. When it comes to the issue of friends I would make this point Virginia: Malcolm Turnbull is the greatest fairweather friend the fight against climate change has ever had. He was happy to argue for emissions trading when he was the Minister for the Environment, he was happy to argue for emissions trading to his electorate of Wentworth, he was happy to argue for it when he was campaigning against Brendan Nelson and now what we see as this matter proceeds towards the Senate is Mr Turnbull unable to control the sceptics in his own party.



JOURNALIST: Well I don’t know if I am able to describe this next person as a fair-weather friend  because he is not a climate change sceptic at all. But Ross Garnaut who of course headed up the  Government’s review of climate change policy, he doesn’t seem to be a friend of yours at all, any  more, either. He says it is a line-ball matter now as to whether it would be better to pass your  emissions trading scheme or do nothing and to wait for a better one to come along. How is that you  have lost the support of so crucial a figure as Ross Garnaut?

WONG: Professor Garnaut has a range of views on these issues, some of which the Government  did pick up in its White Paper. However we are of the view that we need to act now and we are also  of the view that if we fail to pass this legislation two things will happen. One is we will ensure  Australia’s carbon pollution continues to rise, our emissions will continue to rise, so we won’t get  on with the hard task or reducing our emissions and the second is it will send precisely the wrong  signal to the international negotiations and will undermine Australia’s credibility in those  negotiations. And if we all agree, and I think there is broad agreement, we need a global agreement,  that is in Australia’s international interest. And Professor Garnaut’s review made that very clear,  that an agreement is in our national interest. What we have to focus on is what we need to do to get  there.

JOURNALIST: Yes but he is saying your agreement isn’t it. He is actually saying the precise  opposite of what your saying this morning Senator Wong and that is that when your emissions  targets are so low, there is virtually no worth to it.

WONG:  We simply don’t agree and I’d make the point that a minus 15 reduction for Australia  Virginia is a very substantive reduction. It is around about 30 percentage points off business as  usual, that is off where we would otherwise be. Now we have had to take decisions in the national  interest, we have had to balance ensuring we continue to support today’s jobs, recognise the current  economic situation, at the same time as setting in path the reforms to reduce our emissions and to  create the low pollution economy of the future. That is why we have bought forward this scheme  which seeks to balance those issues in the national interest.

JOURNALIST: Let me just take you through a couple of suggestions that Ross Garnaut has made,  because you say you have got to keep talking in particular to the minor parties in the Senate to try  and get this legislation through when it comes up in front of the house. He is saying if you can just  increase your emissions reduction targets, if you can substantially increase those, if more money is  spent on low emissions technology, and if there are conditions put on the assistance that is given to  energy intensive exposed industries, then you would have a better scheme. Can you say this  morning whether those three, any of those three ideas, are they on the table for discussions in order  to try and improve your proposal and to try and get the legislation through?

WONG:  Can I say particularly in terms of low emissions technology that the Government is  putting a very substantial amount of resources and investment, or investment equivalent, into  renewable energy.

JOURNALIST:  Yes, he is saying it’s not enough.

WONG: Well I would just make this point, so we understand what we are doing, we had the Prime  Minister last week announce the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, a very substantial  endeavour which is about bringing together global cooperation on carbon capture and storage, a  critical technology for the fight against climate change. I will be bringing forward legislation into  the Parliament which will expand Australia’s renewable energy target by four-fold so that 20% of  our energy will come from renewable sources. That’s a massive investment in renewables. I know

there are calls for more; I make the point that we also have a half billion dollar renewable energy  fund.

And in terms of the emissions intensive trade exposed, again this is one of the areas where the  Government has had to look to the national interest and recognise the impact of the introduction of  the scheme on existing industries and put in place measures to support those industries through this  transition. Some people have a different view about that...

JOURNALIST: …okay, so you’re saying there’s no negotiation on those three points that…  you’re in stone now.

WONG: What I’m saying is that the Government has a very clear and coherent position about why  those assistance measures are in place. Now obviously as this matter proceeds to the Senate, we  will talk to all parties, but all parties will have to deal with those difficult policy questions that the  Government has sought to find the answers to.

JOURNALIST: Now Penny Wong, just on the meeting that you’re heading off to attend - this is  the first meeting ever of the United States-led Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate in  Washington. What do you hope emerges from that meeting?

WONG: On this issue, Virginia, I want to start by saying how encouraged we are, and I’m sure  many Australians are, by the leadership that the Obama administration is clearly prepared to show  when it comes to these global negotiations. This is a meeting of major economies, the nations in the  room represent nations which cover around 80% of the world’s emissions. Now, this isn’t the  formal negotiation, those are in the UN process. But clearly, given the UN process has around 192  nations, having a smaller forum to enable open and frank dialogue on those issues where we need to  get agreement is a very positive step. We’re very encouraged by this.

I would note that the Opposition, Mr Hunt, has made some criticism of our attendance at this. We  do think it’s extraordinary that the Opposition is so negative, that they would seriously be  suggesting that it is a bad thing for Australia to be represented at the first meeting of the Obama  administration on climate change in an international forum.

JOURNALIST: And look, just finally Penny Wong, I wanted to ask you something on a totally  different subject. As a granddaughter of inmates of Sandikan and someone whose family has known  war and trauma and as someone who has spoken for the need for compassion in her maiden speech  in Parliament. When you watch these asylum seekers turn up increasingly in boats and taken  offshore to be processed somewhere like Christmas Island, do you wish more compassion would be  extended by this country to those people and more such asylum seekers admitted to Australia?

WONG: Virginia, I’m impressed that you’ve done research on a speech I gave such a long time  ago and into my family history. And what I’ve said very clearly, is that we need to be clear who the  focus of our policy is and who is the real public policy enemy here and that is people smugglers. I  mean, the fact is, this is an evil trade. These are people who prey on people’s desperation and fears.  We need to ensure our policy effort is focused on that trade, the evil trade of people smuggling.  And that’s what the Government is focused on, that’s why we’ve put additional resources into  surveillance on our coasts.

JOURNALIST:  Nicely ducked, maybe we’ll have this conversation in another place, another  time. Senator Wong thanks so much.

WONG: Good to speak with you.

ENDS

