

1



MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  STEPHEN SMITH, MP



TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE:   8 February 2009

TITLE:  Interview with Asia Pacific Focus



JIM MIDDLETON: The global economic crisis looks certain to dominate the international  agenda for yet another year with few signs that the world economy will return to health in  either the short or medium term. With President Barack Obama now installed in the White  House, the war in Afghanistan will be the other big ticket item. For the first program of the

year, Foreign Minister Stephen Smith joined me from his home town of Perth.    Stephen Smith, thanks very much for your time.

STEPHEN SMITH: Pleasure, Jim.

JIM MIDDLETON: Let's go to Afghanistan first the struggle against the Taliban didn't really  go too well in 2008, is this the year do you think we'll decide whether the U.S. and its allies  win or lose the war?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we've always known that Afghanistan was difficult and dangerous  and that we were also there for the long haul, so I think we're looking at a longer timetable  than that.

We're very pleased that the new U.S. Administration's indicated effectively a review of the  approach in Afghanistan. We continue to have the view that that approach should not just be a  military enforcement operation but also civilian capacity building or nation building.

And also at some point in the cycle the political players in Afghanistan do need to  contemplate a political dialogue or a political approach. So we welcomed very much the  appointment of Ambassador Holbrooke as the U.S. special envoy to Afghanistan and  importantly Pakistan and we look forward to the United States' review and consideration of  the approach in Afghanistan.

But, the Prime Minister, the Defence Minister and I have made it clear consistently we're  there for the long haul because we see that as being very much in Australia's national interest  and also in the international community's interest. It's certainly the hotbed of modern day  terrorism and it needs to be confronted.



2

JIM MIDDLETON: You were talking there of the link between the civilian and military sides  of the conflict and of the struggle. What then do you make of these suggestions from the  United States that the new Administration, the Obama Administration has basically given up  on the Government of President Karzai and will now focus specifically if not almost  exclusively on the military side of the conflict.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, the course of the election campaign and subsequently, President  Obama has made it clear that he sees the need for an overarching approach; military, civilian  and political.  And it's important, of course, that Afghanistan have elections in the course of  this year and next year, both Parliamentary and Presidential.

And the approach of Australia and others has been essentially to say that we'll deal with  whoever that democratic process throws up. That's a matter for the Afghanistan electoral and  political process.

But I certainly don't make the starting point that the U.S. Administration has given up on a  comprehensive approach, and I think that's essential.

Afghanistan won't be won just by military enforcement action. It will require capacity  building, nation building, humanitarian and development assistance contribution to  Afghanistan to put them - to put their army, to put their law and justice administration, to put  their health and education systems into a state where they can effectively manage their own  affairs.

And that is a very, very important and central part of the approach in Afghanistan.

JIM MIDDLETON: I noticed that David Kilcullen the Australian counter-insurgency expert  who was one of the architects of the American military insurgence in  Iraq is now likening the  Karzai Government to that of President Diem in South Vietnam in the 1960s, that's hardly a  comforting analysis, is it?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, I don't think it's any surprise that there has been international  community criticism of the lack of progress that President Karzai and his administration has  been making.

Indeed, when I attended last year in Paris the Afghan Donors' Conference, the international  community at that conference made it clear to President Karzai that we needed to see real  progress, not just on the peace and security front and the capacity of the Afghan army and  police force to start managing those aspects, but also progress on capacity building  particularly in governance and corruption areas. Also progress on heroin, on the debilitating  drug issue.

I don't think it's any secret that there has been a lack of enthusiasm in the international  community for the progress that's being made on those fronts.

JIM MIDDLETON: I know that it's been longstanding policy of this government not to  increase Australian forces, military forces in Afghanistan but is there any chance that there



3

could be more resources, human resources thrown at the civilian reconstruction effort in  coming months?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, I wouldn't put a timetable on it but I've made it clear consistently,  that both in the context of the review that the United States Administration is doing, and more  generally, as we consider Afghanistan, whether that's through the ISAF meetings at NATO or

more generally, that Australia stands ready, willing and able to contemplate a greater civilian  capacity building contribution.

When it comes to a military contribution, the Prime Minister, the Defence Minister and I have  made it clear that we think our current contribution is about right. We're of course the largest  non-NATO contributor.

But we've also made it clear that if we receive a request from the US administration,  obviously we will contemplate that request as an ally would, but we'll do that in the context of  what contribution other countries are making, particularly NATO.



The Defence Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon, Mr Fitzgibbon has been very clear in making the point  that we're not proposing to increase our contribution if it gives other nation-states the capacity  to either keep theirs where it is or to reduce them.

JIM MIDDLETON: On a current but not related subject, how worried are you about these  reports of abuse of the Burmese Muslim asylum seekers, hundreds of them at the hands of  Thai authorities?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, it's a very worrying issue that's come to public attention. Our  officials have raised that in Thailand.

We welcome very much the undertakings by the Thai administration that they're prepared to  investigate it both themselves and also in conjunction with the UNHCR, the United Nations  body responsible for Refugees.

We're not in a position to verify the facts one way or the other but it is deeply concerning.  We've raised it through our officials and we welcome the undertakings for investigation and  cooperation with the UNHCR.

JIM MIDDLETON: Do you fear that Australia is about to see an upsurge in asylum seekers  again, both from Burma and as a consequence of what's going on in particular in Afghanistan  and Sri Lanka with the same divisive domestic consequences as occurred a few years   ago?

STEPHEN SMITH: I've made the point in the course of last year that what causes refugees or  asylum seekers to come are, of course, the push factors.

And over the last decade or so, we've seen those push factors very strongly occurring in Iraq  and Afghanistan, but now we see those also occurring from, in particular, Sri Lanka.



4

So we're well aware of those difficulties, which is why we've made the cooperation that we  have with our neighbours in the region a very important part of our approach, as well as  enhancing our border security and protection arrangements.

But the cooperation that we do with our neighbours, in particular Indonesia, but also other  neighbours in Southeast Asia and in South Asia is very important, but we continue to watch  very closely those push factors, the disruption to peace and security which caused people to  flee from the countries in which they live.

JIM MIDDLETON: Finally and briefly, in turning to the global financial crisis, there are  signs that protectionism is starting to rear its ugly head in Asia as the economic meltdown  worsens, this hardly helps get world trade going again and if that doesn't happen, there's really  no way out of the financial crisis, is there?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we've made the point strongly and consistently that this is no time  to retreat to protectionism, indeed, that would be the worst thing to do. In terms of the global  financial crisis, we very strongly believe that the G20 is the international institution to pursue  the global reaction and response to it.

We welcome very much the global action plan that the G20 agreed to in London.

From our region's perspective, it's of course important that we've got more than a half a dozen  nations from the Asia-Pacific, including Australia and Indonesia, China, Japan and others in  the G20.

And so that forms a very strong basis for regional cooperation so far as a response to the  global financial crisis is concerned.

I think it's, regrettably, the case but clear to all that the adverse consequences are much worse  than any of us first expected or contemplated.

And that's why one of the things Australia has been doing in addition to calling very strongly  for no retreat to protectionism has been investing very heavily domestically in trying to  stimulate our economic - our domestic economic activity to ensure that we continue to have  positive economic growth.

But the global financial or economic crisis I think will be one of the ongoing issues which  dominates this year, using the G20 and doing that in cooperation with partners in our regions  is going to be a very important part of the foreign policy and general public policy role that  we played this year.

JIM MIDDLETON: Minister, thanks very much for joining us.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks, Jim, thank you.

[Ends]

