Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - Sky News AM Agenda

Wednesday 17th March 2010

Subjects: Paid Parental Leave, Peter Costello, Paul Keating, health reform, Labor’s border

protection failures



EandOE



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Hello and welcome to AM Agenda, I’m Ashleigh Gillon. Peter Costello

has delivered a gift to Kevin Rudd today writing a scathing opinion piece about the

Coalition’s paid parental leave scheme. Mr Costello is astounded that Mr Abbott wants to

hike taxes for big business and he says the party should’ve heard alarm bells ringing after

the Greens endorsed the plan. For reaction to the comments and a look at the other political

issues around today, joining me here in the Canberra studio the Parliamentary Secretary for

Employment Jason Clare, good morning.



JASON CLARE: Good morning, Ash.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: And the Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison good morning to

you.



SCOTT MORRISON: Good morning, Ashleigh.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Scott, no surprises to what I’m going to start on with you this morning,

do you agree with any of the points raised by Mr Costello in that article today?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, one of the points you didn’t mention about what he raised in that

article was what his criticism was of the Rudd government’s health plan …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Don’t worry, we’ll get to that with Jason soon …



SCOTT MORRISON: … but I mean that …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: But, let’s ask you …



SCOTT MORRISON: … that, that was important …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … though about the paid parental leave scheme.



SCOTT MORRISON: … I mean he basically said that is Kevin Rudd doesn’t trust the GST

with, states with the GST well why not take it all back, which I thought was a very interesting

point. But, I think, you know, with Peter’s article today, I think what it shows is that, you

know, Tony Abbott is no more a clone of Peter Costello than he is of John Howard. Tony

Abbott is his own man, he has his own set of policies, he’s made it very clear that he sees

this is a big priority to have a genuine, serious, fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme and

that’s what he’s put forward. Peter has a different view to that, he’s entitled to that but Tony’s

the leader of the Opposition and he’s directing policy.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: So, you neatly sidestepped around my initial question which was do

you agree with any of the points that Mr Costello raised to do with the paid parental leave

scheme?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, if we’re going to have a paid parental leave scheme which is fair

dinkum, then it has to be paid for and this government has completely trashed the budget so

you’re going to have to come up with a way to pay for it. I mean it was the last year when we

responded to the budget and we suggested that the excise on cigarettes should go up to pay

for keeping the means testing, sorry abolishing the government’s proposals to means test

the private health insurance rebate. So, you know, we said it then when we come up with

ideas we do put up suggestions for how we’re going to pay for them and what’s what we’ve

done in this occasion and we’ve got a fair dinkum scheme.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Hiking taxes on cigarettes is very different to slugging big business

with an extra levy. That is some thing that goes against the grain for most Liberals isn’t it?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, we had levies that were introduced on superannuation under the

previous government. We had levies which were introduced to buy back guns. We’ve had

levies in the past to deal with matters and we’ve also abolished those levies when we could

afford to …



ASHLEIGH: It just sounds odd to me. Scott …



SCOTT MORRISON: … that’s why it’s a …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … that you’re defending the Coalition’s record on increasing taxes



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, what I’m saying is that people are suggesting this is some sort of

major departure and the truth is in government we introduced levies from time to time to pay

for things that we thought were important like buying back guns and on this occasion Tony’s

put forward the suggestion we have a tax on a small number of businesses out of the total

that pay tax to fund an important scheme which is fair dinkum, not the hollow, shallow

alternative that the government’s putting up.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Jason Clare, look as Scott Morrison mentioned Mr Costello also

slammed the government’s plans for health reforms, saying this is going to create a new

level of bureaucracy and that’s a, that is an argument we’ve been hearing a lot from the

Coalition.



JASON CLARE: It’s not surprising that Peter Costello attacks the Labor Party; he’s been

doing that for 20 years. What’s surprising today is he’s now starting to attack the Liberal

Party. Peter Costello is the economic messiah of the Liberal Party, Peter Costello created

the Liberal Party’s economic credibility and he’s now just destroyed Tony Abbott’s.

Remember, this is the bloke that the Liberal Party describes as the greatest Treasurer that

has ever been in Australia and he’s now just said that Tony Abbot’s plan is bad economics.

He’s right, it comes off the back of what Barnaby Joyce has said, that it will increase the cost

of petrol, increase the cost of milk, it will increase the cost of bread. You know, for Peter

Costello to be attacking the Liberal Party saying this is bad economics is like Shane Warne

saying you can’t bat and you can’t bowl. What he said is that Tony Abbott is not up to it and

Paul Keating and Peter Costello don’t agree on much but they both agree on this and that is

that Tony Abbott is just not up to it.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: But hold on, on this show before you have attacked Peter Costello for

his economic legacy and now you’re holding him up as the be all and end all.



JASON CLARE: No, no, what I’m saying is this is the bloke that the Liberal Party say are the

great economic messiah, the one that created their economic credibility, and for him, the

person that is in charge, the former Treasurer that the Liberal Party’s hold up as the great

example of economic credibility to now attack Tony Abbott show’s that Tony Abbott now has

a economic credibility problem.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Scott Morrison, there must be some Liberal’s who are pretty upset

about this piece today? I mean, Mr Costello isn’t doing Mr Abbott any favours. The

government is going to have so much fun with this is in Question Time today.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, you know, Peter has forthright views, he’s always expressed

them, he’s a very strong character. In the Liberal …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Is it disappointing? Would you, you would’ve preferred that he didn’t

come out with this piece today?



SCOTT MORRISON: I mean, I think that these things are obvious but nevertheless Peter is

entitled to his view. He’s put it, I mean the Prime, Peter has been very critical of this

government’s record on fiscal management, debt and deficit, I mean I think the biggest

disappointment I think Peter had when he was here in this Parliament in this term was to

watch as the legacy of a positive balance sheet for this country was just demolished. And if

there’s one issue that I think Peter feels strongly about more than anything else, and that is

Lindsay Tanner’s and Wayne Swan’s destruction of the nations finances.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Do you think though that your colleagues and even yourself would be

urging Mr Costello to keep quite on the criticisms especially at this crucial stage?



SCOTT MORRISON: Oh, look Peter’s a free spirit, he can, he writes articles every fortnight,

I’m sure he’s going to write a lot more articles, but the point is this Tony Abbott is not Peter

Costello, Tony Abbott is not John Howard he’s his own man, he has his own policy as he’s

taking us in a very clear direction and, you know, he has great support in the party …



JASON CLARE: That is one good point …



SCOTT MORRISON: … right around the country.



JASON CLARE: That is one good point, Tony Abbott isn’t Peter Costello, he thought

economics was boring. That’s why Peter Costello said he would never have him as his

deputy because he doesn’t treat economics seriously. And Peter Costello did treat

economics seriously. Scott thought of Peter Costello very seriously …



SCOTT MORRISON: You’ve got to comment then, Jason, on what he thinks of Lindsay

Tanner …



JASON CLARE: … in 2008 …



SCOTT MORRISON: … and Wayne Swan.



JASON CLARE: … in 2008 you asked Peter Costello …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Okay.



JASON CLARE: … to come back and be Leader of the Opposition, now you’re

disassociating yourself from everything that he’s saying.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Jason Clare, you also neatly sidestepped my question earlier about

health reform because this is the other …



JASON CLARE: Sure.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … attack that Peter Costello has made in this article. Mr Costello says

that by taking some GST revenue off the states due to these health reforms then you could

be setting a dangerous precedent basically. Mr Costello says, you know, next are we going

to see GST taken away to put into school boards and put into local police boards and isn’t

that a fair point? Don’t the states have a right to be fearful that this sort of, you know, taking

off from that GST revenue could …



JASON CLARE: No, no, no …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … continue?



JASON CLARE: Well, what we’re dealing with here is an area of policy where the costs are

increasing exponentially. The cost of health care is going up by 10 per cent a year compared

to the growth in GST of four per cent a year and that is the crucial difference here. The

changes we want to make to the health system, to the hospital system to fix it are supported

by doctors, are supported by nurses, are supported overwhelmingly by the general public …



SCOTT MORRISON: What about the states?



JASON CLARE: … if you think that the system, well …



SCOTT MORRISON: Are the states going to sign up?



JASON CLARE: Well, well the states will be better off as a result ...



SCOTT MORRISON: But will they sign up?



JASON CLARE: … because if you go to a 60-40 model it means that the extra cost of

funding the health system will be, will be managed disproportionately by the federal

government, by the government that has the best tax bases upon which to fund the system.

Not the system, not the system …



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah, but if the states don’t sign up, Jason it’s academic.



JASON CLARE: Not the system.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: As Scott is pointing out it does look very unlikely at this stage anyway,

none of the states have committed to this plan. They keep saying they need to see the

Henry Tax Review released, for example, so they can see how those GST changes could fit

in with some overarching changes to the tax system.



JASON CLARE: And we’ve assured the states that no state will be worse off, in fact states

will be better off …



SCOTT MORRISON: (Inaudible) they look confident about that …



JASON CLARE: … over the course of the next decade they will get …



SCOTT MORRISON: … they look very confident about that promise, Jason.



JASON CLARE: … well, I’ll tell you what when I talk to my state colleagues they say we’ll be

better off under this than under the system that Tony Abbott was in charge of where he

ripped a billion dollars out of the health system …



SCOTT MORRISON: Oh, you know that’s not true, we’re not going to go over that boring

argument again …



JASON CLARE: … we’re he ripped a billion dollars …



SCOTT MORRISON: … with you guys sledging (inaudible).



JASON CLARE: … one, one billion dollars …



SCOTT MORRISON: … we’ve gone through that …



JASON CLARE: … one billion dollars



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Now, look …



SCOTT MORRISON: … day after day after day …



JASON CLARE: … one billion dollars …



SCOTT MORRION: … leave the untruths



ASHLEIGH GILLON: This is an argument …



JASON CLARE: … one billion dollars



SCOTT MORRISON: … for parliament, Jason.



JASON CLARE: … one billion dollars.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Okay, look this is an argument we heard in Question Time yesterday,

Mr Abbott was reminded by the government of his record on, as when he was Health

Minister, of course, under the Howard government. Let’s have a look at some of that from

yesterday.



PAUL KEATING: You know, Bjelke-Petersen Junior running around, what’s his name the

Senator from Queensland?



FRAN KELLY: I think your talking about Senator Joyce.



PAUL KEATING: Joyce, yep. You wouldn’t trust this mob with a jam jar full of five cent bits. I

mean if Tony Abbott ends up the Prime Minister of Australia, I mean, you’ve got to say God

help us, God help us, you know, an intellectual, truly an intellectual nobody. Look, he turned

up in the last couple of years when I was Prime Minister; I always regard him as a resident

nutter on their side.



LINDSAY TANNER: For 2003/4 a cut, a cut of $109 million. For …



CHRISTOPHER PYNE: Mr Speaker, under standing order 91F I point out to you that it is

disorderly for the Minister to tell lies to the parliament.



HARRY JENKINS: The Leader of the Opposition on a point of order.



TONY ABBOTT: Is it in order for the Minister to misleadingly quote the budget papers and

not the part of the budget papers that say there is a $10 billion increase.



HARRY JENKINS: Order, the Leader of the Opposition resume his seat



ASHLEIGH GILLON: The first sound bite there was obviously not Lindsay Tanner, that was

the former Prime Minister Paul Keating and we will get to those comments in a minute but

firstly, just yesterday we did see this attack on Tony Abbott. Every time the Health Minister

does a news conference she mentions that Tony Abbott took a billion dollars out of the

health system, did he Scott Morrison?



SCOTT MORRISON: No, of course he didn’t it’s totally not true; as Tony said yesterday,

they‘re selectively quoting budget papers. There was a real increase in health funding over

that period of time. The Commonwealth State Health Agreement showed that clearly and

this is just more spin from a Labor government desperately trying to hide the fact that what

Kevin Rudd is putting around is a plan that will not be supported by the states. It’s a plan to

make him look tough before an election, not a plan to fix hospitals. If you’re going to put

forward a plan you’ve got to get people to actually back it in the states, otherwise it will be a

failure. So, until he can demonstrate he can get people on board with this plan in the states

he has no plan, just a lot of tough talk for the election.



JASON CLARE: Well, the …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Jason Clare, is this just a fear campaign?



JASON CLARE: No, no, no the budget papers don’t lie. He ripped $1 billion out of the health

system. When Howard was the …



SCOTT MORRISON: Oh, that’s not true, Jason. Honestly this is just gets tiring, it’s tiring.



JASON CLARE: … well, hang on a sec I gave you a go. Let me tell you what happened …



SCOTT MORRISON: … just tiring.



JASON CLARE: … let me tell you what happened. When John Howard got elected, 1996,

the federal government contributed 45 per cent of the cost of the hospital system by the time

John Howard left office, at the end of 2007, that had dropped to below 40 per cent which

meant the states had to pick up more of the slack. That happened because the amount of

money that the federal government was supposed to put in to the health system dropped by

$1 billion and the interesting thing here is that the internal party polling in the Liberal Party

must show that this is hurting hard because every time we mention that Tony Abbott cut one

billion dollars out of the health system, it really hurts and he gets really upset.



SCOTT MORRISON: What he misses though is an important point. The GST was

introduced in that period of government which created a massive windfall of revenue for the

states which they have monumentally mishandled, most particularly in New South Wales

and Queensland. They were living with rivers of money coming out of the GST and they

basically put it all against a wall buying more desks than beds …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Okay.



SCOTT MORRISON: … and that’s the reality in our hospitals today.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: This is an argument we’ve heard before, we’re going to hear it again …



SCOTT MORRISON: Sure.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … let’s though just comment on those comments we heard from Paul

Keating yesterday. He also just another one getting stuck into Tony Abbott at the moment

saying he was the resident nutter when Paul Keating was here in the building, do you think,

Jason Clare, that that sort of language from Paul Keating is taken seriously?



JASON CLARE: Oh, that’s Paul being nice, you should hear the things that he says when

he’s not on camera. Look, Paul in his own way is making the point that has been made for a

long time and that is that Tony Abbott has some pretty extreme views. We saw on Four

Corners the other night he said he thought women would never be equal to men, he thinks

women are at home ironing, he thinks the planet is cooling; he has some pretty extreme

views. That’s why I said that Tony Abbott is a political bungy jumper. It’s extreme; it’s

exciting everyone wants to watch because everyone thinks it’s going to end badly.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: What do you think about former prime minister’s making these sorts of

comments? I know John Howard when he left said I’m not going to be one of those prime

minister’s that weighs into the daily political cycle. Earlier this week though he also gave an

interview to The Australian slamming Kevin Rudd, saying that he hasn’t achieved anything in

the first couple of years, do you think former PMs should just back off and stay out of the

stuff?



SCOTT MORRISON: Oh, look I think it’s important in our country that we give esteem of

formers PMs, I mean they’ve risen to the highest office in the country …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Paul Keating included in that?



SCOTT MORRISON: … that doesn’t necessarily mean we all agree with what they have to

say. I mean if we’re going to take Paul Keating’s comments on Tony Abbot well frankly I’m

happy for Paul Keating to be sledging Tony Abbott. Paul Keating’s record and Paul Keating’s

relationship with the Australian people at the end of his term spoke for itself. I’m now …



JASON CLARE: What about Peter Costello?



SCOTT MORRISON: Hang on, I’m now …



JASON CLARE: … do you like Peter Costello in there attacking Tony Abbott?



SCOTT MORRISON: I’m now looking forward to Gough Whitlam’s endorsement of Kevin

Rudd because he’s probably the most whitlamlite Prime Minister we’ve has since Gough

Whitlam. So, if Gough Whitlam and Paul Keating want to back Kevin Rudd and bag Tony

Abbott …



JASON CLARE: Peter Costello in there as well.



SCOTT MORRISON: well, they are welcome to do it because I think that speaks volumes

about the Rudd government.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: We are going to take a break and we’re going to try not to mention

Peter Costello or Paul Keating or John Howard in the next half of the program. We’ll be back

with you in just a couple of minutes.



Welcome back to AM Agenda. Yesterday in parliament we saw the Coalition ramping up

pressure on the government over the asylum seeker issue, the Prime Minister acknowledged

the government may need to move asylum seekers to Darwin, to the mainland to be

processed if Christmas Island does fill up, but the Prime Minister said he’s only doing what

the former Prime Minister John Howard did, let’s have a look at some of the debate.



KEVIN RUDD: The government has for a long period of time indicated that if further capacity

is needed at various other locations within the country then of course we would recourse to

that as I would draw the Honourable Member’s attention to my earlier answer when on

previous occasions during the time of the Pacific Solution the government at that stage

brought various asylum seekers to processing centres within Australia.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Tony Abbott though reminded Kevin Rudd of his promise to take a

hard line approach on this issue before the last election.



TONY ABBOTT: Prime Minister with 24 boats and over 1200 unauthorised arrivals in just the

past 10 weeks …



HARRY JENKINS: Order.



TONY ABBOTT: … isn’t his hollow promise of 2007 just the latest example of a government

which is all talk and no action?



KEVIN RUDD: We continue to maintain a policy which includes offshore processing, which

includes mandatory detention, which includes stringent health, identity and security checks

which protects our national security and one in which we also act consistently with this

country’s international obligations.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Scott Morrison and Jason Clare are with me this morning on our panel

of politicians. Jason Clare, the boats just keep on coming. They’re showing no sign of

abating are they? What’s the government doing about it to try to stop them?



JASON CLARE: Well, it’s a tough issue; it’s been a tough issue for governments for the last

30 years. Scott and I actually agree on about 95 per cent of the policy here. Scott won’t tell

you this but we agree on 95 per cent of it. We agree on mandatory detention, we agree on

the resources that you need to give the Navy to do the interdiction and the surveillance on

the high seas, we agree that you need to work with your neighbours; we need to work with

Indonesia to stop people smuggling in those transit countries and we saw the good work that

happens when you work with Indonesia last week. What we don’t agree on are the two

things that didn’t work. I don’t agree with Scott on temporary protection visas. When they

were introduced the number of boats increased, didn’t decrease. And, I don’t agree with

Scott on the introduction or the reintroduction of the Pacific Solution which cost a billion

dollars, 1700 people put on an island out somewhere in the South Pacific, that cost half a

million dollars per person and 60 per cent of the people there ended up coming to Australia

in the end.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: But, it’s not ideal is it for asylum seekers to be taken to Darwin to be

processed which is what inevitably seems like is going to happen. I think there’s only a

hundred or so spare beds on Christmas Island …



JASON CLARE: There’s still capacity there at the moment but we’ve said for the last six

months that if necessary then we will be able to put asylum seekers at Darwin, that’s exactly

the same thing has happened under the Howard government. So, there is no difference here

between what we are doing, or what we will do if necessary and what the Howard

government did when necessary under the Pacific Solution.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Scott Morrison, what is wrong with taking asylum seekers to Darwin to

be processed?



SCOTT MORRISON: Let me just correct a couple of things, firstly what the Prime Minister

and also what Jason said. What was done when we were in government in bringing people

to mainland for temporary purposes is completely different to what this government is

proposing. We introduced special provisions into the migration act that enabled people to be

transferred for a temporary purpose for health or medivac purposes or things of that nature.

There were only a couple of people, a few people who were the subject of those types of

transitions and it was only for a temporary purpose. This is a permanent transfer. This is a

process of saying Christmas Island is full, our policies have failed and we’re now going to

bring people to the mainland before their asylum claims have been assessed. Now, there

are two problems with that, to come to your question. The first one is that it sends a

message to people smugglers that you can now get your clients all the way to the mainland.

It ups the sugar as President Yudhoyono would talk about in terms of pull factors, it ups the

sugar factor. Secondly, it opens up a very real murky legal territory on this issue. Now, the

situation is the UNHCR said last week in both Sri Lanka and in Afghanistan is changing, if

people’s claims are rejected when they’re on the mainland that will be tested in the courts.

Now, Senator Evans says no that can’t happen; well it takes one judge in one court to hear

this issue and test whether someone’s status will be affected if they transfer to the mainland.

Now, when we were in government we put in a provision to enable a transitory, a transitional

transfer. This government has not done this to quarantine our laws in terms of any

movements they might make of people. Now, I think that’s reckless, I think it is the last straw

in terms of dismantling the regime they inherited and that’s why we have 10 boats arriving

per month, the highest on record.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Jason Clare, what do you make of that argument that asylum seekers

could be given better access to the court system and as Scott raises there that one judge

could make decisions?



JASON CLARE: Well, well it’s just simply not right and Scott knows it’s not right. The legal

advice that the government’s got, the legal advice that you’ve been given when you’ve

spoken, when spoken to Amnesty International, refugee organisations or when you’ve

sought the right advice, the advice is that the legal status of the individuals doesn’t change

whether they’re on Christmas Island or whether they’re on Darwin.



SCOTT MORRISON: But it’s not, it’s contestable though Jason, it is contestable.



JASON CLARE: And what Scott is saying is …



SCOTT MORRISON: … it is not absolutely certain.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Okay.



JASON CLARE: … what Scott is saying is that over my dead body no one would ever come

from Christmas Island to Darwin, we’d put them on some island out the back of Iceland.

Now, what the Pacific solution showed us is that it costs more, so Scott is saying the

taxpayers can pay more because we won’t put them on Darwin if have to, we’ll send them

out to Nauru. Well the evidence from the Pacific solution was a cost of a billion dollars, half a

million dollars per person and 60 per cent ended up coming to Australia. So, what Scott is

advocating is that it costs more for the taxpayer that is not the right or responsible approach.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, let’s talk about, can I talk about the cost because he’s raised the

issue of costs?



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Do talk about the costs and I also want to ask you about that issue of

giving the message to asylum seekers that they can get all the way to the mainland. Do you

think they really get that message …



SCOTT MORRISON: Yes.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … when they’re taking off on boats as to where they’re going and what

the …



SCOTT MORRISON: Yes.



JASON CLARE: That’s nonsense, it’s nonsense.



SCOTT MORRISON: Absolutely.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … legal ramifications should be?



SCOTT MORRISON: … I’ve been to Christmas Island I’ve seen the people sitting in the

centres on Skype talking to their families back in Sri Lanka or back in Pakistan or back

wherever they are, the flow of information about what’s happening in terms of the

government’s policies and the changes gets through and this what people smugglers use to

ply their trade. They’re asking people to pay $20,000 per person to get on a boat, now

they’re going to want to know that they’re going to get what they’re paying for and this helps

the people smugglers make that claim stick. But on the issue of costs, already this year

because of the unprecedented flow of arrivals to this country what we have seen is the

government ask for an extra $132 million on their original budget estimate just to catch up

with 3100 that have already arrived and then tracking that forward to the end of the year it

will cost another $250 million this year alone, so over the forward estimates and this year

alone that will be an extra billion dollars in costs because of their failed policies. Jason,

wants to talk about costs, putting people with a massive flow of arrivals, there were only six

people on Christmas Island last year, six people, six people, there are now over 1900 on that

island because of this government’s policies and its costing $81,000 per person who turns

up.



JASON CLARE: $81,000 …



ASHLEIGH GILLON: That is quite complicated …



JASON CLARE: … compares with half a million dollars per person for the Pacific Solution.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: But, Jason your politics (inaudible) …



JASON CLARE: What a waste of money, what a waste of money



SCOTT MORRISON: You’re assuming that’s the only option that’s out there (inaudible).



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Okay, let’s look at the …



JASON CLARE: What a waste of money.



SCOTT MORRISON: You guy aren’t looking …



JASON CLARE: What a waste of money.



SCOTT MORRISON: … any other option other than bring people to the mainland.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Okay, no one can hear us …



JASON CLARE: What a waste of money.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s your plan.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … we’re all talking …



SCOTT MORRISON: Sure.



JASON CLARE: What a waste of money.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … just on the politics of this, Jason, as long as the boats keep coming

these complex arguments, I’m not sure that they flow through to voters at the level that

we’ve just been discussing …



JASON CLARE: Maybe not, maybe not.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … about the legal arguments but as long as these boats keep coming

it’s fair for the Coalition to keep bringing this up as an issue and it’s getting through to the

voters.



JASON CLARE: Well, well they’ll continue to play politics on this I’m sure but the people I

talk to understand that a civil war has just ended in Sri Lanka. Next month is the 35th

anniversary of the fall of Saigon, the end of a war in Vietnam that’s when people got on

boats and came to Australia, the same thing is happening here. Now, Scott debated this

issue at Sydney University a couple of weeks ago with Doctor Mary Crock who is an expert

in international law and she said to Scott that the only pull factor at play here is the Liberal

Party rhetoric that it was the scare campaign by the Liberal Party that was encouraging

people smugglers in Indonesia, so there you go.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: We have run out of time Scoot Morrison, I’m sure you will be taking up

this argument in Question Time …



SCOTT MORRISON: Can I correct one thing?



ASHLEIGH GILLON: … this afternoon. We actually have run out of time we’ve got to get to

the news, sorry Scott.



JASON CLARE: Next time, mate.



SCOTT MORRISON: Next time we’ll be together again.



JASON CLARE: Yes, I hope so.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: We’ll look forward to Question Time today; we should all be counting

the number of references to Peter Costello that should be fun to watch.



