Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript -2GB Drive Program - Illegal boat arrivals

Wednesday 10th March 2010

Subjects: illegal boat arrivals, Coalition immigration and border protection policy



JASON MORRISON: Another day, another boat shows up in northern Australian waters.

HMAS Armidale, that should be doing things that are better than being a tug boat for illegal

vesels, refugee boats, people smuggler boats, HMAS Armidale has to go through the kind of

what must be dehumanising process for these people and go and hook up and tow another

one into Chrismas Island. So that is 21 this year. First week or so of March - 21 they are on

target for probably 100 this year which is something we haven’t seen certainly in close to ten

years and it is a level of this problem that our Prime Minister continues to live in lala land

about. Today he had the had the opportunity to stare down the man at the other end of the

problem, the Indonesian President, and tell him that we ought to, these two countries, sort

this. Australia should put our wall up higher and the Indonesian President should be throwing

everything he has got to kill of the people smuggling operation and then we can start dealing

with the humanitarian crisis as opposed to the criminal activity that is going on to bring these

poor people out into the middle of nowhere and take advantage of our soft policy. But

instead Prime Minister, when in doubt, reaches for the cliches and the bureacratic speak -



KEVIN RUDD: “Our officials yesterday signed an implementation framework on people

smuggling and trafficking in persons. This will enhance and intensify our cooperation of

dealing with this complex regioanl and global challenge”.



JASON MORRISON: We should give out money to anyone who understands what that’s

about. Let’s bring in Shadow Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison, who agrees that we

should return the policy to where it is and believes we should be doing something at the

other end as well. Good afternoon.



SCOTT MORRISON: G’day Jason, that is absolutely right.



JASON MORRISON: Why is this so hard? The Indonesian President would understand

exactly our problem.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well he does, and to be fair to the Indonesian President, today he

announced he would be introducing criminal laws for people smuggling in Indonesia and I

welcome that and think that is a good idea. As Tony Abbott said today, we worked with

Indonesia in the past as we did in Government last time and brought the boats to zero. We

were able to return boats with their understanding and working together. We did a lot of good

work together but only one partner can’t turn up to the party, both do. The Rudd Government

had an opportunity this week to say to the Indonesian President that we are going to reverse

the things that we have done which have created this problem, we are going to do our share

to ensure we are not contributing to the problem but he didn’t do any of that. He announced

whatever that was he announced yesterday and what the people smugglers took out of it all

was let’s send another boat.



JASON MORRISON: Another one come, another one comes. Twenty one so we are not

even a third of the year and we are at this level. Let’s put this on the table, put your neck out

on this. If you retuned the policy, suddenly you were the Minister and you return the policy to

where it was, how many boats would be coming?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, that is the sixty four thousand dollar question Jason. The first

thing we would have to do is establish our resolve in the area and that would mean some

important decisions around returning to temporary visas. It would mean putting a no

compromise position back in on off-shore processing. We believe as we speak today the

Government is preparing to transfer people from Christmas Island to Darwin, to Berrimah,

before their claims are tested. This could happen as early as this weekend in the order of

one hundred.



JASON MORRISON: … because it is full.



SCOTT MORRISON: …because it is full and that means when we were in government no

one was processed who arrived illegally by boat after the reforms we introduced after the

Tampa, on-shore. It was all done off-shore. Now what is happening with this government,

they have rolled back a lot of things, probably the most important, the fact that you don’t set

one foot on the Australian mainland, if you come illegally by boat, until your claims have

been tested - that is about to go out the window.



JASON MORRISON: Forty six more today plus crew, so you have the numbers in front of

you. What are we up to since the policy was softened?



SCOTT MORRISON: 4,100 and there has been 1,100 just this year, but the thing that really

worries me is how this is escalating. Last year we had 61 boats arrive and we had, on

average, about 217 people turning up a month. This year, including today’s boat, there is an

average of 485 people turning up a month and that is the highest we have ever had. The

eclipses what was happening back in 1999, 2000 and 2001. We have got more people

showing up and more boats showing up and asylum applications around the world today are

40% lower than what they were when John Howard was confronting this problem ten years

ago.



JASON MORRISON: Ok. I can accept a little of the argument that’s floated around by Labor

and some of the other parties, the left parties that are out there telling us we have to be a

little different because times have changed. I can accept that, so I am trying to draw on your

expertise on this and your understanding of it, which is saying what? We would have half as

many boats if you do it? Help us realise why we should have this policy changed. I

understand, numerically, and this is, every one of these people who comes here costs us a

fortune.



SCOTT MORRISON: About $80,000 on average is the best we can determine, for everyone

who turns up on Christmas Island.



JASON MORRISON: Each?



SCOTT MORRISON: Yep. That’s a conservative estimate, it could be well higher than that.

But if we go back to what happened in 2001, in 2001 the Tampa showed up and John

Howard sent probably the strongest signal you can imagine and the circumstances allowed

him to do that. We then excised places like Christmas Island, we set up Nauru and Manus

and we did all processing off shore. We went from an average of 460 people a month back

then to less than one person a month the following year. Now, that’s what happened there.

In Italy where Berlusconi has done a deal with the Libyans, I wouldn’t draw too many

parallels there, but they have basically taken a situation where they have reduced their

arrivals by 90% and Libya is in a similar situation to Indonesia where the African asylum

seekers come up through Africa and get in contact with people smugglers in Libya and head

across first to Italy as a way to get to Europe. So look, the opportunities for significant

reductions are there, they have been achieved before but in many cases it depends on the

circumstances. You have got to send a strong message and a strong signal and since we

had that fiasco with the Oceanic Viking last year, we have had 41 boats show up, so of the

89 that have turned up since they changed the policy, 41 of those have now come since the

Viking debacle.



JASON MORRISON: I am still getting over the $80,000 price tag for each person which is

we’re either grossly inefficient or this is just such a mad, make it up as you go program that

there is just no hope.



END.



Further Information: Julian Leembruggen 0419 494 667

