UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS



BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL    (22 March 2010) Border Protection Command has successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.    HMAS Broome, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the vessel  during the evening of Sunday, 21 March approximately 11 nautical miles north of the Browse Island  contiguous zone.    Initial indications suggest 18 passengers and 4 crew are on board the vessel.    Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for  settlement and can be targeted by, and fall prey to, people smugglers.    According to the UNHCR 2008 Global Trends report, there were 42 million displaced  persons worldwide at the end of 2008, including 15.2 million refugees.    People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing this most  serious issue.    The Australian Government has an orderly and planned migration program and places a high priority  on protecting Australia’s borders from irregular maritime arrivals by maintaining an effective and  visible tactical response program of aerial, land and sea-based patrols.

The Australian Government’s Border Protection Command uses a combination of Customs  and Border  Protection and Defence assets to deliver a coordinated national response to security threats in  Australia’s maritime domain.    The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s borders and  today’s successful interception by Border Protection Command continues to demonstrate the  effectiveness of the proactive response program in place.    The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity and  health checks and their reasons for travel will be established.

Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275  6793



