Tue, 9th February 2010

ABBOTT INTERVIEW WITH RAY HADLEY (RADIO 2GB)

The Hon Tony Abbott MP

Leader of the Opposition

Subjects: The Coalition’s direct action plan on the environment and climate change; Kevin Rudd’s great big new

tax; pink batts scheme; the Rudd government's reckless spending; unauthorised arrivals.

E&OE

RAY HADLEY:

G’day.

TONY ABBOTT:

G’day Ray.

RAY HADLEY:

Geez, you created a furore by going to the dry cleaners in Queanbeyan.

TONY ABBOTT:

Well look I was just there to illustrate the fact that ordinary household expenses will be higher under Labor’s great

big new tax but apparently my ironing techniques and even the very fact that I was ironing has become a bit

controversial.

RAY HADLEY:

I think it’s more the fact that you referred to housewives and how you were ironing the shirt but look I said this

morning and I’ll say again, whether you’re a house-husband, which I think you used that expression as well, or a

stay-at-home mum I mean, we are sophisticated enough in 2010 to understand that women play a far different

role than they did in 1958 when my mum was doing the things that she did then and then she went back into the

workforce like a lot of women do now. It’s a choice. I mean, if we’re going to be that PC that we’re worried about

someone referring to someone as a housewife, it’s that dumb now that in radio ratings we can’t have housewives

listening any more, they’re called ‘grocery buy’, which I find just as offensive. What, that’s all they do, go and buy

groceries?

TONY ABBOTT:

Look you’re absolutely right, Ray. I mean we’ve become so hyper-sensitive about all this stuff and sure it’s not

just women who do the ironing, no doubt about that, but I think in many households it is still much more common

to see the woman of the house with an iron in her hand and I’m afraid in our house that’s the way it works out

because Margie, my wife, she wants me to look neat and if it was up to me, the honest truth is I probably wouldn’t

iron my shirts very often.

RAY HADLEY:

Well you wear a coat most days so you’d cover the mistakes.

TONY ABBOTT:

Yes, that’s right. When I was living in England on my own quite a few years ago now, I did occasionally have to

iron shirts and I’d just iron the front because, you’re right, the coat would cover the rest.

RAY HADLEY:

Well I mean, anyway. Whether the lady does the ironing or the husband does the ironing or the adult children do

the ironing is of little consequence when we’ve got other big issues.

TONY ABBOTT:

And the big issue here is the price of ordinary household services, the price of the goods that we are buying for

our shopping trolley every week which will go up under Labor’s great big new tax because electricity is an

essential component of everything. I mean, modern life is unimaginable without electricity and in the first two

years of Labor’s emissions trading scheme even on the Treasury figures, electricity figures go up by about 19 per

cent. Now some people estimate the price rise at significantly greater than that but that’s just the start and if the

price of carbon goes up well then inevitably the price of electricity goes up and then what happens to Labor’s so-called compensation? What we’re going to get under Labor if this scheme goes ahead is a permanent new tax

but I suspect very temporary compensation.

RAY HADLEY:

Look, the only poll that’s going to count is one that’ll be an election later this year but the Herald-Nielsen poll

yesterday, you must be buoyed by it and it must also illustrate to the electorate - and I’ll get to Malcolm Turnbull

in a moment - that you went down the right path over the ETS. The electorate support for some sort of emissions

trading scheme has fallen, Copenhagen was a farce and yet we have Malcolm Turnbull in the House yesterday

rabbiting on about the fact that he was on the right tram.

TONY ABBOTT:

I think people expect Oppositions to create a debate and you can’t have a debate unless you’ve got a different

position and that was the fundamental problem that we were in last year. Now, I happen to believe, and I think

increasingly in the community there’s this belief, that there are a lot of questions over the right response to

climate change and the beauty of the policy that I’ve put forward, Ray, is that all of the things that we want to do

under our emissions reduction fund make environmental sense regardless of what you think of the role of CO2 in

climate and given that the rest of the world plainly didn’t decide to go down the emissions trading route at

Copenhagen, given that there are serous questions about aspects of the science, I think it’s good that we have a

policy in place that doesn’t irrevocably commit us to transforming the economy quickly on the basis of something

that the rest of the world is by no means certain to adopt.

RAY HADLEY:

I’m finding it very frustrating because I’ve been talking about what Peter Garrett’s done to us economically over

the past six months in an attempt to solve the climate change problem according to him and spend as much

money as he possibly can in a short space of time and I’ve been helped by your shadow minister in relation to

this, Greg Hunt. But when you give people something for nothing, it’s very hard to convince them that in the long

run someone’s going to have to pay and it’s usually them. Now let me start with insulation. There are that many

holes you could drive a semi-trailer through the whole thing. It’s a rort. There are some reputable people who

have been in the business for a decade or more who are benefiting but there’s a whole range of other people

who are on the gravy train to the extent of three or four billion dollars. My calls to the Minister were returned

originally. He argued with me I was wrong, then it was proved I was right over all of this that there is a rort and

there are people rorting the system. He no longer returns calls, he just keeps spending the money and it goes

hand-in-glove with the other initiatives he’s made which were declared in The Australian newspaper and the

weekend newspapers that that’s a rort as well. This green energy rubbish. I mean, when I say rubbish, I’m talking

about the fact that there are people jumping on the gravy train with no expertise, two days training and pocketing

a lot of our money.

TONY ABBOTT:

Yeah and this is the problem, Ray, with a lot of the current government’s initiatives. They haven’t been very well

thought through and they were more concerned to spend the money than to get a result. Now, we all know that

it’s easy to spend money but it’s hard to make a difference. Any of us who’ve been in government for any length

of time know that. Given that every dollar that governments spend comes from taxpayers, it’s important not to

spend it lightly, not to spend it in ways which aren’t getting a decent return and it’s all very well saying oh, yeah,

but we’ve kept Australia out of recession. Well, fine, but did you really have to waste money to do so? You have

been quite magnificent in the way that you’ve exposed the ragged edges of this pink batt programme and as you

say Greg Hunt has done terrific work here but the pink batt programme has become a joke and it kind of destroys

people’s faith in government, it destroys their confidence in public administration when you see things like this.

RAY HADLEY:

Just go back to Malcolm Turnbull and I can’t part without referring to this. Most people thought yesterday was

unnecessary. If he wants to cross the floor, let him cross the floor, I mean, that’s his right to do if he chooses to

do so. But you couldn’t help but feel as you watched it that it was tied to some sort of vitriol because of what

happened in the polls yesterday morning. I mean, he was rejected by the electorate in the opinion polls, he was

rejected by the party and yet instead of just simply saying I’ll cross the floor, he wants to go into the whys and

wherefores and to a certain extent people will describe him from within your party as being disloyal.

TONY ABBOTT:

Yeah, I think that would be a bit unfair. Look, we have this tradition in our party, Ray, of respect for people’s

deeply held beliefs and if someone feels sufficiently strongly about an issue we accept that they do have a right

to vote the way their conscience tells them. You’d like to think that it wouldn’t happen very often but nevertheless

it’s there. We don’t have the sort of Stalinist suppression of dissent inside our party which the Labor Party has

always had. So look, I respect Malcolm’s view, I respectfully disagree with it and I’ll get on with an argument

against Kevin Rudd.

RAY HADLEY:

The other thing that I’ve said on air and I’ve said to you, that I think one of the real focuses of this election art

from the ETS and economic management will be the illegal boatpeople. Now, the Howard Government of which

you were part solved the problem. Now, people might disagree with the way the Howard government did it, the

Pacific Solution and temporary protection visas but there can be no doubt when you look at the graph of the

people coming prior to that, the people coming after it, it solved the problem, people smugglers said uh-oh, this is

too hard, let’s try something else.

TONY ABBOTT:

Yep.

RAY HADLEY:

But as soon as Kevin Rudd came to power he changed it and it was as sure as night follows day. What are you

going to do in government, if you win government, to get back to where we were under John Howard?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, I think probably the most important change will be to bring in these temporary protection visas, they used to

be called, or safe haven visas we have proposed now and the thing about these visas is that you won’t get

permanent residency under them and you won’t therefore have the right to bring other people out under them. So

just because you get to Australia, just because you’re found to be a refugee doesn’t mean that you can stay here

forever and that’s what people are looking for, they are looking for the great prize of Australian residency and you

can understand them wanting that, Ray…

RAY HADLEY:

Of course.

TONY ABBOTT:

… I mean, if I was living in a camp in Sri Lanka or on the Pakistani border why wouldn’t I want to come to

Australia. But we have to understand that we can’t be the lifeboat to the world and we can’t save everyone.

RAY HADLEY:

I mean, the Sri Lankans don’t… they don’t need to take a full page ad in the Colombo Times. Scott Morrison told

me when he was there a week or two back, Skype’s available.

TONY ABBOTT:

That’s right and if people think that if you can get to Australia you can stay here it’s hardly surprising that we have

a lot of people trying to get here as best they can and as I said, you can feel for those people but you don’t do

them any favours encouraging them, tacitly encouraging them to make an incredibly dangerous trip across the

Indian Ocean by leaky boat and you don’t do existing Australian citizens any favours by basically saying come

one, come all, hoisting up that sign over the place.

RAY HADLEY:

And I think you understand that it is a very important election issue, later this year.

TONY ABBOTT:

It will be an important… I mean, I don’t know that it’s going to be necessarily the most important issue but it’ll

certainly be a significant one.

RAY HADLEY:

And just finally, the Prime Minister was on the ABC’s Q&A programme last night with a group of 16 to 25-year-olds. I’m heartened by the fact that the 16 to 25-year-olds are perhaps a lot smarter than we give them credit for.

TONY ABBOTT:

They certainly gave the Prime Minister a pretty tough time and I think he looked fairly uncomfortable at different

times.

RAY HADLEY:

Well, if he’s not on an FM radio station showing his tie off or talking about what, you know, particular frock his

wife might wear, he isn’t comfortable, he doesn’t subject… He hasn’t been interviewed by Alan Jones or me since

before the election because he doesn’t want to come on and face censure or difficult questions.

TONY ABBOTT:

Look, running the country is difficult and there are some problems that can’t be solved, there are other problems

which you’re only ever going to be able to take a stab at and this is where, dare I say it, John Howard understood

that leaders have to have a bit of humility and I think that’s been Kevin Rudd’s problem. He’s tried to give people

the impression that he’s some kind of omnicompetent individual. I mean, this whole idea that he could save the

world on his own from climate change, I mean I think that was a shocking conceit and I think that’s part of

people’s general reaction now.

RAY HADLEY:

Some may say he was suffering delusions of adequacy.

TONY ABBOTT:

That’s a nice way of putting it, Ray.

RAY HADLEY:

Anyway, I know you’re busy. I’ll leave you there. Thanks for talking to me.

TONY ABBOTT:

Thank you, Ray.

