Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release

Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley program

Monday 10th May 2010

Subjects: Search and rescue operation for 120th illegal boat arrival



EandOE



RAY HADLEY: The Shadow Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison is on the line. Scott, G’day.



SCOTT MORRISON: Good morning Ray.



RAY HADLEY: Have you got your head around this timeline and the fact that the command

officials from Border Protection say the vessel was overdue, that’s why they went back

looking for it. I mean what do they mean overdue?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think that’s a very good point. As I think you said earlier this

morning, overdue seems to suggest it’s some sort of scheduled arrival and these are not

scheduled arrivals, these are illegal arrivals and what this tragic events show is just what is

at stake here - people die on boats. That’s why we need to stop these boats. This boat has

come all the way from Sri Lanka which is not that common. Most of them come via people

smugglers through Indonesia or Malaysia. Usually when you have a boat in distress it is

usually one that has come the full distance and it is often there are no people smugglers

from Indonesia involved. So this is a tragic situation but it highlights just what we are putting

at risk by having the sort of arrangements we have at the moment where people think they

can do this and get the outcome they are seeking.



RAY HADLEY: Well what does concern me is we knew by April 30 they were out there, 200

odd kilometres north west of the Cocos Islands. The fishing boat is found by the bulk carrier

and given food and water and the Australian Border Protection and the Australian

Government knew about that then the bulk carrier leaves them because they say it is

seaworthy. Four days later we have five of them overboard, swimming for help. Two days

later they begin searching for the boat, the next day it is found west of the Cocos Islands and

this time the Russian ship is directed to it. Now if it is a fait accompli that we are going to

take them here anyway, why wouldn’t the government intervene in the earlier instance?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think that is a very good question and it is one I hope is

answered by the inquiry I hope will take place and if they are not undertaking an inquiry we

will certainly insist on it. We need to know the sequence of events, how decisions were

made and, as you say, if the government had always intended to take these people on board

in Australia, then should they have intervened earlier? But the other option is there

depending on precisely where the vessel was first seen or where it may have been earlier

intercepted. There may have been options for these people to be taken to other countries

but I don’t think the Indonesian Government would be too keen on co-operating with

Australia after the chaos that ensued when we had the Oceanic Viking which was not in too

dissimilar a situation. We also had, going back many years, the issue of the Tampa where

people were picked up by a bulk carrier and of course the history shows what the Howard

Government did there.



RAY HADLEY: It appears the vessel was either drifting or under motor, either 231 or 296

kilometres, either west or north west of the Cocos Islands which would put it much closer to

Indonesia than Australia. But I think because… is there an exclusion zone outside the Cocos

Islands which would put a 200km exclusion zone or something of that nature that you know

of?



SCOTT MORRISON: It’s quite possible it was in those waters where we’re the responsible

search and rescue agency or it was within the contiguous zone. All that being as it is, I mean

this boat was drifting effectively, it sounds like, for nine days and so I think there are some

very important questions. It highlights more, as I said at the outset Ray, that people die on

boats and that is why this trade has to be stopped.



RAY HADLEY: See one of the things Scott I have been saying about this since before the

last election, we don’t know how many other people - forget about getting within 200km of

the Cocos Islands, these people setting out, particularly those from Sri Lanka, how many of

them get 100km away from Sri Lanka and simply sink and we don’t know about that?



SCOTT MORRISON: I’ve heard these stories as well Ray. And one story, and these are

Afghan asylum seekers, that rings in my head every time, was 105 who left Indonesia in

October of last year and were never heard from again. We have no idea how many people

drown out there and I don’t think we will ever know. But we do know that if we can stop the

boats coming to Australia then fewer people will take this risk.



RAY HADLEY: Well as I have been telling the Opposition for at least 12 months now, this is

a major election issue and I think the polls are reflecting that in relation to the Prime Minister.

There are plenty of people who are cranky with him because he has changed his policy and

equally there are plenty of people who think he didn’t change it far enough.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the policy he has changed has proved to be as ineffective as it

has been discriminatory. These things are judged on their results. The boats are continuing

to come, I think there have been about 14 that have arrived since he announced those

changes a month ago and to discriminate against someone’s nationality as to whether you

are going to assess their claim goes against I think all the notions of fairness that we are

standing up for on this issue. We want a fair process and a fair process means that if you

have sought to arrive illegally as opposed to someone sitting in a camp, well we are going to

favour the person in the camp. But if you have come this other method then at least

everyone should get the same treatment, as they would under our system with Temporary

Protection Visas if they were successful.



