

Senator Chris Evans

MEDIA RELEASE

Interview with Harvey Deegan, Radio 6PR

Tamil refugees from Oceanic Viking (6PR Perth, 13 January 2010)

Wednesday 13 January 2010

HARVEY DEEGAN: Now, first of all, I understand we're dealing with five refugees  whom ASIO considers a threat to our national security. Where are they and what's  their future?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, Harvey, what we've done is we've taken all five to Christmas  Island. We've got them in detention in, if you like, high security detention, and we will  be keeping them there. We've refused to grant them visas to Australia. We thought  the best thing to do when we discovered four of them off the Oceanic Viking had  failed their security assessments was to take them to the detention centre, make it  clear they won't be getting permanent visas to Australia, and then work on a longer  term solution seeking to get them to go to some other country. But we think - I've  been a bit concerned about some of the reaction today. We think, and we make no  apologies for this, it's appropriate that these people be detained and they be refused  entry to Australia. And some of the discussion about this just seems to be crazy. We  don't think people who fail the security assessment ought to be allowed into  Australia.

HARVEY DEEGAN: So what are you going to do with them? I mean, are they going  to be at Christmas Island for an indefinite period of time? Have we got another  Guantanamo Bay coming up here?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, it's no Guantanamo Bay. It's a proper detention facility where  you make, as we do with any unauthorised arrival, decisions about their identity, their  health and the security. And the Rudd Government has got a very strong policy;  unless you pass your health, identity and security checks, we won't bring you to the  mainland and we won't give you visas to Australia. These people failed their security  checks and therefore, on the basis of that ASIO advice, the government has made a  decision they won't be coming to Australia.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Well, you got them as far as Christmas Island. How difficult is it  going to be to resettle them somewhere else if they're not go … and neither they  should be allowed into Australia. But how are you going to convince another country  to take them, or do you send them back to where they came from in the first place?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, the difficulty, as you'd understand Harvey, is that they can't go  back to Sri Lanka if in fact one of the reasons they're refugees is that they were  associated with the Tamil cause in Sri Lanka, and where we couldn't be assured of  their safety if they went back to Sri Lanka. But there have been these instances in  the past where we work with other governments to find solutions for them. The  Howard Government had some people on Nauru. Unfortunately that took a very long  time to resolve their cases. But you'll find that Canada and America, and that, are  faced with the same problem. After the war in Sri Lanka we've seen a lot of those  Tamils flee and - but our position is very clear. If they haven't - if they fail the security  tests, if they don't meet our requirements, they won't be coming to Australia. I just  wanted to deal with the fact that Tony Abbott was out there today suggesting that  they would be brought to Australia. I think that's irresponsible. You've got be  responsible about national security matters. We should have a consensus about  these things, not seek to mislead or scare. Those persons won't be coming to  Australia and we've made that very clear.

HARVEY DEEGAN: But you can't tell us where they'll be going.

CHRIS EVANS: Well, that's something we've got to work on. I mean, these things  are difficult but we have resettled other people in the past. We will be working on  that. If that takes some time I'm afraid that's one of the prices you've got to pay.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Well, how many people have you resettled who have failed  ASIO security checks?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, we haven't had this before under this government.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Exactly. So when…

CHRIS EVANS: But the Howard government did face this problem, and the criticism  of that was that it took them five years to resolve it. I certainly don't want to be  looking at those timeframes. But we have resettled people in other countries where  there are security concerns or they don't meet our standards. We have got much  better relationships with the UNHCR now under this government and we hope to  work with them to find the solutions. But the core criticism is that - it seems to be  that we've done the wrong thing by detaining them and refusing them visas. I just  want to make it very clear we're not making any apologies about that. If they don't  meet the security standards, they're not coming permanently to Australia.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Minister, would this have happened had you not fast-tracked the  asylum seekers off Oceanic Viking?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, it's not about fast-tracking. What we had was a situation  where they were on Australian vessel, on Australian Customs vessel because we'd  rescued them at sea. Indonesians assisted us by letting us disembark them in  Indonesia and we all, you know, the stand-off that was there. But fundamentally we'd  indicated to the Indonesians we were going to help them deal with it and help them  take responsibility. And when we found we had security concerns about these  people, we said to the Indonesians we'll take them and we'll detain them, and we'll  manage them to a solution. That's perfectly reasonable because the Indonesians, if

you like, did us a favour letting them disembark in Indonesia. The vast majority of  those off the Oceanic Viking aren't coming to Australia. But we have responsibility to  deal with these people but we've made it very clear if they fail the security checks  they're not coming to Australia, and that's the decision we've taken.

HARVEY DEEGAN: We should perhaps listen to what Tony Abbott did have to say.  He accuses the Rudd Government of duping Australians when you promised asylum  - that you'd be coaxing the Tamils off the Customs boat. Just listen to what he had to  say.

TONY ABBOTT: This is a government which is charged with safeguarding security of  the country and yet it has brought to this country people who it knew to have been  given adverse security assessments.

HARVEY DEEGAN: What's your response to that?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, it's wrong, it's misleading, and it's designed to scare. What we  did is bring four people, who were found to be of security concern, to our major  detention centre on Christmas Island and have refused them visas. We have them in  detention and we are looking to deal with them, either through them voluntarily  returning somewhere or placing them somewhere else. But, as I say, it's totally  misleading and, quite frankly, you know, irresponsible of Tony Abbott to claim  otherwise. He knows what's happened. It's in accordance with Australian law, and  those people will be denied permanent visas to Australia. And to make other claims  - he knows that to be false.

HARVEY DEEGAN: But they are on Australian soil, aren't they, they're at Christmas  Island? And I think the point he's trying to make is, you've got them this far, the  problem is now what you're going to do with them.

CHRIS EVANS: Well, what they said during the height of the Oceanic Viking was  that we ought to take them to Christmas Island, so we'd be facing this issue in the  same way. We took responsibility in our arrangement with Indonesia to deal with the  people off the boat, to help them. The vast majority of those people will be settled in  other countries, those that were found to be refugees. This is a particular group who  are a problem. We took responsibility for dealing with them but that means we've  detained them, we've refused them visas, and we're looking for them to go  somewhere else, and we'll keep working through that. And it's complex and it's not  easy but I think people ought to accept that detention is the appropriate thing and  refusing them visas is the appropriate thing. That's what's happened. Tony Abbott  knows that and he's been deliberately misleading. And, quite frankly, if you want to  be a national leader, you've got to be a bit more responsible on national security  issues.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Minister, why has ASIO issued the alert, if you like? Why do  they believe that the five are a security threat?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, this is always difficult in terms of being able to discuss  security issues that I'm not able to and I actually don't, you know don't have the  details of their assessment but they are charged with that task under our law, they

have interviewed these people. They have done you know, checks if you like and on  the basis of their requirements under Australian law, they found these four people,  five in total now to not pass those security standards that we require. We require that  of people whether they be refugees or rap stars from America or you know, any  other sort of immigrant. We've got security standards which this government strictly  enforces. They failed and therefore they'll be treated accordingly and that's just the  way it is.

HARVEY DEEGAN: So you don't know, you as Immigration Minster don't know what  these people are supposed to have done or why they're a threat to our security?

CHRIS EVANS: Well those decisions as I've said are made by ASIO and they don't  discuss the actual detail of those things, I'm not the minister responsible for ASIO but  …

HARVEY DEEGAN: [Interrupts] Well who have they discussed this issue with?

CHRIS EVANS: Well obviously they report to the Attorney-General, but as I say, as  you know, we never discuss security matters in detail …

HARVEY DEEGAN: [Interrupts] No but you said you don't know, I would have  thought as Immigration Minister you'd … you'd be - have every right, you would be  entitled to know.

CHRIS EVANS: Well the situation is that under the law, they advise the Immigration  Minister that they - whether they have passed or failed that assessment. They don't  provide the details to me and obviously the relevant ministers don't discuss those  security arrangements anyway. But I have confidence …

HARVEY DEEGAN: [Interrupts] So it's not - these things are not discussed in  cabinet then?

CHRIS EVANS: Not the individual cases, no. ASIO have the responsibility under the  Australian law, the immigration law and their own legislation to make these decisions  of proper security assessment and they've made it and they've advised us and we've  taken the view on that basis of that advice. As is required under the law, we will not  be giving those people permanent visas to Australia.

HARVEY DEEGAN: I understand from our Canberra newsroom there was a security  briefing in Canberra today, is that correct?

CHRIS EVANS: Not that I'm aware of, however we had a meeting of the border  security committee of cabinet, but…

HARVEY DEEGAN: [Interrupts] So what was discussed at that meeting?

CHRIS EVANS: Well again we don't discuss what's on cabinet agendas.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Well surely you would have discussed the issue of that Tamils.

CHRIS EVANS: Well as I say I can't go through the agenda as you well know, but…

HARVEY DEEGAN: [Interrupts] Why can't you go through the agenda?

CHRIS EVANS: Because governments never talk about national security matters  and or agendas of cabinet committees. But I can tell you we're very much on top of  the issue. This was an ordinary meeting but we're dealing with all those issues as  you'd expect us to.

HARVEY DEEGAN: On top of the issue? You've got five people at Christmas Island  you don't know what to do with and you can't tell us when they'll be resettled. They're  not coming to Australia, you've assured us of that, and for that we should be grateful,  but you can't tell us when or - where or when they're going.

CHRIS EVANS: No, I mean, I know if people want to know that, but to be frank we've  had them for a couple of weeks, there are complex issues to work though. More  work with them, and the work with the UNHCR so that may well take some time. So I  can't give people timeframes et cetera at the moment. This is very much in the early  stages, but we're being quite upfront about it. They failed the security test, we've  refused them permanent visas to Australia and we're going to manage them but  while we manage them we're going to keep them in detention on Christmas Island.

HARVEY DEEGAN: I think a lot of people would level this accusation at the - well the  figures speak for themselves that the Rudd Government that since you've been in  power there have been more and more asylum seekers arriving off our shores, this  can been seen I suppose as a perception overseas that this government is much  softer on refugees than the previous government was. And everyone will turn around  and say well we've signed a United Nations convention meaning that we've got to  look after these people, now do we have to change our protocols or is it time that  perhaps that United Nations looked at their protocols and guidelines in this area?

CHRIS EVANS: Look it's a good question and it is a live issue if you like, but I make  the point firstly that we've had surges over the last 25 years in people smuggling  arrivals to Australia under the Fraser government, under the Keating government  and the Howard government and these are sort of peaks and troughs and it depends  largely on what's happening in the sup… in the countries of origin. Afghanistan as  you know has gone very bad. We've lost 11 or 12 soldiers there in recent times. A lot  of people are fleeing there, we've seen impacts here, numbers in Europe are through  the roof as well. It's a world problem, we're all trying to deal with it and we've got to  keep working at responses. I mean last year it was a bad year for arrivals but I think  it was still third to a couple of years in the Howard government. It's an ongoing battle,  it's not going to be fixed quickly, but it's something that you know, Italy are dealing  with, Spain are dealing with, Canada are dealing with. We've just got to keep working  away at trying to find solutions and part of that is working very closely with the  UNHCR which we're doing. We have a good relationship with them and we're  looking for - to work with them particularly on solutions like Sri Lanka. We're seeing a  large flow of people now out of Sri Lanka, and obviously working on settlement and  reconciliation in Sri Lanka and solutions for Sri Lankan Tamils is a key to reducing  the flow of people seeking asylum.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Mmm. Before we let you go minister, Christmas Island's  bursting at the seams, is there any more room left, simply put, and if not, where are  you going to - where are you go - you going to set up another refugee processing  unit somewhere else or what?

CHRIS EVANS: We've got - still got some spare capacity at Christmas Island and  we've been expanding that to meet the current demands. So at the moment we've  got some capacity and as I say we've increased our capability there. I've always  made clear, we've got a detention centre at Darwin with capacity for 500 that's  purpose built and has been used in the past so if we need to we'll use that for that  final stages of processing. But people will be taken to Christmas Island and  processed there as the priority and they'll be treated as offshore entry arrivals and all  the legal structures that go around that so we've still got capacity, we're expanding  capacity and we're just managing what is hopefully a temporary peak in arrivals and,  you know, we'll be working very closely in the region to try and address the problem.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Finally do you concede that Wilson Tuckey might have had  something when he suggested that terrorists might try to come into Australia by this  means?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, Wilson's Wilson but I've always made it clear that we'd have  very strong security checking, health checking and identification checking. And if  anyone failed those tests they'd be - not be given visas to Australia and so it was  always expected that we'd have some people fail. Many of the Tamils seeking  refugee have passed. But those that haven't have been refused and that'll continue  to be the case.

HARVEY DEEGAN: Wouldn't have your job for quids minster, got to tell you that.  Thanks for your time today, we really appreciate it.

CHRIS EVANS: My pleasure.



See:  Index of speeches and transcripts

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/speeches/2010/ce100113.htm   Last update: 11 February 2010 at 15:12 AEST



