

Senator Chris Evans

Skilled migration changes and Christmas Island capacity (ABC 7.30  Report, 10 February 2010)

Wednesday 10 February 2010

Interview with Kerry O'Brien, ABC 7.30 Report

KERRY O'BRIEN: The Immigration Minister, Chris Evans, has scrapped the old list  of more than a hundred occupations officially recognised as being in demand in  Australia, to be replaced by fewer higher-skill occupations. And the points test, to be  met by prospective migrants, will also be revised. The Minister is also facing another  tough year on the issue of asylum seeker arrivals, with the Christmas Island  detention and processing facility now close to capacity, and the boats still coming. I  spoke with Senator Evans earlier tonight, he was in our Parliament House studio.  Chris Evans, put crudely, your changes in Australia's skilled migration seem  designed almost entirely to stop international students gaining backdoor access to  permanent Australian residency via education courses. Fair summary?

CHRIS EVANS: No, not at all. We're going to need international students with high  skills, in coming years, to meet our shortages. But what it does do, it says that  people who are skilled, and who will get employment in Australia, will be given  preference. Currently, what we've got is a situation where people are coming in who  may not be able to get employment in their fields. This is designed to address that.

KERRY O'BRIEN: But you've got a circumstance, haven't you, where the bulk of  students coming here, it seems, are coming here with the intent to end up working  here, to gain permanent residency here, and most of them have been in these lower  skilled areas?

CHRIS EVANS: Oh look, that's right, and it was distorting the migration system. We  inherited from the Howard Government a system that was, if you like, supply driven.  People got in the queue and came through the migration program even though they  may not have skills that we needed. This is changing it to a demand program,  whereby employers and others sponsor people in, who've got the skills they need,  who will go straight into skilled work. It's trying to match up our needs with the  migrants coming through, and at the moment there was a huge mismatch.

KERRY O'BRIEN: I know that you've only been the Minister for two years, but it does  seem reasonable to ask why it's taken so long to act. Monash University  demographers last year published figures showing a dramatic rise in the influx for  foreign students between 2004 and 2008 for lower skill level courses, training  hairdressers, cooks, hospitality workers, for instance, from fewer than 5000 in 2004,

to more than 40 000 in 2008, which is an 800 per cent increase in four years. Surely  those figures should have caught the attention of department officials before this?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, they have, Kerry, and I - there's two points to make. First of  all, we welcome students who are coming to study, but we give them a student visa.  The question is, if they want to apply for permanency, whether they ought to come  through that program. So, we welcome students, but all they get when they get a  student visa is a right to study here. What I'm doing is breaking that link. But in 2009,  at the start of 2009, I put in a temporary arrangement where we had a critical skills  list, and I changed the priority processing. So, what you saw last year is we got a  thousand more nurses than we got the year before, we got 500 doctors more than  we got the year before. We actually made changes last year that actually saw a  much better mix and higher skills coming in. This, if you like, is the permanent  arrangement that we've put in place to make sure we get that better mix, and we get  those higher skills. But last year we delivered on that by making those short-term  changes, and this has put - about putting in place a long-term migration framework  that delivers the skills employers need.

KERRY O'BRIEN: It seems that there is a strong expectation within the education  sector that, as an automatic reaction to your policy change, there's going to be a  significant drop in the number of international students coming. That is because they  will no longer be able to have that expectation of permanent residency. I wonder  whether that is going to heighten the risk of the poor impression, for instance, that  Australia - of Australia being injected back in India, after the various incidents of  violence last year against Indian students, because many of the students who will no  longer be coming will also be Indian students.

CHRIS EVANS: Well, Kerry, the answer is, I suppose, two parts. Firstly, that the  universities have welcomed the changes. They say it's a good move and will reward  those with higher level qualifications and skills. But secondly, what - the major blow  to the education industry here is if we're not producing people with higher skills, that  people aren't getting good value courses, they aren't getting the skills they're paying  for. And there have been problems in the education industry, as you know. This is  the - this is dealing, if you like, with the immigration part of that. If people want to  come to this country to study they're more than welcome, we encourage that  industry. If they want to come for a permanent residency outcome, they've got to  meet the migration rules and the priorities of the Australian Government that are in  the Australian national interest. And our priorities are people with high skills. And  what we had is a mismatch where we were getting lots of cooks, hairdressers, and  even accountants who weren't able to get jobs in their field because they didn't have  the skills that they needed, or there weren't vacancies. We've taken the number of  employer nominated migrants from 29 per cent of the total, to 53 per cent. That is  sponsored migrants coming straight into jobs. That's a good outcome for them and a  good outcome for Australia. And we weren't getting that under the old rules.

KERRY O'BRIEN: On the issue of asylum seekers, Senator, you're clearly struggling  to deal with the increase in boat arrivals on Christmas Island, you're racing the clock  really, to add further demountable accommodation before you're forced to house the  spillover on the mainland. What flow of people are you anticipating this year?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, Kerry, we get, obviously, intelligence briefings. Well, I,  obviously, wouldn't want to discuss those with you. But there's no doubt, that as long  as the situation remains difficult in Afghanistan and Sri Lanka, we're going to expect  continuing flows. We're taking all the efforts we can to try and prevent unlawful  arrivals, and to try and work with our neighbours to stem those movements. But  clearly, as long as those situations are poor in those countries, we and other nations  in Europe and other Western nations, are getting - are seeing those flows, and I  don't anticipate that that's going to end any time shortly.

KERRY O'BRIEN: So, reading between the lines, you're anticipating that the trend is  going to continue, if not increase.

CHRIS EVANS: Well, certainly, we expect that we'll continue to have unauthorised  boat arrivals. What level of activity they're at, of course, is not clear to us. You just  don't know. But we've got a range of measures in place, we're taking new measures,  we've increased border protection resources. But fundamentally, what happened last  time we had a surge was, it didn't cease until we were able to, if you like, return  people to Afghanistan when the Taliban fell, and as long as there's major difficulties  in some of these countries, people will continue to flow to what they see as safe  haven.

KERRY O'BRIEN: You've already indicated that once Christmas Island fills up you'll  exercise the Darwin option, you will house them in the facility that already exists in  Darwin. But Darwin's capacity is around 400 or so, a little more, allowing for another  surge. What happens, if and when Darwin fills up? Which wouldn't take many boats,  would it?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, certainly, Darwin's our first contingency option, if you like.  That's a purpose-built facility. It was built by the Liberals in around 2000, 2001, when  we last had a large number of arrivals. It's a purpose-built facility so we'll use that if  we need to. And obviously, we're looking at other contingencies, but we've increased  the capacity on Christmas Island, that'll go up again to about 2300 in the next month  or so, and we've got 550 beds at Darwin, so those are our first options. But  obviously, if the increase activity was to go beyond those levels, we'd have to look at  further contingency plans.

KERRY O'BRIEN: Well, you're saying that you've already thought of further  contingency plans. What is your next step after Darwin?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, at this stage I'm not prepared to discuss that, we're still looking  at options, there's no - there's been no firm Government decision on that but,  obviously, proper planning requires you to look at those options, and we're still  exploring those.

KERRY O'BRIEN: The Australian newspaper claimed last week that the main reason  you haven't yet started moving people to Darwin is because the Prime Minister is  refusing to authorise the move. Is that true?

CHRIS EVANS: No, it's a nonsense. The Government has been clear for six or nine  months now, that we're expanding the capacity at Christmas Island, that is our first

preference, to do all the processing on Christmas Island. If there are capacity issues  there, we will finalise people at the last stage of their processes at the Darwin facility.  That's been out stated position, that's very clear. That's what we'll do. At the moment  we've got enough beds on Christmas Island and we're expanding the capacity, but if  we need to, we'll use Darwin.

KERRY O'BRIEN: Chris Evans, thanks for talking with us.

CHRIS EVANS: My pleasure, Kerry.



See:  Index of speeches and transcripts

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/speeches/2010/ce100210.htm   Last update: 11 February 2010 at 14:17 AEST



