The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations

Minister for Social Inclusion

Deputy Prime Minister

12 April, 2010

Transcript

Television Interview - Sky News PM Agenda

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS PM AGENDA  445PM MONDAY  12 APRIL 2010

ISSUES: BER Implementation Taskforce; Asylum seekers; AEU’s NAPLAN boycott

DAVID SPEERS: Julia Gillard, thank you for your time.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.

DAVID SPEERS: Let's just have a look at how this will work. If a group of parents, for  example, think that the building project at their school is overpriced, they lodge a complaint  with this new taskforce. What does the taskforce then do?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, obviously, much of the operational work here is a matter for Mr  Orgill, and he will work his way through it.

But what I would envisage the task force doing is it would get in contact with the parents, it  would actually work through with them, what it is that they're complaining about, why  they've got these fears about value for money.

It would then look at the project, the contracts, the quotes, get comparable quotes if necessary  to test the proposition as to whether or not value for money is being rolled out.

This is a body, the taskforce, that can contract in experts. So if it was something like an  unusually sloped block or something different about the soil or something like that that could  explain the price difference, they'll be able to get at it with expert assistance.

DAVID SPEERS: Sure. But if they find out that, you know, a toilet block or whatever the  building is cost way more than it should have, perhaps it's overpriced by $100,000, the  taskforce goes through the contracts and discovers that, what do they then do? Can they get  that money back from the builder, or is the Education Department to blame for agreeing to  that price? What then happens?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, they would obviously then make recommendations about what  should be done next. And examples could be that the contract needs to be terminated, a  termination clause exercised, or that a quote is too high and a project should be re-tendered to  get a better quote, or negotiation should be entered into with the builder to say that price is  unacceptable and it needs to come down by the following amount.

DAVID SPEERS: If the building is already done though, if the project's complete?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, when we're looking at Building the Education Revolution, this is a  program with two years to run, and to the extent that there have been a public focus on value  for money questions, many of them have actually been about quotes. So there obviously still  is time to work through that.

DAVID SPEERS: But for those buildings that are already done, there are quite a number  that have been completed, is it too late to then get the money back?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, the task force will be able to look at any mismanagement  questions that there may be from those buildings and make recommendations.

But I do want to say too, David - I mean, obviously in this discussion, because we're talking  about the work of the task force, we're focusing on the schools that may have problems, we  do need to recognise there's another very, very big side to this equation, and that very big side  is that there are schools right around the country that are absolutely delighted with what is  being constructed.

DAVID SPEERS: Sure, but there have been problems, as you acknowledge. If a building is  complete and the taskforce finds there was a problem, they don't have any authority to step in  and demand money from the contractor, to actually act on that problem that has already  happened.

JULIA GILLARD: Well, I think there are probably two types of problems that could  happen for a building that's already completed.

There may be questions about whether or not what was done was in accordance with the  contract and the terms and conditions of the contract could then point you in the direction of  remedies or legal action that could be taken.

Then I suppose there's another question as to whether the contract just got it wrong and a  price was contracted for that was too high, then the task force could make recommendations  to the Block Grant Authority to use the terminology which means...

DAVID SPEERS: The State Education Department.

JULIA GILLARD: Or the Catholic Education Office or the authorities working with  independent schools to see what should be done next to assist that school.  So there are - you know, there are processes here. I mean, we're obviously at this stage  talking about hypotheticals and that can get confusing and complicated, but the main message  here is the taskforce has got full power to respond to individual complaints, to look at value  for money questions and if it wants to, of its own motion, to look at something about the

Building the Education Revolution systems that it thinks needs a look and may need some  recommendations about change.

DAVID SPEERS: As you point out, there are still two years to run in terms of building  works under this program.

You're saying that the money can't be clawed back, you're not going to reduce the size of this  $16 billion project - program. Why not?  Why can’t you reduce that at all?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, money for schools is money for schools, and we said to schools  around the country that in order to support jobs and keep this country out of recession, which  we have achieved, that we would provide economic stimulus around the nation to every  school. Every school benefiting in some way, supporting local jobs, getting the infrastructure  that schools need. And we deliberately put that amount of money into schools.

DAVID SPEERS: But the economy has performed better than you expected. It avoided  recession, unemployment is relatively low and I know - you know, the Government's taken  credit for that.

So then why can't you tailor this to the circumstances as they are presented today and rein in  some of that spending?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, the circumstances presenting today are that activity in the non  residential construction sector is being supported by Building the Education Revolution.

If we pulled Building the Education Revolution out, then activity in the non-residential  construction section would just go plummeting.

I mean, ask any builder. Ask the Master Builders. The Master Builders are saying this is what  has kept businesses in operation and blokes in work. This is what's doing it for us, and if you  take it away, then all those jobs will be lost, all those companies will go to the wall, all of  their apprentices will end up not in training any longer.

So it's not true to say that somehow, you know, the private sector is at full capacity and this is  extra. This is what is keeping activity turning over in the non-residential construction sector.

DAVID SPEERS: But are you confident that no taxpayers' money has been wasted under  this program?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, we've built in levels of insurance to this program and we did from  the start. I mean, David, we always knew that this was a huge thing to do and had never been  done before.

Here we were, global financial crisis, global recession, a prospect of this country going into  recession, hundreds of thousands of people joining the dole queues and we said, what can we  do to make a difference. We decided to do this as part of economic stimulus.

DAVID SPEERS: But did you have enough insurance from the beginning?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, it certainly worked to keep people in jobs and it's got auditing and  monitoring and compliance at every level, but this...

DAVID SPEERS: [Interrupts] So why then did you have to put in this new layer of  insurance today?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, because, look, this is the first time something this big has been  done. This is the first time this country has successfully avoided a recession and a global  crisis.

I mean, this is all history making. We never - we've never before confronted a global  financial crisis and global recession in the circumstances that presented to us in 2008.

DAVID SPEERS: Sure, so why wasn't there more consideration given to the checks and  balances that you would need in place with a $16 billion school building program.

JULIA GILLARD: Well we gave good consideration to the checks and balances, but now of  course we've got some experience of this program in operation, and we couldn't have that  experience until the program started.

And having seen the experience - whilst I'm absolutely convinced that overwhelmingly this  program is rolling out around the country to the delight of school communities, there have  been some limited problems, and, I believe, an extra level of insurance is worthwhile.

DAVID SPEERS: More than you anticipated?

JULIA GILLARD: Well we've built in this extra layer of insurance, because I'm as  enthusiastic as anybody else in this country, probably more enthusiastic, to make sure that  every dollar spent on schools actually does the maximum amount of work for schools.

DAVID SPEERS: But did you envisage there would be the number of problems that we've  seen in this program?

JULIA GILLARD: Well the Prime Minister and I envisaged that there would be some  problems in this sense, that…

DAVID SPEERS: But have there been more than what you've envisaged?

JULIA GILLARD: We’ve never been here before, we've never done a program like this  before, we've never confronted economic circumstances like these before - but the Prime  Minister and I understood on the day we launched this program that if you're going to do  24,000 projects around the country in 9500 schools, there are going to be some problems.  There are going to be some human beings who seek to get an unfair advantage, and rip a little  bit out of the system. That's human nature.

And there'll be…

DAVID SPEERS: And you expected the extent that we've seen - or is it more than you  expected?

JULIA GILLARD: Well look - our expectations were that this was going to be big, huge,  and have some problems.

It's proved to be big, huge, and have the occasional problem. We've now learned by doing  and I believe in these circumstances, it is worth building in an extra level of insurance.

DAVID SPEERS: This has been an area of vulnerability for the Government. You've moved  to address it today. On Friday, we saw the Government also move to tighten up the  processing asylum seekers, freezing claims from Afghanistan and Sri Lanka. You've also  suspended the ceiling insulation program. It looks like the Government is tying up a lot of  loose ends here. Does that mean an election is around the corner?

JULIA GILLARD: Well I think it looks like the Government is governing, and dealing with  the issues that we need to that confront this nation. I mean, we're a Government that's strong  on border protection - that's why we've got more patrols, more naval assets out there doing -  protecting our waters, and protecting our borders than the Howard Government ever did.

And we are now responding to changing circumstances in Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. With  this program, I've been saying for some period of time now, we've got auditing, and  monitoring in the program. It was there from the start.

But I've said that if we needed to do more to ensure schools were getting maximum value for  money, and students were getting everything out of this that we wanted them to, then we  would do more. And today I have announced the taskforce.

This is the right week to do it because this is the week I'm meeting with my ministerial  colleagues from around the nation in our ministerial council meeting.

DAVID SPEERS: You've met - the border protection issue, as Shadow Immigration  Minister, you were committed to 90 day processing of asylum seekers. Doesn't Friday's  announcement, that there will be a six month freeze on processing of Afghanistan claims,  three month freeze on Sri Lankan claims blow that commitment out of the water?

JULIA GILLARD: Well what is happening here is something very practical which is, we  know, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees knows that things are changing.  They are obviously changing in Sri Lanka. There are elections there.

This is a country that's reconstructing and picking itself up from what has been effectively a  long-running civil war, so - with elections, with the processes after the election - obviously  everyone would be hoping that Sri Lanka stabilises and is a safe place for everybody in Sri  Lanka.

But that obviously has an impact on the processing of refugee claims.

Afghanistan, obviously when we look this is still a nation with considerable problems…

DAVID SPEERS: We've still got troops there.

JULIA GILLARD: We've still got troops there.

DAVID SPEERS: And we're the only country to suspend the processing of Afghanistan  claims.

JULIA GILLARD: There are parts of the country that are stabilising, and parts of the  country where we believe we need to look again. And…

DAVID SPEERS: But you're doing this for all Afghans.

JULIA GILLARD: The Afghans, overwhelmingly, are the people from Afghanistan who  seek refugee status here, are Hazara people, a particular ethnic minority in Afghanistan.

DAVID SPEERS: And they don't face anymore problems.

JULIA GILLARD: I'm certainly not saying that. And neither is Stephen Smith, our Minister  for Foreign Affairs. But we do have some information to suggest that in parts of the country  circumstances are changing for Hazara people. We want to…

DAVID SPEERS: But this applies to all Hazaras.

JULIA GILLARD: We want to fully assess that information. You know, every part of the  country, where it applies, what it means for processing…

DAVID SPEERS: And in the meantime, they…

JULIA GILLARD: … that's why we've got the suspension.

DAVID SPEERS: And in the meantime they won't get their 90 day processing commitment  that was given by Labor.

JULIA GILLARD: Well the purpose of assessing people's refugee claims was to acquit our  obligations under the refugee convention, and to treat people who are legitimately fleeing  persecution as refugees. Other people who aren't fleeing persecution - for whom a return  home could be effected in safety and dignity - then that return home is what we do.

Now with countries changing in order to make that decision properly, about refugee status -  we need the best information, and that's what this suspension is about.

DAVID SPEERS: And just finally, Julia Gillard, the Australian Education Union today  voted for teachers to boycott the NAPLAN Literacy and Numeracy tests. You've suggested  parents could be brought in to supervise these tests, under supervision of principal. But is this  going to create a fair bit of tension in school communities if parents are actually going in -  perhaps there are a picket line of teachers - to supervise tests, if their teachers of their own  kids don't want to go ahead.

JULIA GILLARD: Well let's be really practical here. I mean, the Australian Education  Union at its executive today has made a decision. If we look at the schools right around the  country, principals don't support this ban, the Independent Education Union in independent  and Catholic schools doesn't support this ban. I meet teachers every day that aren't afraid of  transparency in the data.

They are happy for all the world to know how their school is going.

I think what this ban will mean is some limited problems in some areas. We'll look at a full  range of options to roll out the national tests - one option is to have parents assist with rolling  out the national tests.

It doesn't have to be acrimonious.

That is parents are legitimately pursuing their view that they want this information. I mean,  they've already voted with their fingertips on My School. It may be that parents are now  prepared to vote with their feet - and come and help out with the national testing.

DAVID SPEERS: Julia Gillard, thank you.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.



ENDS.

Media Contact:

media@deewr.gov.au

Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



