UNCLASSIFIED





THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS



BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND RESCUES 27 PEOPLE  (11 March 2010) Border Protection Command has provided assistance to a vessel 118  nautical miles north west of the Tiwi Islands. Border Protection Command (BPC) reached the  vessel this morning and the people have now been safely transferred to HMAS Glenelg.  The people on board the vessel are safe and have indicated they wish to come to Australia  and will be taken to Christmas Island where they will undergo health, security, identity and  other checks.  The vessel was initially sighted by a Customs and Border Protection Dash 8, operating under  the control of BPC.  Initial indications suggest 24 passengers and three crew were onboard the vessel.  The Minister for Home Affairs, Brendan O’Connor, said today’s rescue highlights the risks  and dangers associated with such ventures.  “People smuggling is a deplorable act with organisers putting innocent people’s lives at risk.  The Australian Government is pleased that the group is safe, but it is only through Border  Protection Command’s and the Australian Maritime Safety Authority’s vigilance that these  people escaped greater harm”.  Australia is working with our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process  on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, to address  this most serious issue.  People smuggling is a global and regional problem. According to the UNHCR 2008 Global  Trends report, there were 42 million displaced persons worldwide at the end of 2008,  including 15.2 million refugees.  The Australian Government has committed more than $654 million to implementing a  comprehensive people smuggling strategy to combat this issue. The Government has  expanded its presence in the region with the Australian Federal Police, Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade, Department of Immigration and Citizenship, and the Australian  Customs and Border Protection Service recently setting up or expanding liaison posts devoted  to deterring irregular migration.  Agencies are working closely with their counterparts in country exchanging and gathering  information, and strengthening our regional capacity to mitigate irregular migration to  Australia. Our strengthened offshore approach is working. Since September 2008 there have  been 130 disruptions of people smuggling ventures in Indonesia, and the arrest of 208 people  smuggling organisers.  Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793

