The Hon Julie Bishop MP

Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs

Deputy Leader of the Opposition

6PR, Drive with Howard Sattler

Tuesday, 06 July 2010

Subjects: Labor’s border protection policy

E&OE…

HOWARD SATTLER    The Pacific Solution of course was John Howard’s baby and someone who  worked with him is Julie Bishop, Deputy Opposition Leader these days. Hi Julie.

JULIE BISHOP    Good afternoon Howard.

HOWARD SATTLER    Is this the Pacific Solution re-branded?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Howard no one could make any sense of what Chris Evans claims is now  meant to be Labor policy. It sounded like just more talk from the Kevin Rudd school of spin.

But let’s be crystal clear about what Julia Gillard did announce today. There was a lot of tough talk but  all she announced was that she’s made a phone call yesterday to the President of East Timor, who  presumably has no more detail of what she is proposing than the Australian public have, and she  made one phone call to the Prime Minister of New Zealand.

Now before the last election Julia Gillard said Labor would end all offshore processing and that she  supported turning the boats back. Now that she is facing an election she’s pretending to do a backflip  and yet all she’s done is make a few phone calls talking about what she may be thinking about doing  in the event that she is re-elected.

HOWARD SATTLER    But she must think there are votes in it.

JULIE BISHOP    But I don’t think she can be believed on this because she has argued for years  against offshore processing. Her speech today is just a distraction to say whatever it takes to get  through to the election.

HOWARD SATTLER    But Julie you know the game. The number crunchers have done the job, they  have gone around the various electorates, marginal electorates, and worked out particularly in  Western Australia that the boat people is going to be an issue at the election.

JULIE BISHOP    But Howard I am not buying what Labor is saying…

HOWARD SATTLER    I am trying to work out why they would change, why they would do the  backflip. That’s got to be the reason surely?

JULIE BISHOP    Well this is the confusing thing. Julia Gillard was actually the architect of Labor’s  border protection policy. She framed the policy that led to the resumption of the people smuggling  trade and the surge in boat arrivals. And now we are meant to believe that suddenly on the eve of an  election she’s changed her mind. I am just not buying it. She either didn’t believe what she has been  saying consistently over many years, right up to today, or she doesn’t believe what she said today…

HOWARD SATTLER    But if your side was elected you’d go for offshore processing wouldn’t you?

JULIE BISHOP    Offshore processing is a part of a whole range of measures that we’ve announced,  that in the past did disrupt the people smuggling trade…

HOWARD SATTLER    But you did it in Nauru and New Guinea, I think I’m right?

JULIE BISHOP    Manus Island.

HOWARD SATTLER    Manus Island, part of New Guinea. So where would you hope to do it if you  were elected to office?

JULIE BISHOP    But Howard can I make this point, this is the fundamental point, Labor are still in  denial over the fact that it’s Labor’s promise of permanent residency that the people smugglers are  selling. And that is going to continue under Labor….

HOWARD SATTLER    But I need you to answer the question Julie, where would you propose to do  your offshore processing?

JULIE BISHOP    Well we’re not in government.

HOWARD SATTLER    No but you must have some idea.

JULIE BISHOP    We’re not in a position to negotiate or make phone calls with foreign governments  and try and stitch up a deal with foreign governments. We’ve said if we get elected we will restore  universal offshore processing of all boat arrivals including all …

HOWARD SATTLER    Would you go to places like Nauru where you did make an arrangement  before? Would you go to Manus Island?

JULIE BISHOP    You see the problem with trying to pick out countries like that is you end up with  what Julia Gillard did today, she announced that she made a phone call to the President of East  Timor but nobody has any idea whether East Timor were agreeable or not agreeable. I don’t know  why she rang the Prime Minister of New Zealand. Was she suggesting she’s going to have a  reprocessing centre in New Zealand?

HOWARD SATTLER    No, I’ve talked to a few New Zealanders. They’ve said no way.

JULIE BISHOP    And I haven’t heard what the President of East Timor said. But the point is Howard,  if you are still offering permanent residency it is still a magnet for the people smugglers.

HOWARD SATTLER    [inaudible] before you go to the election you’ve got to tell people where you  would propose to do your offshore processing.

JULIE BISHOP    We’re not in a position to do that because we can’t, as an Opposition, make deals  with foreign governments.

HOWARD SATTLER    Would you tow boats back to say Indonesia?

JULIE BISHOP    Well you see this is the other interesting thing why you can’t believe Julia Gillard.  She used to say that Labor would turn back the boats. In fact in 2002 when she was the Opposition  Immigration Minister Julia Gillard said that her policy was to turn back seaworthy boats. Just before  the last election she said she supported Kevin Rudd’s position on turning boats back. And then today  Ms Gillard attacked people for suggesting that turning seaworthy boats back was….

HOWARD SATTLER    But surely you can tell me what you’d do with the boats if they were  seaworthy. Would you tow them back?

JULIE BISHOP    Yes. Tony Abbott has said that time and time again.

HOWARD SATTLER    So you would actually tow them back, you wouldn’t just turn it back?

JULIE BISHOP    Well it would depend on the circumstances Howard. Obviously that is operational  and that is what our Customs and Navy people would determine.

HOWARD SATTLER    But they wouldn’t get to say places like Christmas Island?

JULIE BISHOP    We did it under the Howard Government. We took boats back to Indonesia, that  happened, it occurred, we didn’t make a big song and dance about it.

But today Julia Gillard attacked people for suggesting that turning seaworthy boats back was  possible, in fact she said it was evil. Only three years ago she said she supported turning back the  boats.

HOWARD SATTLER    But what would you do about Indonesia whose local authorities continue to  allow and must know these boats are leaving their ports all over the place with these people who are  paying heaps of money to the smugglers? What would you do about Indonesia?

JULIE BISHOP    Well clearly we have to work very closely with Indonesia because it is one of the  most important countries in our region in terms of being a port from which the boats…

HOWARD SATTLER    But what does that mean, working closely? We give hundreds of millions of  dollars of aid to this country surely we can hold them to account and say, look we’re not going to keep  providing aid to you if you won’t even help us on this issue?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Indonesia is trying to tackle the problem.

HOWARD SATTLER    Really?

JULIE BISHOP    What they need to do is pass legislation to make people smuggling a crime that is  punishable by really serious sentences and the like, that would be a good start.

But Howard let me come back to this point. If we continue to offer permanent residency, that is the  product that the people smugglers are selling and Labor haven’t changed any of their domestic  policies, now this is Indonesia’s problem. While Australia still holds out this product, permanent  residency, you’re going to get people smugglers taking all these risks, putting people into these boats  to make the journey to Australia.

HOWARD SATTLER    But with both your policies they still get priority processing. I mean there are  people - I’ve met these people personally, I know them, I’ve talked to them once they’ve got here -  there are people sitting in United Nations camps all over the world who do the right thing, go to the  camps, fill in the application form, wait their turn. How do you think they must feel when they know  these people at least will still get some priority in an offshore processing place? Why aren’t these  people, the boat people, put at the back of the queue?

JULIE BISHOP    That is what Tony Abbott said today.

HOWARD SATTLER    Promise?

JULIE BISHOP    Absolutely. He announced it today in Sydney that we would give offshore applicants  the priority, that is people who are in refugee camps, we would give priority to …

HOWARD SATTLER    So they’d come before boat people?

JULIE BISHOP    The resettlement of refugees who have made offshore applications through our  existing refugee and humanitarian visa program…

HOWARD SATTLER    Yeh, they’d take in at the front of the queue ahead of the boat people.

JULIE BISHOP    That’s right, that’s what Tony Abbott announced today. He announced a number of  policy measures including; we would require greater proof of identity, you know for example where  people have travelled by air to Indonesia…

HOWARD SATTLER    Chucked their passports overseas…

JULIE BISHOP    They must have had travel identity documents to travel by air, but then they take a  boat to Australia and don’t have any travel documents.

HOWARD SATTLER    Thrown overboard.

JULIE BISHOP    Well that’s right. We’d restore great objectivity in the proof of identity determination,  we would put offshore applicants who make an application via our refugee and humanitarian visa  program we would give them first priority, as well as restoring the temporary protection visas.

HOWARD SATTLER    And it is going to be an election issue isn’t it?

JULIE BISHOP    Of course it is an election issue Howard. We live in Western Australia, we know it is  a matter of concern, Labor knows it is a matter of concern. That is why Labor is saying whatever it  thinks people want to hear. It is not only confusing it is unbelievable. Either Julia Gillard didn’t believe  what she’s been saying over many years or she doesn’t believe what she said today.

HOWARD SATTLER    Thank you Julie, leave you there.

JULIE BISHOP    Thanks Howard.



