

Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Adverse security assessments of Oceanic Viking passengers

Friday 12 January 2010

Doorstop, 12 January 2010, Canberra

CHRIS EVANS: I just called the doorstop obviously to respond to media reports  about the four asylum seekers off the Oceanic Viking who have failed their security  assessments.

I can confirm that those four persons have been taken to Christmas Island and they  will not be eligible for permanent visas to enter Australia and the Government will be  working with the UNHCR and others to find solutions for them over coming months  but those four persons have been found not to meet our security standards.

They've had negative security assessments under the public interest checks required  under the legislation. And as a result they do not qualify for permanent visas to enter  Australia and they won't be entering Australia. They'll be detained in, on Christmas  Island in appropriate detention facilities until such time as we're able to resolve their  particular cases and that'll be done in discussions with the UNHCR.

QUESTION: What happens to the kids?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, they are detained, legally detained on Christmas Island as well  but obviously we make appropriate arrangements for children not to have them in a  detention centre, but there'll be appropriate detention arrangements but the children  won't be in the detention centre itself.

QUESTION: What did they do?

QUESTION: At least are they with their mother still? Does that mean the mother is  no longer in detention?

CHRIS EVANS: No, no, the mother is in detention and we have a range of detention  arrangements from the full detention centre to guarding of houses et cetera. So the  children are formally with the mother in detention, but they're not in the detention  centre. They are secured, but the children are not in the detention centre.

QUESTION: Are they with the husband?

QUESTION: Are they behind barbed wire?

CHRIS EVANS: No, they're not.

QUESTION: Are they with the husband?

QUESTION: Does she get access to see them?

CHRIS EVANS: Yes, look, to be clear, the woman and her two children were  transferred to Christmas Island to keep the family intact. It's also the case that her  husband, who was already on Christmas Island, has failed his security assessment.  So we now have five persons who failed their security assessments. Four off …

QUESTION: What …?

CHRIS EVANS: Just let me finish so it's clear, Ron. There are four persons who  were on the Oceanic Viking who failed the security assessment. As result they're not  eligible for permanent visas to Australia. There is an additional person who around  the same time or a little bit earlier was found by our security agencies to have not  met the public interest criteria, in terms of his security assessment.

It is the case that this man is the spouse of the mother of the two children who was  onboard the Oceanic Viking, and that family will be accommodated appropriately in  Christmas Island - appropriate security arrangements, but all will remain detained.

QUESTION: What did they do, in broad terms, I appreciate you can't go into detail,  but what did the five, what are their suspected - are they suspected to have links to  the LTTE? Or?

CHRIS EVANS: No, well for a start I don't know the nature of ASIO's findings so I  couldn't help you if I wanted to, but as you know, I wouldn't anyway. The reality is,  well I've got to be frank with you, I mean, this is a security assessment by ASIO, they  have found that the public interest criteria in terms of the security clearance have not  been met. They have failed that assessment.

As a result, they're not eligible for permanent entry to Australia and we will seek to  keep them in detention. That's where they are now, they were taken to Christmas  Island and detained and we'll manage their cases from here on in, in terms of are  there resettlement options or voluntary departure.

QUESTION: We won't take them, where do we expect them to go? I mean, back to  Sri Lanka?

CHRIS EVANS: Well people have in the past sought to voluntarily depart, or we work  with UNHCR to find resettlement options.

This isn't the first time this has occurred. I think there was at least two who were on  Nauru under the previous government who failed their security assessments and you  work with UNHCR to find a solution for those persons.

QUESTION: Previous cases …

QUESTION: Iraqi men though were stuck there for five years. Is it possible for that to  happen in this case?

CHRIS EVANS: Well certainly that's not desirable as you know this government's  been very committed to try and end that long-term indefinite detention but there's no  doubt that these are difficult cases.

When you find people who have been found by the UNHCR to be refugees, but who  are then unable to return to the country of origin, they are particularly complex and  difficult cases. But all countries who accept refugees have faced these things,  America, Canada, ourselves, we've faced this before and we'll just have to work with  the UNHCR for solutions for those people.

QUESTION: You've said that you won't give permanent visas to any of these people,  is the department or is the government considering issuing any other type of  temporary visa to any of these people?

CHRIS EVANS: No, we're determined that these people are resettled elsewhere.  They've been refused entry to Australia. They will be, remain detained and we'll work  with UNHCR on a solution for their cases.

QUESTION: Sixteen people remain imprisoned out of the Oceanic Viking remain in  Indonesia, what is going to happen with those people and what's the possibility of  them coming to Australia?

CHRIS EVANS: There are a number of people still in immigration detention in  Indonesia and they are the last group of the group that came off the Oceanic Viking.  They'll be processed in accordance with the agreement we had with the Indonesian  Government.

Their cases are proceeding and they'll be resettled accordingly. I can't give you  details on where that group will be going now but it's all going according to timetable  and they'll be resettled in accordance with the agreement.

QUESTION: Minister we're concerned …

QUESTION: How old are the children? Sorry, how old are the children and if they are  of school age will they be attending school on Christmas Island?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, I'll have to take that one on notice. I know they're quite young,  but I'll have to check for you the exact age, but if they're of ch- of school age then we  would be making appropriate opportunities for them to go to school.

QUESTION: Minister would it concern you …

QUESTION: Can Australia rely on the Sri Lankan government help for the security  assessment at all?

CHRIS EVANS: It's really a question for ASIO but, so I'm not, look, I'd have to check  for that, I mean that's a question for ASIO but ASIO are responsible under the act for  the security assessment. They've made that security assessment. In terms of what  sources they use you'd have to direct the question to them, but they found in  undertaking their obligations under the act that these people have failed the  character check and they have issued a negative security assessment.

QUESTION: Are you expecting any more?

QUESTION: Will you be asking the UNHCR to help resettle these people now?

CHRIS EVANS: We'll be working with the UNHCR on finding durable solutions for  this group, that's the normal process, that's what we've done in the past and that's  what we'll do with this group.

QUESTION: What's the likelihood of them actually being able to find a place that will  now take them?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, obviously these are the difficult cases. But I understand one of  the gentlemen off Nauru was settled in Sweden at one stage and he'd failed his  security clearances in Australia.

So it's not unheard of, but these are, make no bones about it, these are difficult  cases when someone's found to be a refugee, you can't return them to the country of  origin, but they don't meet your security assessments.

QUESTION: There's been a suggestion that Christmas Island is the new  Guantanamo Bay.

CHRIS EVANS: Well I haven't heard that put by anyone credible, so, if you'd like to  tell me your sources are I'm happy to have that discussion with them. But I think if  you talk to any of the advocacy groups of standing in community, the ombudsman,  any of the persons who regularly inspect and work with us on Christmas Island, they  would reject that outright.

QUESTION: Did the Australian Government have any security concerns or any  inkling that these security concerns existed when these people were actually on the  boat for four weeks with Australian customs crew responsible for them?

CHRIS EVANS: Not as far as I know. I think it's fair to say though we always  understood the possibility that persons on the boat would fail their security  assessments.

That's true of any unauthorised arrival until you've done the health, identity and  security checks, you cannot be sure and you know, it's been clear for some time that  given what's occurred in Sri Lanka, and the fact that many Tamils have fled and  Tamil Tigers or former Tamil Tiger operatives have fled, the likelihood of us finding  persons who may be of interest to security agencies was there.

So it doesn't come as a surprise but we, as far as I know, we didn't know until we got  ashore, you know, the full details but …

QUESTION: Sorry, can you clarify for us, what, that you've got husband and wife  who are both deemed to be security risks, you've got two children living with them  who you don't want to put behind barbed wire, what are the security conditions I've  been on Christmas Island recently enough to know - what are the security conditions  which are secure for two security risks but easy enough going for children?

CHRIS EVANS: Well you can have home detention with guarding et cetera, there's a  range of things. We have …

QUESTION: What's happening?

CHRIS EVANS: Well we have a range of, they're going through the processes now  as to final arrangements the coming months for handling them. But they will be in  appropriately secure detention, and but the children will not be in the detention  centre.

CHRIS EVANS: Sorry.

QUESTION: Can you provide us with the age of the other three security concerns?

CHRIS EVANS: Well the four who left the Oceanic Viking, who had security  concerns, were all adults, three males and the female. The female is the mother of  two children and it was determined that the children would go with her to Christmas  Island because that was in part as I understand their wishes, but also the fact that  the father was already on Christmas Island so it made sense for the family to stay  together.

In terms of any longer term arrangements, you know we'll work those issues through.

QUESTION: Are the other two related? The other two, are they related to the family?

CHRIS EVANS: The other two?

QUESTION: The other two people who are security risk?

CHRIS EVANS: There's three other persons sorry. I'm not sure what the answer to  that is. I can check for you.

QUESTION: We've got a lot of …

QUESTION: Been in Indonesia?

CHRIS EVANS: Sorry?

QUESTION: How long have the family been in Indonesia?

CHRIS EVANS: I'm not aware of that but clearly the husband had travelled  separately because he had arrived in, on a boat that arrived in the middle of the  year. He was intercepted and as I say he also failed his security assessment.

QUESTION: Why did you bring them to Australia? I mean given that they are - or  had been deemed to be a security threat by ASIO, why did you bring them to  Australia?

CHRIS EVANS: Well we thought given the time frames agreed with the Indonesian  Government that it was best that we take them to Christmas Island, detain them  there and work on resolving their cases in the longer term there.

QUESTION: So it was the special deal that got them here?

CHRIS EVANS: No, there was an agreement with the Indonesian Government about  managing that case load and we made it clear that we would take lead responsibility  in those matters.

When these people were found to be of security concern, we determined to take  them to Christmas Island, detain them there and work with the UNHCR on long-term  resolution of their cases.

QUESTION: Is it your expectation that, I mean we have a lot of Tamil asylum  seekers in detention out at Christmas Island, is it your expectation based on advice I  assume you've had or discussions you'd had with ASIO or other agencies that there  will be more adverse security assessments?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, the answer is I don't know. I can't predict what ASIO will find,  but clearly they've found so far five. But that's all they've found in terms of the  assessments they've done, but it certainly is, as I've always said, a possibility that  people will fail the security assessments.

That's why we're - let me just finish. That's why we do them. We do it to ensure that  people who are security risks do not enter this country. And if you like it's the system  working. Those people have been identified of being of security concern, and  therefore they've been refused Visas, and they're in detention, and if there are more  who fail their security clearances, they will also remain in detention, and we will deal  with them to find solutions for them.

But they will not be getting permanent visas to Australia.

QUESTION: What are conditions like on Christmas Island? Are you hearing any  reports of any tensions or other incidents along those lines?

CHRIS EVANS: No. There's been obviously some tension when we had that  disturbance a while back. But things have been relatively calm - as I understand it.  There is obviously concern from some of the Tamils of the fact that the Afghans tend  to get their security clearances more quickly.

That's a function of risk in ASIO processing, and that's just the reality. No-one's  going to be processed unless they pass their security clearance. This is what we're  talking about. If they don't pass their security clearance, they don't get let out of  detention, they don't get a visa to Australia.

So there's some obviously disquiet among some of the Tamil detainees, as I  understand, about that, but it's been explained to them what the processes are; and  there have been a number of Tamils who have received Visas.

But we are absolutely meticulous in making sure that those persons have had a  proper security assessment. And if they fail, then they're not getting Visas to  Australia.

MALE SPEAKER: Just one more question. We're going to make a move.

QUESTION: These people, just to check are there any appeal mechanisms open to  these people?

CHRIS EVANS: Well there are always appeal mechanisms under Australian law for  persons. Whether or not they then have standing in the courts, or how far they get is  obviously subject to advice, but these persons have failed the security checks. It's a  requirement under the act that they pass those public interest criteria.

They fail those. And they won't be getting permanent Visas to Australia.

QUESTION: Are you aware of the strike at Villawood, of the quality of food that's  been going on for two days?

CHRIS EVANS: I haven't been briefed on that. But I've been just back from leave.  But I, we obviously have management issues at each of the centres that are  managed by the provider, but I haven't been advised of that one.



