

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

Tony Abbott Doorstop - Julia Gillard’s  failed border protection policies;  emissions trading   09/07/10

Subjects: Julia Gillard’s failed border protection policies; emissions trading.

TONY ABBOTT: Well, I’ll say a few words. I’ll ask Julie to say a few words, I’ll ask  Scott to say a few words and then we’ll take questions, but Julie’s on a pretty tight  timeframe so she might have to go at some stage.

Look, it’s very clear that the government’s proposed regional asylum seeker  processing centre is unravelling. It’s very clear that what we’re seeing is again, a  pattern of incompetence and deception from the government. It’s very clear that what  the union and factional warlords have managed is a transition from one incompetent  Prime Minister to another incompetent Prime Minister; that the union and factional  warlords have managed a seamless transition from bungling to bungling.

Now, what we’ve seen here is a failure of judgement and a failure of process. The  Prime Minister must have known that it was wrong to announce an important new  initiative dependent upon the agreement of another country without getting that  agreement first. She must have sensed that there was a problem doing a deal with a  head of state rather than a head of government and above all else, she should never  have done this without talking it fully through with the Foreign Minister who must  have been able to warn her that this just wouldn’t fly.

So, as I said, what we’re seeing from this Prime Minister, as from her predecessor, is  incompetence, deception and ideology. It’s just not good enough. The Australian  people deserve better, they deserve a competent government that can be trusted with

the security of our country and that’s what they’ll get from the Coalition.

The final point I want to make is that what’s pretty clear is that despite the change of  Prime Minister, amateurs are still in charge and that’s just not good enough and the  real risk is that the coming election will see an incompetent government given the  second chance that it doesn’t deserve and that Australia just can’t afford.

So, Julie, I’ll just throw to you.

JULIE BISHOP: Thanks, Tony. This new Prime Minister’s massive blunder in  relation to East Timor where she announced her plans for East Timor without even  contacting the government of East Timor and then making out that she wasn’t actually  referring to East Timor is unforgivable. But this new Prime Minister hasn’t learnt the  lesson. Yesterday, she nominated Papua New Guinea as a country that was a  signatory to the UN Convention on Refugees, thus, in a shifty way indicating that  perhaps Papua New Guinea would be in her sights, yet there are no details as to  whether any proper process has been gone through in relation to Papua New Guinea.

Instead of blundering around our region and in a shifty way trying to identify  countries that might be in her sights, the new Prime Minister should admit that her  policy on asylum seekers is merely a thought bubble, that there was no consultation,  that there was no proper process and that she has backflipped on the fundamentals.  These are precisely the charges that were laid against Kevin Rudd and he lost his job  for it.

TONY ABBOTT: Ok, Scott?

SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks Tony, thanks Julie. Well, it’s clear that Julia Gillard is  seeking asylum from her policy today and this is a very serious issue that Australians  are very concerned about and it needs serious people to address them.  What we saw  when the Howard Government was in place when John Howard announced there  would be a processing centre on Nauru is that within 10 days of that announcement  there was an agreement signed and nine days after that, the centre was open. That’s  what a serious government does when they’re serious about this issue. What we’ve  seen from Julia Gillard is a thought bubble that has popped.

TONY ABBOTT: Ok, are there any questions?

QUESTION: Tony, Nauru is not a signatory to the UNHCR. Why would you focus on  an area like that, a region where it’s not regulated, versus Timor or PNG?

TONY ABBOTT: Because, first of all, it’s my understanding that the Nauruan  Government has indicated a preparedness to consider hosting such a facility and  second, because there is already a facility on Nauru which has been constructed by the  Australian taxpayer and why would the Australian taxpayer want to construct a new  offshore processing facility when we’ve got one that’s already been put there by the  Australian Government on Nauru?

JULIE BISHOP: I think there’s another point here and that is that when Australia ran  that processing centre in Nauru it was under the auspices of the International  Organisation of Migration. So, it is not true for the new Prime Minister to suggest that  Australia was acting unilaterally. The other point is that the new Prime Minister has  said that the processing centre must be in a country that is a signatory to the  Convention. There are only a handful of countries in our region, Papua New Guinea  being one of them, but of course that’s Manus Island, but the remainder are in the  Pacific and that would mean a Pacific Solution. So, the new Prime Minister has

narrowed her options and that’s why she should stop blundering around the region  identifying countries in this way without doing the proper homework.

QUESTION: Tony, how do you reconcile your religious background and your tough  stance on asylum seekers? I mean, basically, Jesus was a refugee most of his life.

TONY ABBOTT: Look, I don’t think that my religion should be held against me and  I don’t think that the Prime Minister’s views on this subject should be held against  her.

QUESTION: What does Gillard’s back flip say about the Government?

TONY ABBOTT: It says that this is a fundamentally incompetent Government which  is trying to spin its way out of trouble. I think that the new Prime Minister is lost in a  wilderness of spin and I think the public are increasingly seeing through this.

QUESTION: You’ve mentioned that you’d like to see offshore processing in a third  country. Can you name any of those countries?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, as I said when I made that announcement back in April, from  Opposition you can’t conduct government to government negotiations but almost  immediately after…

** interruption **

QUESTION: Thanks guys, sorry about that.

TONY ABBOTT: That’s cool. Just repeat the question again?

QUESTION: Can you name any of the countries…

TONY ABBOTT: Yeah, ok. Look, what I said when we made the original  announcement in April is that you can’t conduct government to government  negotiations from Opposition. What I said was that an incoming Coalition  Government would open discussions with neighbouring countries and almost  immediately after making that announcement, the Government of Nauru said that we

would certainly be prepared to consider re-hosting a facility. So, the Coalition did not  make the mistake that Julia Gillard has made in naming countries before we’d  actually had the serious discussions and at least an agreement in principle to go ahead.

QUESTION: So the concern is style over substance, really. I mean, it’s about offshore  processing…

TONY ABBOTT: No, no, no, the concern is with competence and candour in  government. Only an incompetent government would make this kind of an  announcement without talking first to the right person in the foreign government in  question and only a deceptive government would then try to spin itself out of trouble  the way this government has.

SCOTT MORRISON: Do you mind if I make one point there, Tony?

TONY ABBOTT: Sure mate.

SCOTT MORRISON: Just on the regional processing centre, and what they’re talking  about here is trying to secure agreement with a whole host of countries to deal, as they  say, with this regional issue, but what we’re proposing is dealing with Australia’s  challenge and putting a centre in one place to deal with illegal boat arrivals to  Australia.  So we’re seeking to deal with problems on our side of the fence and put in  place measures that will deal with that.

What Julia Gillard is potentially talking about is having people seeking asylum all  through the region and beyond being drawn to a magnet of a centre, where she  proposed East Timor and that’s why the East Timorese have said, have been in  particularly, so concerned about the proposal. And you can only have a regional  processing centre if those who are hosting it are prepared to take those seeking asylum  from other parts in the region to that centre and East Timor has made it pretty clear  that that’s not something they’re interested in and that’s why this policy has  unravelled. They have not thought through the consequences of what they’ve actually  floated out there.

TONY ABBOTT: Ok. Any more questions?

QUESTION:     On environment policy, to cover emissions trading, do you think Julia  Gillard will put that issue to bed before she calls an election?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, what we’ve seen from the Government over the last couple  of weeks is a sustained attempt to adopt ‘me too’ policies. They essentially embraced  the Coalition’s critique of the mining tax proposal, they’ve tried to embrace, in a very

incompetent way, aspects of the Coalition’s policy on border protection and now it  seems that they’re going to try to embrace aspects of our policy on emissions  reduction. Now, there’s a sense in which I’m flattered by the political copycatting

which is going on here, but I think it is indicative of a government which has truly lost  its way, truly lost its way.

Now, she said that she had to replace the former prime minister because the  Government had lost its way. It had lost its way because it was failing to consult, it  was failing to observe due process. What we’ve seen since the transition is just more  failure to consult, more failure to observe due process. But fundamentally, what we’re  seeing is a Labor Party that is pretending to be the Liberal Party in the lead up to an  election and obviously it will just revert to type after an election and people know the  Labor type. The Labor type is all spin, no substance, constantly re-announcing things  and hoping by the time you make the new announcement, people have forgotten that  you’ve failed to deliver on the old announcement. When things get bad, when  Newspoll indicates you’re in trouble, execute the leader and hope that people will  believe that this is a fresh start.

Well, I think the public are seeing through this. I think they’ve been conned to often  by Labor and I don’t think they’re going to get conned again.

Thanks so much. Thank you.

