Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Friday 19th February 2010

Subjects: Another illegal boat arrival, Christmas Island, SIEV 36 inquiry



EandOE



RAY HADLEY: Another boatload of illegal immigrants have been intercepted off the

Ashmore Island last night, the 13th boat to arrive in Australian waters this year, 41

passengers, 4 crew stopped around 6.30pm, 22 nautical miles north west of the island. The

illegal boat people are now taken to Christmas Island for security, health and identity checks.

The Shadow Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison is on the line. G’day Scott.



SCOTT MORRISON: G’day Ray, how are you?



RAY HADLEY: Good. Just before we get to that I have got an email here I wanted to share

with you, just came in. A gentleman says I got a phone call from my nephew who has been

given a three month government contract to travel to Christmas Island, for he and his

partner, and I guess other qualified professionals, will be assessing the mental health of

Kevin’s refugees. I asked him what he will be looking for in their mental health, he said a lot

of these people have been traumatized by war, have lost family and friends and the

overcrowding is not helping their mental state. He further added that he was going there to

tick and cross those who can come into the country, there was another process. I asked the

question that he didn’t want me to ask, I said, how much are you getting paid? He said

‘heaps’. An example, $150 per day, per person as meal allowances, enough to travel abroad

without working for six months, he explained to me. I read from this that we can expect a

heavy influx of refugees into the mainland shortly. Other parts of the conversation can’t be

repeated because of the foul language involved when I discussed it with my nephew. So we

just don’t know how much we are having to spend up there, do we?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well it’s expensive but my best guess Ray, both from what we went

through with Senate Estimates the other week was that each additional person costs around

$80,000 just to have them up there on Christmas Island based on the extra money they

asked for, when things started getting out of control. So it is expensive when additional

people start turning up, you do have to fly additional mental health nurses up, you do have to

fly additional assessors up and there’s all the other recreation activities and various other

things that go on. It becomes a very expensive exercise when it is out of control. If it is a

small population, it is manageable.



RAY HADLEY: Ok. Specifically why I wanted to talk to you is the story today in all the

publications about the deaths of the 5 people on board that boat in April of last year and the

fact that the coroner or the counsel assisting the coroner has identified three men as acting

in concert in implementing a plan to sabotage the boat and then the fact that the 35, 36 or 37

other people have now recanted on statements they gave to police, are not co-operating in

any way, shape or form in order to convict anyone who may be charged down the track.

These people are all in Australia because of the circumstances, the government brought

them straight here on visas, including the three alleged murders.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right. The Minister gave all of them permanent protection visas

last year and if they are charged they will have to go and find them, they are somewhere in

Australia and the Minister also had the opportunity to knock back these visas on character

grounds, not something he ever seems to do. So, it’s just another example, whether it’s that

issue, whether it’s how you handle the Oceanic Viking, it comes to this issue Ray, they’re

hearts are just not in it. I mean they talk the talk but when it comes to what needs to be

actually done, and that means not giving visas to someone who might be suspected of

murder, it’s a very serious issue…



RAY HADLEY: Well everyone, particularly those in authority, only had to speak to the ADF,

the Australian Defence Force and they would have know the fire, the explosion, was lit by

someone on the boat. Why then would you give 40 people protection visas to come here

knowing that one, two, three or ten of them were responsible for the deaths of five others?



SCOTT MORRISON: It is a very good question and I can’t answer you Ray because the

government is the ones who gave them those visas. I mean they didn’t even look at giving

them a bridging visa or some other form of visa which would have made things conditional.

You raise another important point there and that is, to what extent are people co-operating

with the Federal Police and others in their inquiries to find people smugglers, to get to the

heart of issues like this. When people are on Christmas Island there is an obvious

opportunity to collect an enormous amount of intelligence. Now we’ve had 3,600 people

show up since August 08, that’s quite a lot of stories that should be there to be telling us

where these people are and how we can shut the business down.



RAY HADLEY: One would imagine. Thanks for your time as always.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks Ray.

