

Transcript: Julia Gillard Interview with Triple M  Melbourne  Julia Gillard posted Thursday, 19 August 2010

HOST: Nine minutes to eight, Triple M’s Hot Breakfast. Forget about asylum seekers,  National Broadband Network. Last night the biggest issue of the campaign was finally  brought to the fore and let’s have a listen to Julia Gillard last night:

PM: I’m a Western Bulldogs girl, maybe a unity ticket we can be on is we can all hate  Collingwood and I think that that’s fair enough isn’t it?

HOST: Now she had been asked if she would defect to the Brisbane Lions to make up for the  Kevin Rudd scenario but it’s interesting Ed, your Collingwood army has responded and  they’ve responded passionately:

Collingwood supporter: ‘What an absolute muppet, there goes about 60 to 100,000 votes that  Julia just lost.’

Collingwood supporter: ‘Up until this morning I had no idea, I thought it was just same  rubbish, different shovel but after hearing Ms Gillard against the Pies I’m sorry Ms Gillard  I’m way against you now.

HOST: Julie Bishop got on the line straight away and she said, declared her intentions  without any clarity required at all:

(Excerpt from earlier)

Bishop: Look I’m a politician, I’ve got no principles. Collingwood for me.

HOST: Julie we’re going to mark you down for $25 mill for the Westpac redevelopment  which is fantastic -

Bishop: Do you think I should ring Tony Abbott this morning? I think I’ve just done  something to the budget. Do you think I should ring Tony?

HOST: Ah doesn’t matter -

HOST: Just do it -

HOST: All the figures are rubbery anyway Julie

HOST: I’m politician, I’ve got no morals says Julie Bishop. Well the Prime Minister of  Australia, Julia Gillard has now phoned in and she joins us on the Hot Breakfast. Julia I’ve  got a little upset -

HOST: I’m not talking to her.

HOST: ALP boy.

HOST: He’s a sad little boy here.

PM: Oh Eddy, I know I’m in heaps and heaps of trouble but you know I’m a politician with  principles so I had to stick with my Bulldogs, had to do that.

HOST: That’s ok what we want you to do is pay the principle for Collingwood-

PM: And I think you should probably take it as a compliment that Collingwood is the team to  beat this year so they’re the team we hate while we’re watching them win. That’s alright isn’t  it?

HOST: Don’t wind me up (laughter)

HOST: Well what he wants to know is are you going to match the Julie Bishop offer?

HOST: I’ve got twenty-five on the table for the Westpac redevelopment which is going to go  of course into netball and for women’s activities down there and for safety for women around  the tan track. All those sorts of things close and dear to your heart Julia.

PM: Oh look it is close and dear to my heart, Eddie I’m going to keep talking to you about it  but you know the difference between my side of politics and the Liberals is we’re doing the  budget right and it all adds up. There’s is full of rubbery figures that’s why I don’t go around  saying yes to things when people ask me for them.

HOST: Julia I don’t mind if you take it from somewhere else.

PM: But it’s a question of where-

HOST: Oh take it out of education, the kids leave school anyway-

PM: Eddie, Eddie you can’t do that. I see today that Tony Abbott wants to take a billion  dollars out of our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme so the price of medicine goes up. You’ve  got to be careful where you take those cuts back, you can hurt people a lot.

HOST: Tony wants to be the only bloke on drugs does he?

HOST: Hey Julia I reckon you summed it up superbly. She’s a real hardcore supporter Julia,  doesn’t jump on the bandwagon and pretends she follows footy, she’s loved the Bulldogs all  their way. We love you Julia, don’t worry about that and you’ve mobilised everyone else  because we did, now I reckon this email sums it up Julia. Adrian’s just emailed the Hot  Breakfast here and he says: ‘Hey Eddie, firstly don’t waste your money on how to vote cards,  most Collingwood supporters can’t read anyway -

PM: Ooh.

HOST: ‘also if the Libs get in it’s on your head. You’re probably better off voting for the  Dental Party, your supporters would benefit greatly.’ That’s from Adrian there -

PM: There you go, well I certainly wouldn’t say that about Collingwood supporters, that’s  not right. Heavens above.

HOST: Julia, we’re going to make a pledge, we won’t vote informally when we get to the  ballot box at Collingwood but what we will do is we won’t rob people’s houses while they’re  voting if we get the dough.

(laughter)

PM: Eddie what a remarkable pledge.

HOST: Never heard that one before have you Julia?

PM: (laughter) I may have heard similar things said in the past it’s true-

HOST: Hey Julia on a half serious matter for a moment, two days to go and I’m sure even  you are starting to think: thank God for that. We’re going to speak to Joe Hockey in about  half an hour’s time, last go with us on the Hot Breakfast and we wish you all the best for the  next couple of days. As people go to the ballot box, and Luke Darcy did yesterday and cast  his vote ahead of time, what’s the last thing you want to give them on the way out the door?

PM: Very last thing I want to give people on the way out the door is: I’ve got a plan to make  sure we keep growing jobs, we did the right thing to protect jobs during the global financial  crisis, we’ve got to keep doing the right thing and if we can keep our economy strong then we  can keep investing in schools and hospitals. So my economic plan is all about skills,  infrastructure, the National Broadband Network, making sure we keep our economy strong  for the future. I’ve been talking about it all campaign. Tony Abbott, no economic plan and  when Joe Hockey comes on I think ask him why he wants to take a billion dollars out of the  Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and a billion dollars out of incentives for apprenticeships,  that’s not good enough.

HOST: Julia how are you going to celebrate if you win?

PM: Oh look I’m not thinking about that, I’m thinking about-

HOST: Keeping a lid on it Julia

PM: I’m thinking about all the campaigning hours in between now and when the ballot box  closes on Saturday, this is tough and tight, every vote counts.

HOST: Where do you cast your vote Julia?

PM: I’ll do that, obviously in Melbourne’s west. I’ll be back home.

HOST: Good on you Julia, thanks for joining us this morning for a bit of fun. We don’t take  it personally that you got up there and had a go, in fact we take it as a badge of honour for  Collingwood. It’s us against the world.

PM: Badge of pride. You, John Brumby all against the world, I know.

HOST: We’ll put you down for 25.5 just that little bit extra, just that little bit extra.

PM: And I’ll have to find the point five personally, I bet.

HOST: Thanks Julia for joining us on this morning on Triple M’s Hot Breakfast.

PM: Thanks Eddie, thanks guys.

Tags: Gillard, Julia, magpies



