



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS            BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL    (27 March 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.    HMAS Glenelg, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the vessel  during the early hours of the morning on 27 March south east of Ashmore Islands.      Initial indications suggest seven passengers and one crew member are on board the vessel.    Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for  settlement and can be targeted by, and fall prey to, people smugglers.    People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing this most  serious issue.    On Tuesday 23 March 2010, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR) released its 2009 report on Asylum Levels and Trends in Industrialised Countries. The  report highlights that the number of arrivals to Australia remains very low by world standards.     In 2009 some 377,200 asylum claims were recorded in 44 countries with Australia receiving 6,170 -  less than 2 per cent of the total asylum applications.    Australia was not alone in experiencing an increase in asylum seeker applications in 2009.  While  Australia had a 29 per cent increase, Denmark experienced a 59 per cent increase, Hungary a 50 per  cent increase, Finland a 47 per cent increase, Poland  a 47 per cent increase, Belgium a 40 per cent  increase, and New Zealand a 36 per cent increase    The Australian Government has an orderly and planned migration program and places a high priority  on protecting Australia’s borders from irregular maritime arrivals by maintaining an effective and  visible tactical response program of aerial, land and sea-based patrols.

The Australian Government’s Border Protection Command uses a combination of Customs  and Border Protection and Defence assets to deliver a coordinated national response to security  threats in Australia’s maritime domain.



The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity and  health checks and their reasons for travel will be established.

Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275  6793

