

Senator Chris Evans  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Visit of the Indonesian president and asylum seekers

Tuesday 9 March 2010

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Breakfast

FRAN KELLY: The Immigration Minister, Chris Evans joins us now. Minister,  welcome to Breakfast.

CHRIS EVANS: Good morning, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Chris Evans, what deal is being negotiated between Indonesia and  Australia at the moment in terms of the flow of asylum seekers from Indonesia?

CHRIS EVANS: Well there's nothing going on in terms of a deal Fran. There's an  ongoing relationship between us. We've got the Lombok Treaty, but we jointly chair  the Bali process, and there's ongoing work on combating people smuggling in the  region, and obviously that will be part of the discussions between the Prime Minister  and the president for the next couple of days. But there's ongoing cooperation on a  whole range of fronts.

FRAN KELLY: Would you - is it fair to say that whatever is ongoing at the moment is  not working, the Lombok Treaty, the Bali process, the Indonesian solution, whatever  you want to call it, if more than a thousand asylum seekers have arrived on  Christmas Island so far this year?

CHRIS EVANS: Well look it's working in part. Obviously we're getting good  cooperation from Indonesians. There are a lot of disruptions, a lot of people have  been intercepted, and we're getting good results out of much of the activity from  Indonesian authorities, but there's no doubt that there's a lot of activity at the  moment, a lot of people fleeing Afghanistan and Sri Lanka in particular. And we're  not, at the moment, able to prevent them all from progressing down on boats to  Australia, but that doesn't mean there's any lack of effort from Indonesians or any  lack of resolve from this government.

FRAN KELLY: So you're not critical of the robustness or otherwise of the effort by  the Indonesian authorities to stop people - if Indonesia is a jumping off point - to  stop people there at that point?

CHRIS EVANS: No, look the AFP and others tell me that their level of cooperation is  at an all time high. They've working very well together, and in fact the Indonesian  police have recently increase their resources in this area with special squads to work  on people smuggling issues, so there's no question that they're committed and  they've been closely with us, but there are enormous challenges at the moment, and  we're just trying to work with them and other countries in the regions to find answers  to the challenges imposed.

FRAN KELLY: Is one of the keys to the answer in Indonesia in your view, stiffer  prison sentences and tougher laws against people traffickers and asylum seekers  trying to leave generally? I mean is it true that Indonesia doesn't, at the moment,  have laws criminalising people smuggling?

CHRIS EVANS: Look, the Indonesians don't have a specific law that criminalises  people smuggling, and that has been an issue. They have made a commitment to try  and get a people smuggling legislation through the parliament in Indonesia this year.  We'd certainly welcome that. We think that would be very helpful. Currently…

FRAN KELLY: Without that it's a bit hopeless isn't it? I mean why would anyone care  if there's no law criminalising it?

CHRIS EVANS: Well that's not been the attitude of the Indonesian authorities. They  have certainly made every effort to disrupt people smuggling activities, but it is true  that successful prosecution and deterrents is more difficult without that legislation, so  we welcome their commitment to seek to legislate that this year. We think it would  make a huge difference if we were able to have them prosecute people smugglers in  Indonesia, but as you know we've had some people extradited to Australia to face  charges here. We hope to have a couple of others extradited in the near future, but it  certainly would be a help if Indonesia was to pass people smuggling legislation.

FRAN KELLY: If negotiations are ongoing between Australian and Indonesian  officials - and I'm sure it'll be the subject of talks with the Prime Minister and his  Indonesian counterpart - what is the - is there a single policy effort or key that you  would like to see discussed or agreed upon that might make a difference?

CHRIS EVANS: Look Fran, I think people have got to understand there's no silver  bullet to this issue. This is a worldwide problem. Europe, Canada, America are all  facing challenges from people smuggling and unlawful movement of people and it's  not going to go away anytime soon. You've got to have a range of responses, and  what we've learnt is you've got to have close cooperation between neighbouring  countries, the transit countries if you like, to ensure that you build effective  mechanisms to deal with it. So, we're working on all sorts of fronts with the  Indonesians under the Bali process. We're making some good progress, but there's  no silver bullet and we've just got to keep working away at these issues.

FRAN KELLY: Clearly no silver bullet and the numbers of asylum seekers seeking  refuge here are on the increase, no doubt about that. Isn't it the simple truth that if  you are a genuine refugee, in fear of your life, you arrive in this country by way of a  people smuggler, you are ultimately - will be allowed to stay, that's Australia's policy,

and as long as that's the case, no deal between governments will stop people trying  to come here will it?

CHRIS EVANS: Well that's in part true because it was also true under the Howard  Government.

FRAN KELLY: Sure.

CHRIS EVANS: One of the great myths was that the people went to Nauru et cetera  weren't settled in Australia and weren't found to be refugees and of course that's  untrue. Despite the Pacific solution most were found to be genuine refugees and  were re-settled in Australia and New Zealand largely, so that is part of our  international legal obligations and we don't have any intention of walking away from  those. But it is true, I think that the last increase in numbers, it was effectively ended  when we were able to return people to Afghanistan when the Taliban fell, and so in  large part you are dependent on what happens internationally. I think with the  improving situation in Sri Lanka, our capacity to return people to Sri Lanka will  improve, and I think we've already seen - we've returned three people voluntarily to  Sri Lanka through Tamils in recent times. So we're seeing an increase in the  numbers been found not to be refugees as the situation in Sri Lanka improves. And  so those sorts of developments will have a big impact on the situation we confront as  well. At the moment we're seeing a supply of people from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan.  Obviously improvements in those two countries will go a long way to addressing  those flows.

FRAN KELLY: In the meantime, the Federal Opposition is speaking about tougher  measures to keep asylum seekers from seeking refuge here. It's talking about plans  to make moves to push back the boats, it's also talking about some kind of an  asylum visa, a special asylum class of visa in line with what was the temporary  protection visa. Is the Government looking at toughening up its response at all?

CHRIS EVANS: Look we're certainly always open to looking at new policy options  Fran, what we've said directly we won't be doing is we won't be going back to the  situation where we had thousands of children and adults locked up in detention  camps with no hope of any resolution of their case. I mean we had, you know,  thousands of children detained for long periods of time under the previous regime. I  think Australians decided that's not the way we want to have this country run. That's  not how we want Australia to be seen. And so we've had a policy which says you  treat people with humanity, you treat people with respect, but you also seek to try  and attack people smuggling and deter people from taking those options. Now we  keep - we're committed to those policies, but equally we always look at policy  responses that would assist in meeting new challenges, the tactics of people  smugglers have changed...

FRAN KELLY: And do you have any up your sleeve then?

CHRIS EVANS: Well certainly we're always looking at policy responses, but we  won't be going down the path which the Liberal Party are now entertaining, which is  going back to punishing people, punishing people who have been found to be

refugees. That's not the answer, that's what they seem to be flirting with again, and  we certainly will reject that.

FRAN KELLY: And just meanwhile, you say this issue's not going to go away  anytime soon which means Christmas Island is just going to get fuller and fuller. It  was a detention facility originally designed to detain people in the hundreds. I think  800 was the original. Now it's up to over 1900. This is unsustainable. What is  stopping you removing some people and taking them to the Darwin Detention Centre  now?

CHRIS EVANS: Well Fran, what we're doing is we've expanded capacity on  Christmas Island, that's right. I mean John Howard knew this would occur so he built  an 800 bed detention centre. We've increased capacity. We've made it clear we'd do  this, but we...

FRAN KELLY: We've had a thousand arrive this year.

CHRIS EVANS: But we've also made it clear that if we need more capacity we'll use  the Darwin Detention Centre that was but by the Howard Government for that  purpose, so we've got that...

FRAN KELLY: Are you reluctant to do that, because bringing people to the mainland  gives them extra legal avenues?

CHRIS EVANS: No Fran, the situation is that if they've landed at Christmas Island  and begun their processing there, they're still offshore entry persons, and so the  legal regime that applies there stays with them if they come to the mainland, so that's  not an issue. If we need to, we'll bring them ashore to Darwin. At the moment we've  got enough capacity. It makes sense for us to process them there, but I've made it  clear from the very start that if we need th Darwin capacity we'll use it.

FRAN KELLY: Chris Evans, thanks very much for joining us.

CHRIS EVANS: My pleasure, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Chris Evans is the Immigration Minister.



See:  Index of speeches and transcripts

URL: http://www.minister.immi.gov.au /media/speeches/2010/ce100309.htm   Last update: 09 March 2010 at 17:02 AEST



