Laurie Ferguson MP

Parliamentary Secretary for Multicultural Affairs and Settlement  Services

$3 million to enhance South Australian settlement  services  7 June 2010

Providing refugee and migrant youth a homework club and leadership internship  opportunities is just one excellent example of the important work agencies funded  under the settlement grants program undertake, the Parliamentary Secretary for  Multicultural Affairs and Settlement Services, Laurie Ferguson, said today.

As part of $3 million settlement grants program (SGP) funding allocated to South  Australia, the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) will provide $129  000 to Australian Refugee Association (ARA) in Adelaide.

'ARA provides individual and intensive homework support to high school age  migrants and refugees and the opportunity to develop leadership skills through a  mentoring program,' Mr Ferguson said.

'Among the issues we face in settling refugee youth into Australia is school  engagement and identifying young leaders to rise up into the community.

'Projects such as this provide assistance for high school youth to engage in their  schooling and to build new support networks as well as the confidence to advocate  for their families and communities.'

During the 2010-11 financial year, DIAC’s settlement grants program will provide $3  million towards 18 projects that will help new arrivals to settle into South Australia.

Some of the successful applicant organisations include migrant resource centres,  multicultural service agencies and community and welfare organisations.

'The many projects supported by the settlement grants program will help migrants  and refugees to settle successfully into their new communities, promoting social  participation and assisting in their cultural transition into Australia,' Mr Ferguson said.

A complete list of successful applicants in the 2010-11 funding round is available on  the DIAC website.  See: Settlement Grants Program

'I commend all organisations for their contribution to the successful settlement of  migrants and refugees in South Australia,' Mr Ferguson said.

