UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS



BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL

(28 April 2010)  Border Protection Command successfully intercepted a suspected irregular entry  vessel late last night.

HMAS Wollongong, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the  vessel during the evening on 27 April north of West Islet near Ashmore Island.

Initial indications suggest 50 passengers and four crew are on board the vessel.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity and  health checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.

The Australian Government has changed the asylum seeker processing system, effective 9 April 2010,  and suspended the processing of claims for Sri Lankans and Afghans for at least three and six months  respectively as situations in both countries are evolving.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing this most  serious issue.  Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and Malaysia have led to  positive steps forward in bilateral and regional cooperation to deter people smuggling.

The Australian Federal Police continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in  their efforts to combat people smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships  have resulted in a number of arrests and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such as  Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.

As a direct result of these strong working relationships, since September 2008, in Indonesia there have  been 142 identified disruptions; 3,689 foreign nationals detained by Indonesian authorities; and 74  arrests of facilitators/organisers.



Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793



