







THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS





TRANSCRIPT





E&OE PROOF ONLY



6PR Mornings with Simon Beaumont

Friday, 9 July 2010

Topics: Proposed regional immigration processing centre; Charles Zentai

SIMON BEAUMONT: Joining me on the program now is the Minister for Home Affairs  Brendan O'Connor. Minister thank you for your time this morning.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good to be with you.

SIMON BEAUMONT: Brendan, just listening to the PM in the last couple of days with  regards East Timor, it was - I think it would be fair to say that it was very much a centrepiece  of her announcements of border protection and immigration policy. It would appear there's  been some softening by the East Timorese. If this falls over, this notion of basing a  processing camp there, is there a plan B for your government?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look we have a current system in place that does two main things.  Firstly it intercepts vessels successfully and processes people and also we have places for  people to be properly determined as to whether they're refugees. If they're not they go home,  if they are they can be settled.   Now that's what goes on now, so that's happening.   But what we need for the longer term, and that's why the Prime Minister indicated on  Tuesday the need to have a regional approach, is we need an arrangement with our partners in  the region and that's what we're looking to do now. And I have to say whilst, you know,  you've characterised it as being a change or a softening, the fact is we have now the Prime  Minister and the President of Timor saying that they want to sit down and go through the  detail of the centre and I think that's a good thing and it's the next logical step.

SIMON BEAUMONT : One of the reasons that the party room and probably the Australian  public to an extent fell out of love with Kevin Rudd was that he would make a policy  announcement first and consult later. Take the mining tax for example. Has Julia Gillard done  that in this instance with East Timor?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I don't believe so. I think that's an unfair characterisation. I  mean on Tuesday she'd indicated she's spoken to President Horta and she talked about the  possibility of setting up a centre and that was the case. And since then the President of East  Timor has spoken with his Prime Minister and they've both now said they want to talk about  the detail but, you know, if we had tried to do everything undercover people would have said  we weren't explaining it to the Australian people.   She wanted to be very clear. We needed a regional approach. I have engaged with partners in  the region, we are now going to be talking on the detail with the President of East Timor,  with the authority of the Prime Minister of that country.

SIMON BEAUMONT: All right, well we'll see how it plays out. Minister, I did want to ask  you while we have the opportunity about Charles Zentai. The Federal Court ruling on Friday  means that he won't be extradited to Hungary. Do you propose to appeal that decision?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I'll be receiving advice on that. The decision of the court was  clear. We'll seek advice on the reasoning, it's over 100 pages, the decision. Until I've received  that advice I can't really decide whether there should be an appeal or not and it's something I  will closely consider...

SIMON BEAUMONT: Are you just...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: ...having looked at the facts and received legal advice from the  Department of the Attorney-General.

SIMON BEAUMONT: Are you disappointed with the decision?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No. I think the decision is, you know, entirely up to the court. The  court will determine the matter on the facts and of course it's made its decision. There are  appellate processes in place if required but I will receive advice from my department before  making a decision.

SIMON BEAUMONT: Well you're - it is - but it is your - it was your decision to proceed on  advice from the Commonwealth DPP and your department. You've seen a frail West  Australian man incarcerated in Hakea Prison for a couple of months and I think it's a fair  question to ask, why keep pursuing him? What is the advice that's coming to you that  demands or compels you to keep pursuing him?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well as I've said, this matter is before a court. I consider the matter  in accordance with my obligations. I will look at the decision and look at the court orders that  - once they're determined and I'll consider whether an appeal is to be made.   And that's my obligation, pursuant to the Act and pursuant to the international arrangements.  I'm acting in accordance with the law and I'm acting, I can assure you, with due diligence on  this matter.

SIMON BEAUMONT: But Mr O'Connor, you're also a Minister of the Crown and surely it's  required of you to justify your decisions. You wouldn't talk about why you were proceeding  and now you're not - now you're using this legal process to again dodge the questions of why  you keep pursuing Charles Zentai.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I'm sure you understand the situation I'm in. It's not about  dodging any questions. The matter's before the court. There's a very lengthy decision and I'll  be looking at the reasoning for the decision, receiving advice as to whether the matter will be  appealed or not.

SIMON BEAUMONT: And that advice will come from the Commonwealth DPP and your  department?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It will come from the Attorney General's Department.

SIMON BEAUMONT: All right. Mr O'Connor thank you for your time today.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Not at all. Thanks so much.

SIMON BEAUMONT: Brendan O'Connor, the Minister for Home Affairs.







