Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Transcript - ABC Lateline

Tuesday 6th April 2010

Subjects: Population, migration, asylum seekers, illegal boat arrivals, Malcolm Turnbull



LEIGH SALES, PRESENTER: The shadow minister for Immigration Scott Morrison joined

me a short time ago in the studio.



Scott Morrison, good to have you with us in person.



SCOTT MORRISON, OPPOSITION IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP SPOKESMAN: Hi,

Leigh. Good to see you.



LEIGH SALES: The federal Population Minister Tony Burke has said on the 7.30 Report

tonight that he'll consider whether the Government needs to impose tighter rules on where

new migrants can live.



What does the Coalition think of that that idea?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, what we're seeing from the Government on this issue is they're

trying to move the deck chairs around when it comes to population and they're not really

confronting the big question is, which is: how many people should be coming?



What should be the size of the population? What's the carrying capacity?



This sort of harks back a bit to Tom Uren and centres policies and things of this nature,

governments thinking they can just sort of move people around at will.



It's a lot easier in theory than it is in practice and I think it presents real problems.



So, I think the Government needs to start focusing on what the actual numbers are and

what's sustainable and then work back from there.



LEIGH SALES: On the numbers, you've been using a figure talking about population growth

called the net overseas migration figure and you say that for Australia it's 300,000. Where's

that figure from?



SCOTT MORRISON: It's from the ABS statistics, Australian demographic statistics and our

population is made up of all those people who are here for 12 months or more and our

population growth is our net overseas migration plus our natural increase.



And more than two thirds of our population increase is due to net overseas migration.



LEIGH SALES: On those ABS figures, as you say, when they collate that net overseas

migration figure it includes anyone who's been here for 12 months or more.



So that includes students who are studying in Australia. That is a very major and growing

component of that figure.



Do you think then if you need to reduce that figure that the Government needs to reduce or

freeze the number of overseas students coming to Australia?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think these are all the options that are obviously out there.



We're talking about a current intake now of 300,000, with 75,000 per quarter on average

since this Government was elected.



And we need to look at the whole program. The permanent migration program is around

180,000, and you have those here on temporary.



We have those who come, you know, about 30,000 who come from New Zealand.



LEIGH SALES: So you think it should all be on the table?



SCOTT MORRISON: All of these things need to be on the table. The one area, obviously,

we said we'd quarantined would be the refugee and humanitarian area because it's a very

small number as a percentage of the total, and so we would obviously do that. But across

the table, you need to look at what the intake is.



LEIGH SALES: But if you put overseas students on the table with everything else, that

industry's worth $17.2 billion a year to Australia, it creates 126,000 jobs.



At what cost to the economy would you be cutting these numbers?



SCOTT MORRISON: Look, there are hard decisions to be made right across the board.

We've got a current intake of 300,000. Now all of those 300,000 use roads, catch buses, go

on trains, drink water, all of those things and so we need to understand the impact right

across the board of our program.



The Government themselves have made changes to the education visa area in the wake of

things like the Baird report and others and I'm sure that will have an impact on those

numbers.



But we have a long ground to make up to get from 300,000 where we are now to 180,000

which is what the Intergenerational Report says.



And in our view, we think that 36 million figure that will producing is concerning and we'll

probably need to go further.



LEIGH SALES: Sticking to that ABS figure again of the 300,000. As you pointed out, a third

of that is accounted for by natural increases - births minus deaths.



SCOTT MORRISON: Oh, no, that's in addition.



LEIGH SALES: Oh, sorry; you're right, you're right. In addition to that. So the overall

population growth, it's about 450,000, so there's 150,000 due to natural increase.



To be consistent then, as well as cutting migration, don't you have to encourage people not

to have as many children if you want the population to slow?



SCOTT MORRISON: No, I think they're two different issues. The Coalition's always been

very supportive of Australians having families and growing their families.



LEIGH SALES: But you pointed out those infrastructure issues before and they don't discern

- water and roads and all of the rest of it don't discern between people born here and people

coming here.



SCOTT MORRISON: No, but you start with natural increase and see where you're going

with natural increase and then your migration program is supposed to supplement that to the

degree your economy and your society requires that increase in further population.



And we believe that that migration program needs to be very focused on skills, on what can

be added in terms of improving our productive capacity, which can improve our productivity

and to drive our economy which improves the overall well-being for all Australians.



LEIGH SALES: Business and industry leaders have not welcomed the Coalition's statements

on migration, saying that a reduction would lead to higher interest rates because wages will

go up for skilled workers, that we rely on skilled workers to deal with demand for Australian

resources. What do you say to them?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that's why the Coalition will be focused on ensuring a strong

presence for skilled migration as part of any program.



When we were in government we inherited a permanent migration system which less than

30 per cent of the intake was skilled migration.



We built that to just under 70 per cent. Now under this Government it's fallen back below two

thirds.



And we believe at least two thirds of the permanent intake for migration should be skilled

and there should retain a very strong focus on skilled migration.



LEIGH SALES: We've been relying on those ABS figures, but the Department of Immigration

uses a different measure when it talks about population.



It doesn't include people like students or workers who are here temporarily for that sort of 12

months or beyond.



It uses net permanent migration, the number of people permanently arriving in Australia

minus the number of people permanently leaving.



For 2008-2009 that figure was 77,000. Isn't that a more accurate figure to use?



SCOTT MORRISON: No, because the figure we're talking about is 36 million and 36 million

people are 36 million people who are going to be here for 12 months or more and that's the

official population statistic.



LEIGH SALES: But you've been talking today about the rate of increase and isn't it fairer to

look at the rate of permanent people living in Australia rather than the people who come and

go for a 12 month period?



SCOTT MORRISON: But that's the demand on our resources. I mean, people who are here

for 12 months or more, many of them still send their kids to school, they still go to hospitals,

they still ride on buses and trains.



LEIGH SALES: But that comes back to my point that so do people who are born here.



SCOTT MORRISON: No, but my argument is and the Coalition's argument is natural

increase is where you start and the migration program is there to supplement.



It's not the starting point, it is there in addition to. Now, natural increase we've always

encouraged.



As a result of good strong natural increase, we will be less reliant on a migration program to

fulfill our population growth targets.



Now - so I think they're very much two separate issues and I think driven by two very

different forces.



LEIGH SALES: Do you think that the Australian public considers that people who are here

studying temporarily are part of the population?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well whether they do or not they're counted in the figures. We have 22

million people here in the country at the moment which includes all of those who are on this

12 month or more arrangement.



And as I said, they all consume the resources which governments have to provide for. And

so that all impacts on the services that we can all access as Australians.



So I think it's very relevant and a population policy that seeks to just narrow cast into one

area rather than looking at the full spectrum of pressures I think is deficient.



LEIGH SALES: If we could turn to the issue of asylum seekers. Of people who come to

Australia by boat, nine out of 10 of them are classified as genuine refugees.



Given that, does the bar need to be raised? Do the tests need to be harder?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well this is something the Coalition is concerned about and particularly

with the pressures that are there on Christmas Island and the Government's need to get

people off Christmas Island because more people are arriving.



When you look around the world, the rejection rate statistics vary markedly and I think one of

the things that needs to be done internationally is to get a better understanding and better

objectivity about making these assessments.



LEIGH SALES: So is it too easy then to be classified as a refugee if you're coming to

Australia?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well at the end of the day, and I was there in Christmas Island as you

know in January and I spoke to the assessors and in many cases it's a subjective judgment

based on the balance of probabilities.



And particularly when people are discarding their identity documentation, at the end of the

day, people have to make a judgment whether the story rings true or not without any sort of

hard evidence to base those decisions on. So I think that presents real pressures and

problems.



LEIGH SALES: So are you saying our approach is too lax?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well what I'm saying is I think there are enormous pressures on

making these judgments and when you've got arrivals at the rate they are today, which is the

highest level on record, then I think that's putting a lot more stress on the system, as ASIO

just said a week or so ago when they said they're having to divert resources from the checks

they're doing on others looking to migrate to Australia to focus on this issue at Christmas

Island.



LEIGH SALES: But how would you tighten it up? How would you go about addressing those

pressures?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think ensuring people have documentation is a key requirement.

Now people say, "Well, they don't have the documentation." You gotta remember that those

who are coming in the vast majority of cases are coming through other countries.



They're on their way along a route from Pakistan or Iran through to Malaysia and Indonesia

and they're flying into these countries, and the Sri Lankans in particular were flying into

countries. Now, you need documentation to get into these countries.



And somehow between there and Australia that documentation goes missing. Now, that

raises concerns from our perspective and we're looking at policy remedies as to how you

would deal with that if we were in government.



LEIGH SALES: Regardless of your concerns about that, at the moment it is that nine out of

10 people are considered to be legitimate refugees who come by boat.



If we're not interested in taking that many refugees, do we need to assess our commitment

to some of the international treaties that we're a signatory to?



SCOTT MORRISON: I think Australians are fair-minded, generous people and I think our

intake of 13,500 is a generous, but I think a fair-minded thing for us to commit to.



The problem is that those who are coming by boat in this manner are literally taking places

of others. Now I'm aware of a case involving - there was an Australian journalist and there

were three other women who were put in jail in Afghanistan and now they're in a UN refuge

in Pakistan.



Now they have been told - they've been assessed by the UNHCR as having refugee status.

They've been told by the Australian Government that our quota is full because of the

unauthorised arrivals.



Now that's the real life situation of three women who deserve to have their opportunity to

come here who are being denied because others have come by boat.



LEIGH SALES: Let's turn briefly to Malcolm Turnbull's announcement today that he won't be

recontesting the seat of Wentworth at the next election.



As a former state director of the party in New South Wales, how difficult is it going be for the

Liberals to hold that seat?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, Wentworth can never be taken for granted and Malcolm never

did. He worked very hard as a local member, first to win the seat and to hold the seat in

2004.



And so I'm sure Malcolm would be the first to tell whoever might seek to succeed him as the

Liberal candidate in Wentworth that it's a tough road.



LEIGH SALES: And what particular challenges does that seat present?



SCOTT MORRISON: Oh, I think it's a very eclectic seat, it's a very dynamic seat. The

population is very diverse, a vast arrange of people from many different backgrounds and

many different age groups, a lot of itinerant population in that seat.



LEIGH SALES: So you might need somebody economically conservative, yet socially liberal

- a bit like Malcolm Turnbull.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, look, I think the pre-selectors will make that decision about who it

will be.



But it is a seat that also has I think high expectations of their members and people like

Malcolm in the past, and John Hewson was a former leader from that seat and, you know,

it's a seat which has high expectations.



LEIGH SALES: What does it say about the Liberal Party that it couldn't accommodate

somebody of Malcolm Turnbull's talent?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well I don't think that's what it says at all. I think Malcolm came to the

Liberal Party, he was preselected, he made a very big contribution.



LEIGH SALES: So why is he out so quickly?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that's Malcolm's decision. He's decided to go on and do other

things.



LEIGH SALES: What do you think?



SCOTT MORRISON: It's really only for Malcolm to say.



LEIGH SALES: Does Malcolm Turnbull wear any of the blame for it himself?



SCOTT MORRISON: You'd have to ask Malcolm.



LEIGH SALES: I'm asking your opinion as a member of the parliamentary party.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, look, I honestly do think that's for Malcolm to answer. I mean, he

made a great contribution while he was there. He's an incredibly intellectually powerful

individual who I think inspired many people within our parliamentary ranks and was a great

encouragement to them.



And so, I wish him well and to Lucy and we're sad to see him go, but life goes on and I'm

sure there'll be another big chapter in the Malcolm Turnbull story down the track.



LEIGH SALES: Scott Morrison, thank you very much for coming in.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thank you, Leigh.



