Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release

Coalition rejects Prime Minister's 36 million population target

Thursday 29th April 2010

JOIN STATEMENT WITH LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION HON. TONY ABBOTT



A Coalition Government will set target bands for future population growth informed by an

expanded Productivity Commission.

Since the Rudd Government came to office, net overseas migration has averaged over

300,000 a year. By contrast, in the last seven quarters of the Howard Government, net

overseas migration was just over 200,000 a year.

Despite the economic slowdown and the Global Financial Crisis, Prime Minister Rudd has

presided over immigration numbers that have increased nearly 50 per cent even on the

boom times associated with the former government.

Without any stated rationale, the Prime Minister has repeatedly endorsed a projected 50 per

cent plus population increase to 36 million by 2050 based on a net immigration rate of

180,000 newcomers every year.

However, if immigration continued at Mr Rudd’s current rate of 300,000 newcomers every

year, Australia’s population should reach 32 million within just 20 years and no less than 42

million by 2050. Plainly, Australian governments are not adding to our housing, health,

educational and transport infrastructure the equivalent of the city of Canberra every year.

The Coalition will seek to restore public confidence in the integrity of our migration program,

by ensuring that it is consistent with a sustainable population growth path.

Decisions about immigration numbers should take into account regularly updated expert

advice about projected future population numbers and whether planned infrastructure is

likely to be able to cope.

Within three months of taking office, a Coalition government would re-constitute the

Productivity Commission as the Productivity and Sustainability Commission and task it with

an annual review of Australia’s infrastructure needs for short, medium and long term

projected population numbers.

The key elements of the Coalition policy directions statement, released today, are to:

1. Establish a credible and independent source of advice on population growth - through the

extension of the role of the Productivity Commission to advise on population sustainability

issues. Decisions about the annual migration intake would be informed by this work. A future

Coalition government would be guided by Productivity and Sustainability Commission

recommendations about whether future infrastructure bottlenecks and environmental

pressures were being addressed.

2. Listen to Australians - through an independent inquiry to be undertaken by the

Commission to establish a new benchmark of community attitudes on where to go from here

on future population growth.

3. Establish a population growth band target - developed on the basis of Commission advice

to inform migration planning that takes into account our capacity to handle growth in areas

such as infrastructure delivery, water, energy and food security and environmental

sustainability.

4. Increase transparency in decision making - by introducing population planning into the

Budget Process.

5. Support Australian business - by ensuring skills migration remains the primary focus of

our migration intake.

Australians are already feeling the growing pains of increased population pressures. We

simply cannot sign up Australia blind, as Kevin Rudd has done, to a population of 36 million

by 2050. Australia’s population is already growing at one of the highest rates in the

developed world, with one person being added to our population every seventy seconds.

A “big Australia” is not necessarily the same as a stronger and more prosperous Australia.

Congestion in our cities, limitations on our energy supply, threats to food and water security,

unaffordable housing and eroding standards in our hospitals and schools are all causing

Australians to ask questions about how current needs will be met, let alone the needs of

Kevin Rudd’s “big Australia”.

Australians can have no confidence that Kevin Rudd will deliver the infrastructure required to

support his “big Australia”. A Prime Minister who breaks his election promises, who can’t

safely put insulation into roofs, who can’t build school halls and who flip-flops on major policy

issues cannot be trusted to get this right.

The Coalition welcomes migrants and supports a non-discriminatory immigration policy

based firmly on Australia’s national interest and informed by changing economic conditions.

Largely because the former Government boosted economic migration over family reunion

migration and virtually stopped the arrival of boat people, public concerns about immigration

were halved. By contrast, the Rudd Government has shattered public confidence in our

immigration programme by dramatically boosting immigration numbers and losing control of

our borders.



