1





LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

20 July 2010

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR    REMARKS AT THE OPENING OF THE CAMPAIGN OFFICE OF LIBERAL  CANDIDATE FOR DEAKIN, MR PHIL BARRESI  RINGWOOD



E&OE……………………….………………………………………………………………………………..

TONY ABBOTT:

Ok well, ladies and gentlemen, it is such a thrill to be here in the heart of Deakin, opening Phil Barresi’s  campaign office with Helen Kroger, who has done so much to keep the local Liberal Party mobilised. Just  four weeks ago, Julia Gillard announced that the Government had lost its way. She then proceeded to do a  dodgy deal on mining, she did a dodgy deal with East Timor, that never really came to anything. She then  gave a speech on economic credibility, hijacked by Kevin Rudd, courtesy of Laurie Oakes. She told us she  was going to sort out her climate change policies, couldn’t come to an agreement that she was prepared to  announce to the Australian public and then, after three weeks of complete bungling, she rushes to an election  before it can get any worse. This is the most incompetent government in Australia’s living memory. This is a  government which is worse than Gough Whitlam’s Government and it does not deserve to be re-elected.  That, in the end, is what this election is about. Do we deserve competent government in this country and the  answer is yes.

And I have a very simple message to the Australian people. If you want to stop the boats, you’ve got to  change the government. If you want to end the new taxes, you’ve got to change the government. If you want  a competent team at the top, you’ve got to change the government, because this government doesn’t get it on  the economy and their mad desire to impose more taxes on our most successful industries is proof that they  just don’t get it when it comes to the economy, but they don’t even get it when it comes to democracy. And  wheeling in the faceless men of the factions to execute an elected prime minister, however bad that prime  minister might have been going, he was elected by the people and he deserved to face their judgement, not  to be executed in the dead of night by the factional and the union warlords.

And what we’ve seen since then is a pattern of evasion, of responsibility by the Prime Minister, when she  was asked by Laurie Oakes about her fateful role that night, she said look, nothing to do with me, can’t  answer any questions, all confidential, but this is a pattern of conduct from the Prime Minister. When she’s  asked today about the Green preference deal, she says nothing to do with me, I did no deal, and yet, just as  she was the beneficiary of the union deal to get rid of Kevin Rudd, she wants to be the beneficiary of the  Green deal which will give us, make no mistake about it, a higher mining tax and a carbon tax. That’s what  this Green preference deal is about. It’s about a carbon tax and what is that, but a great big new tax on  everything.

Now, it’s very important that this country be saved from a great big new tax on everything that the Prime  Minister has agreed with the Greens but won’t talk to us about. What did Cabinet come up with that day  when it discussed climate change? Why did she not talk about what the Cabinet had decided, instead of

2

coming out the next day to talk about school uniforms instead? Everyone was promised a fix on climate  change to follow the so-called fix on the mining tax and the so-called fix on boat people. Instead, we get this  talk about uniforms. Well, that’s nice. But what really went on in Cabinet? I bet they weren’t talking about  school uniforms for several hours. They were talking about climate change and now we are seeing the  results of all of this in the Green preference deal and the coming carbon tax. That is now front and centre of  this campaign, the coming carbon tax, if the Labor Party gets elected, as part of the price it’s paid to get this  deal with the Greens.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, if we want to stop the carbon tax, we’ve got to vote for Phil Barresi as Member  for Deakin. Now, I’ve known Phil for a long time. We were colleagues for 12 years almost, in the  Parliament. I know that to lose an election is a devastating business. I know how I felt after the 2007 election  and I held my seat. For Phil to come back into politics, for Phil to come back to the people of Deakin shows  that there is no one with a stronger commitment to the vocation of public service than Phil Barresi. This is a  tough but necessary life. The electors of Deakin need a representative who is with them, who is for them,  who is of them. It’s a tough but necessary life. Phil could easily have gone to build a whole new career after  Parliament. In fact, he had built a whole new career after Parliament as a senior advocate with the Australian  Retailers Association, but political representation still called. Service to the people of Deakin still called and  I think the people of this area are incredibly lucky to have someone who is so dedicated to them that having  given them almost 12 years, he’s know prepared to come back and give them, in effect, the rest of his  working life, should he be elected on August 21.

So ladies and gentlemen, I’m proud to call Phil Barresi a friend. He is a great servant of the Australian  people, particularly the people of Deakin and I so hope that they are represented by him, that the Australian  Parliament has him in it after the 21st of August and I think Phil Barresi deserves a mighty round of  applause.

[ends]

