

ROWAN RAMSEY MP  Member for Grey



Mining Industry and Smokers to Pay in a Weak Budget

Federal Member for Grey Rowan Ramsey said today this year’s Budget is relying on new  taxes, not tough decisions to bring it into the surplus which the Government claims will be  achieved by 2013. The Coalition believes the figures used are overly optimistic and even if  achieved it will still leave a huge debt to be paid off.

“Treasurer Wayne Swan’s budget relies heavily on imposing a $9 billon a year tax on the  mining industry and another $1 billion per annum on smokers. Rather than take tough  spending decisions, the Government has hit what it thinks are the easy targets with new taxes  to try to balance the books,” Mr Ramsey said.  “This route could prove disastrous if a proposed tax on mining companies discourages  investment.  “The new 40 percent tax on profits is levied, what is left is then taxed at the company rate of  28 percent. The effective rate is 57 percent which the Government says will not have any  effect on the mining industry or mining jobs, who are they trying to kid?   “The Government says the tax on smokers will discourage people from smoking but says the  tax on mining won’t discourage mining operations, this logic is not credible.

“Already drilling programs around Australia are being suspended, hundreds of jobs are on the  line and everyday investors are losing money through the market and their superannuation  schemes, as the world re-evaluates Australian stocks. New projects worth hundreds of  billions of dollars are on hold. Cancelled projects are lost jobs and less revenue for

Australia.”

Mr Ramsey said he was bitterly disappointed, but not surprised at the announcement the  Government had finally canned the Port Augusta MRI.   “We have fought long and hard for this service, which had been a Government commitment,”  he said.   “But once again the Rudd Government has failed to deliver citing the inability to “identify a  suitable operator.  “I have disputed this publicly on many occasions including in Parliament and met with  Minister Roxon on the issue.  “I cannot support her comments that no suitable operator could be found.

“There is at least one tenderer with the expertise, professional support and finances to install  the service.  “All they require is the Medicare operating subsidy and the Budget has removed the $1.2  million per annum previously allocated for the service.

“The government has slashed $81 million from the Natural Heritage Trust and Landcare  programs, these initiatives ploughed millions into the environment particularly benefiting  rural regions.

“We have lost $179 million from the water recycling initiative which gave residents a rebate  of $500 to install rainwater tanks or piping for grey-water use.   “This is extremely disappointing at a time when water recycling must be a high priority and  we should be encouraging people to capture and store water.

“The government say this is not a big spend budget, but it is spending big on fixing up its  mistakes, $1 billion to fix the insulation debacle, $1 billion to address the influx of asylum  seekers since the government changes to legislation, and another $1 billion for the overrun on  costs for supplying computers to schools. This is on top of an announcement last week of  spending $15m on an inquiry into wastage in the schools building program.

“Ironically the Green Loans Program has been allocated $102.7million but no longer  provides loans because of mismanagement.

“Taxpayers should be steeling themselves for a big round of Government advertising with  budget allocations of $126 million, including $30m for climate change advertising, despite  having back-flipped and  abandoned the ETS and  $38.5 m to advertise the outcomes of the

Henry Tax Review despite only adopting a handful of the 138 recommendations. It sounds a  little like a paid election advertising program, but of course that’s something Kevin Rudd said  he would not do.”

“This budget will still see Mr Rudd having to borrow more than $700 million a week to fund  the Government’s spending putting added pressure on interest rates and cost of living for  every Australian.”

Media Contact: Leonie Lloyd-Smith (08) 8633 1744  May 12, 2010

.





