Joe Hockey

Shadow Treasurer

Joe Hockey Address to the Liberal Party Federal Council

26/06/10

E&OE

When I have that odd occasion at home at night I always take the opportunity to read  a bedtime story to my children.  I have three under five.  My sons like to hear about  Thomas the Tank Engine.  Thomas always seems to go through dark tunnels, face  adversity, yet come through at the end happily picking up the children and going back  to the sheds.

My daughter, she’s obsessed with Mermaids.  The mermaids and the princesses  always seem to go through those periods of adversity but at the end of the day, it’s a  happy story.  I wasn’t to share with you today a story, but I don’t know what the  ending will be.  It is a story about the destiny of our nation and it might begin “once  upon a time”.

Once upon a time Kevin Rudd was elected to lead the nation.  He was left with a great  bounty - $45 billion in the bank, a budget surplus, 4% unemployment.  He was left  with a nation that was brimmed full of confidence about its destiny and about its role  in the world.  He was left with a nation that believed in itself.  That was confident,  certain and secure.

Kevin Rudd had a team around him.  His Deputy, Julia Gillard, she was there.   Believe it, she was there.  Julia Gillard was there for FuelWatch and GroceryWatch.   Julia Gillard was there for the bungled employee share schemes.  Julia Gillard was  there for all those Budgets that never delivered a surplus.  Julia Gillard was there for  the reckless spending.  The reckless spending on pink batts, school halls, undelivered  computers in schools - Julia Gillard was there.

And just as I predicted that Kevin Rudd would never deliver a surplus Budget - and I  was right - so too do I say to you fellow Liberals, Julia Gillard will never deliver a  surplus Budget.  Labor will never repay the debt.  And it is so important in a volatile  world, so desperately important for our small nation which relies so heavily on  investment and has done so since the first settlers arrived - it is so important that we  are seen to be a stable, reliable, certain place for investment in the fastest growing,  and some might say the most volatile, economic region in the world.

That has been our core strength.  That has been challenged by modern events.  That  has been challenged by a government that is run by amateurs.  A government that has  shown itself incapable of delivering on its promises.  In fact at various times over the  last few months on the one hand Australians have wished that Kevin Rudd had of kept  his promises, but when he did try and deliver those promises, I bet Australians wished  that he hadn’t tried.

This is a bad government.  It is root and branch to its very core a bad government.  I  know a bad government when I see it because I live in NSW.  I say to you as a first-hand witness, this is the burden of our destiny.  We as Liberals have an obligation.   Our obligation is to try and grasp the future from a bad government.  To stop a bad  government from being re-elected.  To prevent the deficits from getting worse.  To  prevent the debt from getting worse.  To prevent the deficits from getting worse.  To  take away the burden on our children to ensure that like ourselves, their dreams can  come true in a modern Australia.

It has to be done through hard work.  It has to be done with consistent principles.  It  has to be done with a steely determination to put in place policies that are going to get  us back on track.  My colleague Andrew Robb and I have outlined the most  significant savings ever outlined by a modern political Party in Opposition - $47  billion of gross savings and we did that not with any great relish.  We know that there  is pain associated with that but we are now living in a volatile world.

We are facing a volatile economic future.  Sovereign debt and inflation are going to  be great challenges, great challenges for Europe and potentially the United States in  the years to come.  Australia itself as a major export of energy and commodities has  the opportunity with a fast-growing region to be a stable, secure, reliable supplier of  the absolute necessities for growth in the Asian region.  But that’s all changed.  It’s all

changed because we now have a government that doesn’t know what it is doing, but  most significantly, it is unstable.   It is unsure of itself.  If it’s not a backflip today, if  it’s not consultation after the announcement today, then so surely can we rely on

uncertainty from this government that it will come in the future in the form of less  investment, fewer jobs and a harder road ahead for our children.

At the National Press Club I outlined a productivity agenda.  We have to grow the  pie.  IT has always been the Liberal way to grow the pie and we grow the pie through  hard reform.  You remember tax reform - when we undertook tax reform we  abolished taxes.  We reduced the tax take.  We introduced a simple, broad-based  consumption tax.  We removed eleven different reporting mechanisms and replaced it  with one.  This government claims tax reform is when you introduce a great big new  tax on mining - $12 billion.  This government doesn’t understand that it’s $12 billion  of other people’s money.  Tax is other people’s money.  Tax is the money that is  removed from ambition.  Tax is the money that is taken away from the aspirations of  small business people, of hard-working Australians.  Ultimately if the government  collects more tax, it is less opportunity for families, less opportunity for households,  companies.  It’s less opportunity to grow the pie.

With our productivity agenda we are focusing on improving participation, giving  people an incentive to return to the workforce.  We will roll out participation plans  before the election focusing on the under-30s - how we can get them into work and

meaningful work.  Importantly for the over 55s, how we can give companies an  incentive to keep them on the payroll or get them on the payroll and also to give  parents the choice to get back into the workforce after so much effort has gone into  their education and training.

We are going to reform the Trade Practices Act to give people not only a fair go, but  better opportunity.  Importantly, we’re going to take a different approach to

infrastructure.  We’re going to focus on better access regimes, better utilization of  existing infrastructure.  We do not feel the need to have a ribbon-cutting ceremony in  every street.  We have to have a ribbon-cutting ceremony for the future of our nation.   That is what we do as Liberals - we do the hard yards to build Australia a stronger  economy.

And so as I began, I finish with a line that there is a story that needs to be told.  We as  Liberals cannot be distracted by political honeymoons.  Julia Gillard may have a  political honeymoon but the Australian people will not.  The Australian people will  not get respite from a bad government.  The Australian people will not have respite as  we battle the challenges of deficit and debt.  The Australian people will not have  respite from a government engaged in reckless spending.  With an absolute  indifference towards small business people and the hard-working families of  Australia.

There is no respite from that unless there is a change of government.  The only way  we can capture our future, the only way all of us as a nation can write a happy and  positive ending to this story is to change the government.  To get rid of a bad  government and to put in place a Liberal Party and a National Party that are going to

deliver stability and certainty for our future.  Thank you very much.



