THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP     MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

Transcript

2GB Breakfast

16 March 2010

Interviewee: Brendan O’Connor MP

Subjects: Boat Arrivals

ANDREW MOORE:           Yes, Brendan O'Connor is Home Affairs Minister, and he's been

kind enough to join us this morning, for phoning through, Mr O'Connor, I appreciate your

time.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Morning, Andrew.

ANDREW MOORE:           Now you say push factors stemming from various regional

conflicts that are blamed for the continued flow of asylum seekers to Australia, is that still the

Government's position?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  That is, and in fact it was the previous Government's position.

ANDREW MOORE:           But now we've got the UN saying the situation is improving, we've

got figures in the UK which are showing that they've had a six per cent decline in asylum

applications, why are more and more coming here specifically?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Firstly, the asylum claims for Afghanistan, or by Afghanis, rose by

34 per cent last year, and there's about eight or nine countries—I can go through them if you

like—where there was an increase in claims in 2009. What we've seen is an overall increase

in refugee asylum claims in the last three years, and as a result, you'll see the incidence of

people seeking asylum in this country rise. That's why we've got to make sure we've got our

people out there, intercepting the vessels, and processing them properly.

ANDREW MOORE:           Yeah, I mean it's still a long way from what we've been told in the

last election, where we're going to be turning boats back, and the like. Are we being tough

on asylum seekers, because it doesn't seem to most Australians that we are being?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think it's a really important point, Andrew, we are being tough on

people-smugglers. For example, since September, 2008, we have convicted 28 people-smugglers in our courts; we've arrested over 100, and we've got 83 further to be prosecuted.

So we're certainly cracking down on people-smuggling activities.

You heard the President of Indonesia only last week indicate they're about to

legislate to criminalise people-smuggling, which is something we do welcome. Malaysia's

doing the same, because this is a regional problem, we have countries where...

ANDREW MOORE:           Well, it's a shame they're only going to a five year maximum

though.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, they've going to five year maximum—they're putting forward

that. That's certainly better than it is now. It also provides opportunities for extradition, so the

cooperation between the two countries is important. I think, also, that it's important we

dedicate our efforts to dismantle those syndicates.

In relation to the refugee claims, we'll assess claims. If there are people fleeing

persecution, we'll consider taking our fair share, just like the United States and Canada, and

the United Kingdom. What we won't do of course, is condone a process that's unlawful, and

a process that places people in danger, quite frankly.

So that's why we'll continue to work with Indonesia, Malaysia, and other countries

in the region, to target people-smugglers, we've got to smash the syndicates, to stop the

flow.

ANDREW MOORE:           There's a 20 year maximum for people-smuggling here in

Australia, as I understand it, how many people that you're aware of, have got 20 years?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Most of the people who have been convicted, are convicted

between five and six years. They are those that have been crews on the vessels. What we,

of course, are always seeking are those—the big fish if you like—those people who are

running the organised syndicates, not in Australia, normally, but overseas. What we need is

closer regional cooperation so we can target those serious criminals and ensure they're

convicted for long sentences.

ANDREW MOORE:           So we've got Christmas Island Detention Centre bursting at the

seams, and reports that the Darwin facility's ready to go, and it could be in operation as early

as this week, is that likely?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  We look at this from time to time. The Government's been up front

with the Australian people, we have had a high incidence of arrivals, we're processing them

properly, making sure it's done in an off-shore facility. W will continue to monitor it. As the

Minister for Immigration, as early as September last year, said, the contingency option was

the Darwin centre. At this point we continue to expand accommodation on Christmas

Island—that is our preferred option.

ANDREW MOORE:           How can you keep expanding it, I don't understand how many

more people you can fit in there?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  As you know, the previous Government constructed the site for

400, with an expansion of 800, we've now extended that to ensure we can accommodate far

more. That's our preferred option, we believe that is a better way to process claims, and

indeed assess for security, health and other reasons, those people that are arriving in these

vessels.

But we have to monitor it, and as the Minister for Immigration made clear six

months ago, Darwin was an option to be considered, but of course Christmas Island is our

preference.

ANDREW MOORE:           So again, would Darwin be in operation within the next week, if

these reported two vessels do arrive, or get intercepted?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  I've seen the reports in the paper and, as I say, the Government

assesses the situation on an ongoing basis. We have had a high incidence of arrivals this

year, that's very clear, everyone's aware of that, we've intercepted all of those vessels, and

those people have been processed properly. But we have to monitor what else we are to do,

if there are capacity constraints on Christmas Island...

ANDREW MOORE:           So how close to Christmas Island is it to capacity?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  It's closer to capacity than we would prefer. We look to process

those people on Christmas Island. For those who are not genuine asylum seekers, they're

returned home. Most people are then processed and are settled, mainly in Australia if they

are genuine refugees. That reduces the accommodation issues on the island - reduces the

capacity constraint, so that we've got more spare accommodation.

ANDREW MOORE:           Can it deal with another 200, if they arrive this week?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Again, it will depend on a number of variables, how many come off

the island, genuinely, and how many then can be accommodated. As I say, we're looking at

this on a week to week basis. Of course we'd like to see a decline in the vessels, which of

course would relieve some of the pressure.  I would like to say though, that officials on the

island, and indeed our officials on those vessels that intercept those leaky boats, are doing a

fantastic job.

It's an arduous job, dealing with people, many desperate people and often families

that are on these unseaworthy vessels. We want to make sure we process them

professionally and in an orderly manner. But, in the end, my focus, and the focus of the

Government, is working closely with Indonesia and Malaysia, and other countries, to

dismantle those syndicates...

ANDREW MOORE:           Yeah, I think most Australian people don't want refugees who

haven't yet got the appropriate visas on our mainland, do you think most Australians are

satisfied with the way the Federal Government's handling asylum seekers?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  That's up to each and every individual, I'm sure people would like

to see the end of the flow of arrivals, as Minister Ruddock said during the Howard years,

international factors caused the surge, as we know, the Howard Government years have had

the highest three years of arrivals in our history...

ANDREW MOORE:           At least they reacted to it at the end, by turning them away.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  Well, there was a boat turnaround in 2003, and then not after that.

The fact is, that there were two things that occurred internationally, that affected the slowing

of vessels: firstly, the invasion of Iraq meant that fewer people were fleeing persecution in

that country, which led to fewer people seeking to come to Australia, and, secondly, there

was a repatriation program in Afghanistan, which slowed, very much, those people seeking

asylum out of Afghanistan.

Now that coincided with some domestic policies here, but let's be clear about this,

the Howard Government blamed international factors when there was a surge, and then

chose to conveniently  congratulate themselves, when there was a slowing...

ANDREW MOORE:           Right, Brendan O'Connor, I'm sorry to interrupt, and I do

appreciate your time, we're coming - we're into the 7.30 news right now, so I have to leave it

there, I appreciate your time.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  No problem, Andrew.

ANDREW MOORE:           Brendan O'Connor, Home Affairs Minister.





