UNCLASSIFIED







ATTORNEY-GENERAL   HON ROBERT McCLELLAND MP

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS  VESSEL



[4 January 2010] Border Protection Command yesterday successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.

HMAS Albany, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the  vessel at 6.20pm (AEDST) on 3 January 2010 approximately 29 nautical miles south of  Cartier Island.

Initial indications suggest 30 passengers and 2 crew are on board the vessel.

Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for  settlement and can be targeted by, and fall prey to, people smugglers.

According to the UNHCR 2008 Global Trends report, there were 42 million forcibly  displaced persons worldwide at the end of 2008, including 15.2 million refugees.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing  this most serious issue.

The Australian Government has an orderly and planned migration program and places a high  priority on protecting Australia’s borders from irregular maritime arrivals by maintaining an  effective and visible tactical response program of aerial, land and sea-based patrols.

The Australian Government’s Border Protection Command uses a combination of Customs  and Border Protection and Defence assets to deliver a coordinated national response to  security threats in Australia’s maritime domain.

The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s borders  and today’s successful interception by Border Protection Command continues to demonstrate  the effectiveness of the proactive response program in place.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks and their reasons for travel will be established.



Media Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02)  62756793

-----------------------------

To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au

