Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Transcript - 2GB Andrew Moore program

Tuesday 6th April 2010

Subjects: Boat Arrivals, Asylum seekers, Population policy.



EandOE



Andrew Moore: Well I said just after the news Australians are tiring of asylum seekers

arriving at Christmas Island, we are tired of constantly being told the boats are being

intercepted, tired of being told we have room to accommodate the arrivals and we are more

than tired of hearing the need to increase immigration for what is being called the “big

Australia”. The 103rd boat arrived at the weekend, asylum seekers are reportedly sleeping in

offices on Christmas Island, Scott Morrison is shadow minister for immigration and he has

written a piece for the News Limited site, The Punch this morning saying the Prime Minister

can’t have it both ways. He says like the Coalition, the majority of Australians, have no

problems with accepting our fair share of refugees. We do however want to have a say

about who comes and want them to apply offshore like everyone else who is seeking to

come to Australia, including from refugee camps around the world. Scott Morrison, whom I

spoke with on Good Friday is back online. Nice to talk to you again Scott.



Scott Morrison: Good day Andrew. How are you?



Andrew Moore: I am alright mate. You say Australians like to see themselves as generous

and compassionate and I think that is right, but we get sick of things being shoved down our

throats and not being done the right way.



Scott Morrison: Well I think that is true.



Andrew Moore: We like fairness.



Scott Morrison: We do like fairness. We also don’t like being seen as a soft touch too and

having that generosity taken advantage of. I think these are the two things that are really

concerning Australians about this issue. Kevin Rudd just responds by saying oh look the

problem isn’t that big and all these sorts of things and Christmas Island isn’t full. He must

think it is some sort of magic pudding up there. The truth is that Australians are concerned

that this has got out of control and I don’t know how Kevin Rudd thinks Australians are going

to trust him on letting him grow our population to 36 million when he can’t even get the

population on Christmas Island right.



Andrew Moore: Well Kevin Rudd has basically in the last week or so dismissed your

concerns, our concerns about all this asylum seeking issue by saying we have more

important things to worry about. He can’t ignore it for too much longer surely?



Scott Morrison: Well you would think not Andrew but he seems to have a pretty big capacity

for ignoring the views of the Australian people on this issue. He just basically doesn’t want to

talk about it and frankly there are others who out there, certainly not our host today, who are

basically trying to put pressure on the Coalition to go quiet on this issue. We have got the

Clare Martin, the head of ACOSS, today out there saying everyone should calm down a bit

and shouldn’t be raising this issue in these ways. We wouldn’t be having this conversation if

the Prime Minister had done his job and kept his promise on border protection. We are only

talking about it because Christmas Island is full and we have had five boats arrive in seven

days.



Andrew Moore: Yeah, well the volume just in the last twelve months has increased

enormously. Over the weekend Kevin Rudd announced Tony Burke as his Minister for a big

Australia and he reports back in twelve months. You say it is classic Kevin Rudd, a plan for a

plan.



Scott Morrison: Yeah, a plan for a plan after the next election. I mean if Kevin Rudd was

serious about the population issue he had a few opportunities to show it recently. Just a few

weeks ago Bob Brown and I joined forces to call for a National Independent Population

Inquiry. Nothing heard from Kevin Rudd. If he was serious about the issue it would be on the

COAG agenda. If it had been long in the planning and all these sorts of things it would be on

the COAG agenda. But it is not. This is just an Easter fix-up where he has appointed what I

would call the Minister for over-population, who has one job and that is to go around and tell

everyone that Kevin Rudd is right and they are wrong and that you actually want 36 million

by 2050. That is his job to go out there and sell it he is a salesman not a population minister.



Andrew Moore: I think most people have trouble trusting the Prime Minister on future

population growth when you consider his can’t keep his promises to maintain the integrity of

our borders at the moment.



Scott Morrison: Well I think that is right. I think that is absolutely right we had a net overseas

migration in 2008/09 of 285,000 people - that is net. That is 105,000 more than the average

that they have forecast to 2050 to get us to 36 million people. I think 36 million based on

current projections is an under-estimate and the government needs to consider all the

options not just saying Kevin Rudd is right on this issue. They have to consider all the

options which means scaling back if necessary, investing more in services and

infrastructure, if necessary. They’re the issues that need to be addressed, not a salesman’s

task where Kevin Rudd tries to say well look actually I have been thinking about this the

whole time and you can calm down about this and the boats, but I don’t think people will

believe him.



Andrew Moore: No, well as you say Tony Burke’s new position is one of a salesman but it is

a difficult sales pitch.



Scott Morrison: Well I think so because the feedback I get and we get in the Coalition from

all around the country is that people are concerned about everything from housing

affordability to how we are managing our water resources. It is no so much necessarily about

who is coming, but it is the question of how many should come, how we should allow our

population to increase over the next 40 years and not just sign up blind, as the Prime

Minister has to his vision of 36 million people.



Andrew Moore: I would like to know Scott how anyone reasonably expects that we’ll be able

to have the infrastructure in place to have to deal with such a dramatic rise. There were

figures out last week from the Bureau of Statistics about our massive population growth in

the last twelve months. Ninety three odd thousand more people living in Melbourne, eighty

five odd more thousand more people living here in Sydney and I know here in Sydney we

don’t have the infrastructure to cope now let alone with a boom over the next couple of

decades.



Scott Morrison: That is the key question and that is how many people and infrastructure,

services, and how we manage water, all of these things sustained going into the future. I am

not going to pretend the Coalition knows the answers this question, I don’t think anyone

does at the moment. That is why I think we need to ask it, find the answer and then once we

have found the answer we can start making assessments about how many people we

should be taking under our migration program, which accounts for 60% of our population

growth, but in the meantime I think we have to be very cautious about our level of intake until

we really know what the carrying capacity is.



Andrew Moore: It is such an important issue for all of us, little lone the people who are going

to come here in the next 30-40 years. Why is your call, for a national debate on this issue

sustainable population growth, being ignored at the moment? You would think this the

perfect forum for debating on.



Scott Morrison: Well it would do two things if we have an independent national inquiry.

Firstly, it would take the politics out of it and we genuinely want to know what the sustainable

carrying capacity is. That is a very simple thing for the Prime Minister to agree to. It is not

just the Coalition who have said this, it is other parties as well, which reflects I think the

broad spectrum of concerns that exist on this issue. So I think he could engage with that but

the other one I think it must be on the agenda of is COAG of all the States. The Prime

Minister wants to put everything on the COAG agenda, if this was important to him this

would be on there too because it is the States who at the end of the day have to deliver the

roads and the infrastructure and let’s not forget local government as well. There are reports

today of one in four councils in New South Wales can’t pay their bills. It is the councils and

others who have to provide the services for this population. Now population growth in the

past has had some real benefits for Australia I mean that is how you get economic growth

but there comes a point where it can become negative when your infrastructure services

cannot keep up and it erodes your quality of life and starts being counter-productive. These

are the things that the Coalition thinks we need to be focusing on.



Andrew Moore: We already have enough issues with water, we have issues with transport

and we have issues with power and you are almost going to need a bank loan to pay your

power bill as it is in the next few years and all of this is only going to get worse.



Scott Morrison: Well as long as we just sign up blind as Kevin Rudd has to 36 million people

then these sorts of problems are inevitable and the erosion of your quality of life is inevitable.

A sensible plan, a fair-dinkum debate and a real minister for population, not just someone

who is out there trying to convince everyone that Kevin Rudd is right is what we need. There

plan is ok, after the next election we will tell you what our real plan is. As we said at the

outset, if you can’t trust him on border protection, you can’t trust him on population.



Andrew Moore: Well already, it is spinning out of control and I am going from memory here, I

am sure the figures last week showed our population increased by 2.1% over the past twelve

months as opposed to most similar countries up by only 1.1%. I think people are sick of

being told what to think as opposed to well-informed debate about all of this which is

required.



