



LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

11 December 2010

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR   ADDRESS TO THE LIBERAL PARTY WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DIVISION  STATE COUNCIL   PERTH

E&OE……………………….…………………………………………………………………

[start of recording] This is my first address to the West Australian Liberal Party since the election and I  want to thank each and every one of you for the result we achieved here in the west. There was a three per  cent swing against the Labor Party. The ALP lost yet another seat and what perhaps pleased me most of all  was the way the election result here in the west finally disproved the persistent myth that it is hard to do well  federally when you are in power in the state. The success of the Barnett Government was our best federal  asset in the recent federal election. So, thank you so much Colin for the good work that you’ve done.

Ladies and gentleman, I particularly want to congratulate Ken Wyatt for winning the seat of Hasluck and I  of course congratulate all of my other successful federal colleagues, led by the leader of the West Australian  Liberals in the federal parliament, my friend and colleague Julie Bishop.

Of course, I commiserate with Donna Gordon, with Matt Taylor, with Joe Ferrante. All three of you,  particularly Donna Gordon, did a really excellent job and all of you secured significant swings to the Liberal  Party in the seats that you contested.  I thank the division, Barry Court, Danielle Blaine in particular, for  their hard work and for the extraordinary financial assistance that they rendered to the federal campaign. Not  for the first time, ladies and gentleman, has the money raised in the west gone to Canberra. So often, the  money raised in the west goes to Canberra. I’d like to think that the money raised in the west and given to  the federal Liberal campaign was actually more productive than some of the money that’s raised in the west  and currently goes to the federal Labor Government, but I just want to say thank you to the west for all the  help that it did but particularly, again, to Premier Barnett for his help and for his counsel before, during and  after the recent federal election.

But, ladies and gentlemen, it wasn’t all good news. One of the great characters of Australian politics lost his  seat due to the vagaries of preferential voting and this occasion should not pass without suitable recognition  of Wilson Tuckey, for 30 years the Member for O’Connor and one of the great contributors to Australian  politics.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, as 2010 draws to a close, it is abundantly clear that the Labor brand is  increasingly toxic right around the country but I want to remind you and to let you know that I know that it  all started here. Back in 2008, when the Liberal Party was on its knees, the revival started here in the west  with the election of the Barnett Government. It came and it continued in the federal poll where for the first  time in 80 years a first term government lost its majority, and the Coalition tide continued most recently in  Victoria where perhaps the least bad Labor government in the country was decisively and unexpectedly  defeated and I want to say to you, ladies and gentlemen, that the Victorian result has a particular poignancy

for me. It has a particular poignancy for me - it’s rehabilitated the Speedo, ladies and gentlemen. It’s finally  respectable for a senior politician to do press conferences dressed in budgie smugglers. But I’m not going to  read too much into that, I hasten to add, and I reassure you that you will continue to see me much more often  in a suit than on the sporting track.

Ladies and gentlemen, we still have lots to do. Lots and lots of hard work ahead of us but if we Liberals,  right around the country, can keep working and stay united there’s no reason why the Liberal tide can’t  continue to sweep across our wide brown land. First, in New South Wales, then in Queensland, and  eventually right around the country because the more we see of Labor incumbents, the worse they look, and  I want to dwell just for a moment on the record of the current Labor Government in Canberra.

Back in June, Julia Gillard said that the Government had lost its way. Well, the news is, they’re still lost.  They’re still lost. Team Labor has changed its leader from Burke to Wills but they are still wondering  around, hopelessly lost in the political desert. When she said that the Labor Government had lost its way,  she said that she was going to fix the mining tax. Well she hasn’t fixed it, she’s just fibbed about it. She said  she was going to fix the boat people problem. Well, since June, when Julia Gillard became Prime Minister,  there have been 55 more boats and since the election there have been 41 more boats. She said she was going  to fix climate change and she was going to have a citizens’ assembly to do it, as if it’s not the parliament’s  job to declare what our policy is on these big issues.

Ladies and gentlemen, since the election it’s just got worse for Labor. There was the carbon tax that was  ruled out before the election and has been ruled in since the election. There was the East Timor detention  centre that was going to happen before the election, but clearly is never going to happen after the election.  There’s the onshore detention centres at Curtin and at RAAF Scherger in Cape York that weren’t going to  happen before the election, but are going to happen after the election, along with more detention centres at  places like Northam, here in Western Australian, and at Woodside in South Australia.

There was the Murray-Darling Basin Plan that she was going to adopt sight unseen before the election, but  which is now degenerating into shambolic chaos after the election. There was the National Broadband  Network which was eventually going to be sold back to the private sector before the election and is now  going to stay forever in government hands after the election. And while I’m on the subject, ladies and  gentlemen, of the National Broadband, if you think that the pink batts programme was wasteful and  dangerous; if you think that the school halls programme was wasteful, just think how much waste this Labor  Government is going to manage with $50 billion, let alone the $2.5 billion of the pink batts programme and  the $16 billion of the school halls programme. All the time that they are spending $50 billion of borrowed  money rolling out a cable, there are highways that aren’t built, there are railways that aren’t built, there are  ports that aren’t built, there are the real economic needs of our country continually neglected.

When you ask yourself what is behind almost every change in this Government’s position since the election,  whether it be the nationalised broadband network, or the gay marriage and euthanasia distractions - behind  all of this is the alliance with the Greens. Let’s be under no illusions. While Labor is in Government, the  Greens are in power and the only convictions that Julia Gillard now has are the convictions of Bob Brown,  the leader of the Greens and the real deputy Prime Minister of this country. This is a divided and  dysfunctional Government and that’s the way it will stay as long as it is an unholy alliance between the  Labor Party, the Greens and country independents and the people suffer because of this incompetence.

Since 2007, ladies and gentlemen, your cost of living has suffered. We’ve seen a 42 per cent increase in  electricity prices, a 29 per cent increase in gas prices, a 46 per cent increase in water prices. Your education  costs up 17 per cent, your health costs up 17 per cent, your rent up 18 per cent and Labor now wants to make  it worse with its new taxes, its new taxes on mining, its new taxes on carbon. This is a Government which  makes every problem that it touches worse and that’s why this is a Government which is increasingly known  as quite possibly the worst Government in living memory and that’s why it is so important that we get rid of  this Government as soon as we humanly can.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I think that increasingly the Australian public get it about this Government. I

think they get that modern Labor is more spin than substance, more announcement than delivery. I think  they understand that. I think they know that the Gillard Government is a dud and I think they are starting to  understand that the Prime Minister is out of her depth, that she’s not up to the job. Our task, this year, is to  help the Australian people to appreciate not just that this is a seriously bad Government but that we are a  truly credible alternative and that means not just persuading the Australian public that we are a credible  alternative but it also means, at least over the course of this year, doing our best to persuade the  independents that they made a mistake a couple of months ago when they put Julia Gillard into power.

I want to change the Government of this country as soon as possible and I have to tell you that the Prime  Minister is not going to go to Yarralumla and advise an election that she will lose. She is not going to do  that. The only way to achieve a change of government any time soon is to persuade the crossbenchers that  they made a mistake and that’s what I will be doing my best to do by the way I conduct myself over the  course of the next 12 months.

Our task over the next 12 months is not just to expose the Government’s errors, wherever they are occurring.  Our job is to demonstrate that our country would be different and better from day one of a Coalition  government. Our task is not to reinvent ourselves, our task is not to discover a whole lot of new policies.  What our task is, over the next 12 months, is to deepen our engagement with the public on the policies that  we already have and that we took to the election.

Our task is to demonstrate to the public that from day one of a Coalition government there would be lower  taxes, fairer welfare, better services and stronger borders. We want lower taxes and a Coalition government  would return to the Henry Review recommendations on personal income tax. Higher thresholds and lower,  flatter tax rates, because they will help the Australian people to be more productive, and while I’m on the  subject of tax let me also say that it is simply unfair that the great state of Western Australia only gets back  something like 67 per cent of its GST. It isn’t right, it isn’t fair and it should be re-examined.

We need a fairer welfare system and we will retain the election policies, the good election policies designed  to bring more participation from older people, from mothers and from younger people who might otherwise  be stuck, long term, on welfare. We need to have all the people of our society, all the people of our country  as economically productive as they can possibly be. We will further develop Howard Government policies  dropped or insufficiently pursued by the current Government such as Work for the Dole and welfare  quarantining, again because we will be a better country the more productive our people are.

We do want better services; particularly we want better schools and better hospitals and I want to  congratulate the Barnett Government for its Independent Public Schools initiative. Margie and I visited the  Roseworth Independent Public School yesterday. What a terrific exercise in people power. What a  marvellous way of better harnessing the energies of the school community and of the teachers. The Barnett  Government is leading the way and this is an initiative that should spread right around our country and it  will spread right around our country under the next Coalition federal government.

Stronger borders, ladies and gentlemen. A country which can’t control its borders is at risk of peaceful  invasion. We can’t get away from the fact that a sovereign country must control its borders. The last  Coalition government controlled our borders and it will take another Coalition government to get our  borders back under control. And I want to say to all of you that we have nothing against the people who  want to come to this country. Who can blame desperate people in troubled countries for wanting to come to  our country, but we have everything against a Government whose policies have put the people smugglers  back in business. That is the problem. The problem is a Government which changed policies that worked an  in so doing has put the people smugglers back in business.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I want to reassure you that the policies that the Coalition develops and embraces  will always be based on clear values and I want to remind you of just what the values of our political  movement are. As liberals, we support lower taxes, greater freedom and smaller government. As  conservatives, we support the traditional family. We respect the values which have stood the test of time, but  above all else, as Australian patriots who want policies which work and which will make a great country

even stronger in the years ahead.

Ladies and gentlemen, in closing, I want to thank everyone who has contributed to the great success of the  Liberal party and of the Coalition over the last year. Obviously, again, I thank my parliamentary colleagues  led by Julie Bishop and I thank the West Australian Liberal Party led by Colin Barnett and by Barry Court  but I also want to particularly thank the unseen heroes of politics. I thank my wife, Margie. All of us are in  politics because our spouses allow us to be. Thank you for allowing me to continue in politics, but you  know, every member of parliament is sustained not just by a family but by a staff. As this year closes, I want  to thank my own staff, particularly my chief of staff, Peta Credlin and my press secretary, Claire Kimball.  The three strong women in my life: Margie, Peta and Claire, thank you for all the work that you have done.

We have done great work this year. We will do even better work next year but we have to appreciate that we  can only do good work because of the thousands of helping hands that sustain us. Ladies and gentlemen,  thank you so much for everything you’ve done for me. Thank you so much for everything you’ve done for  the Liberal Party and thank you so much for what you have done for our country, Australia.



[ends]



