

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS  VESSEL

1 January 2010

Border Protection Command last night successfully intercepted a suspected irregular entry  vessel.

HMAS BROOME, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted  the vessel at approximately 10.53pm (AEDST) approximately 22 nautical miles north of  Ashmore Islands.

Initial indications suggest there are 58 passengers and 4 crew on board the vessel.

One of the male passengers is suffering from a serious medical condition. He was treated on  board by a  navy medical officer, who assessed his condition as being in need of immediate  medical attention.

The man is being transferred to Darwin Hospital.

Australia is proactively working with our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the  Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime,  to address this most serious issue.

People smuggling is a global and regional problem. According to the UNHCR 2008 Global  Trends report, there were 42 million displaced persons worldwide at the end of 2008,  including 15.2 million refugees.

The Australian Government has committed more than $654 million to implementing a  comprehensive people smuggling strategy to combat this issue. The Government has  expanded its presence in the region with the Australian Federal Police (AFP), Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) and  the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service recently setting up or expanding  liaison posts devoted to deterring irregular migration.

Agencies are working closely with their counterparts in country exchanging and gathering  information, and strengthening our regional capacity to mitigate irregular migration to

Australia. Our strengthened offshore approach is working. Since September 2008 there have  been 92 disruptions of people smuggling ventures in Indonesia, and the arrest of 40 people  smuggling organisers.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks as well as establish their reasons for travel.

Media Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or   Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793



