Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Thursday 18th March 2010

Subjects: SIEV 36, Australian population debate



EandOE



RAY HADLEY: Criminal charges could be laid against three Afghans accused of deliberately

setting fire to a boat near Ashmore Reef in April last year. Now the Northern Territory

coroner has handed down his findings into the explosion which killed five boat people. Mr

Greg Cavanagh says he believes the fire was deliberately stared by people aboard that

wooden vessel to make sure they would be brought to Australia. He’s named three people

believed to be part of the plan. He also found a number of boat people lied, in fact no one

told the truth of the 36 that remained during the four week inquest. He says one of the

Indonesian crew members allegedly disabled the boat’s engine before the explosion which

injured another 40 people. Now the Rudd Government has already rejected calls to

immediately revoke visas granted to the three men believed to have started the fire. It’s

understood the Immigration Minister, the waste of space, Chris Evans, has the power to

revoke their visas on the grounds they are bad characters but he maintains he can’t do

anything until criminal charges are laid. What a load of codswallop. The Shadow Immigration

Minister Scott Morrison is on the line right now. G’day Scott.



SCOTT MORRISON: G’day Ray.



RAY HADLEY: Can you put that to rest for me please.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yes, absolutely. The Prime Minister yesterday in Parliament said the

same thing. He said that under the Act there had to be a conviction before they could act.

That is simply not true. Under the Act, and I won’t go through the details of that chapter and

verse, but you can make a decision as the Minister based on someone’s past and present

general conduct.



RAY HADLEY: Well just for the benefit of the Prime Minister and the obtuse, that’s my word

for the day after the Deputy Prime Minister was described by the Deputy Chair of the

Principal’s Forum here in NSW of being obtuse, Julia Gillard, the obtuse Minister for

Immigration under Clause (6) (c) (ii) of section 501 of the Act, the Minister, the Minister, to

have regard of the persons past and present general conduct is not contingent upon a

criminal conviction.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right.



RAY HADLEY: It’s there in black and white. The obtuse Minister for Immigration, lacking of

course in quickness or perception or intellect and the Prime Minister, need to understand

that what they said in Parliament yesterday was misleading.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yes that is absolutely right Ray. What we are finding with this

government, particularly this Minister is he doesn’t like to make decisions. Last October the

Prime Minister revealed in Parliament that when it came to them getting the permanent

protection visas, he didn’t even make the decision, he delegated it to his department. They

hide behind officials who aren’t elected, they hide behind false interpretations of their own

Act and it is all designed to do one thing, they don’t want to make a decision for which they

might be held accountable and that’s no way to run a government.



RAY HADLEY: That’s exactly right. Now, I heard Evans taking on TV, the Minister last night,

about the fact that he relied upon information from the Northern Territory police, that’s why

he granted these visas to these three men. Now, the suggestion was that he was told by

Northern Territory police that this was an act of god, that it wasn’t a deliberate attempt to kill

people and destroy the vessel.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well there were other options he had other than to give them a

permanent visa, I mean they have been given a permanent residence visa to Australia. They

could have provided what is called a Temporary Safe Haven Visa under the Act which would

have been a temporary arrangement and that could have been in place until the coronial

inquiry was completed. But what the Government is trying to do here is link the potential

criminal case here and the immigration issues and the two are completely separate. The

Prime Minister and the Minister have to answer a simple question. Do they think when a

coronial inquiry has a clear finding that three people were part of a plan to cripple a boat that

resulted in five people dying, dozens more injured and Australian defence force personnel

being put at risk, they tried to blow up a boat, did blow up a boat, now if that doesn’t qualify

as poor character then this Minister just can’t make decisions whether it is on stopping boats

or stopping people who blow up boats.



RAY HADLEY: Well the other thing the Coroner said Scott that while he named these three,

he couldn’t determine whether others on board the boat played a role in it but the one thing

he did say that none of them told the truth when they came before him. So I would be calling

for all 36 remaining to be sent packing.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well you know all of these things need…



RAY HADLEY: I mean if they don’t respect our law at the first hurdle, a coroner’s inquest into

the deaths of five of their countrymen, what hope are they down the track over equally

important issues?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well right now I am focusing Ray pretty much on these three. We have

talked about these issues surrounding the rioters up on Christmas Island, we’ve got

proceedings pending there, I mean if there’s a difference between those two cases, it’s this,

there’s a prosecution going on about what happened on Christmas Island. In this case there

has been a coronial inquiry...



RAY HADLEY: No prosecution, don’t waste our money, send them back to Afghanistan, get

rid of them.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that case will finish but this case is, at least in my view, there are

clear findings, there is a requirement for the Minister to make a decision, he doesn’t even

want to consider making a decision, let alone make a decision.



RAY HADLEY: Well he’s a jellyfish, he hasn’t got a backbone, we don’t enjoy a strong

Immigration Minister and that’s why we are about to celebrate, or commemorate or signify,

our 100th boat arriving since August of 2008, because he is obtuse.



SCOTT MORRISON: Well when you send these weak messages, and these are tough

decisions, they are decisions you have to make on immigration which say we are not going

to tolerate certain behaviour like blowing up boats. Now when you say ‘oh we are going to

wait and see and we really should take advice on this and we will wait for the court’ all that

says to the people smugglers is the obvious thing and the boats will keep coming, As you

say we are at 92 now. Julia Gillard, who said when she was Shadow Immigration when they

were in opposition, ‘another boat arrival, another policy failure’, well 92 boats don’t lie when it

comes to this government’s failure.



RAY HADLEY: Just one other thing, just another case in point, we’ve got all this newspaper

support in some areas for the Sheik who has been deemed, from ASIO, to be a person we

don’t require here and should go back to Iran and because he is now making an appeal to

the Minister who can override a decision of the various courts including appeals of the High

Court whether they had jurisdiction to rule on this or not. Anyway he has given this man a

bridging visa because he should be out of this place tomorrow apparently. He has been to

the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, he has been to every court in the land, so he has given

him a bridging visa, ok which is understandable because he has got to make a decision.



I got a phone call from a young bloke at Mildura, Irish fellow, came here as tourist - loved

the place - and said we want to stay here, he is a welder, found a place down there that

reckons he is a really good welder and wanted to give him a job, his wife is a dental nurse,

wanted to give her a job at the local dental health clinic, but he appreciated, David, that he

had to go back to his native Ireland to re-enter, so there was no blues about that. So we

spoke to Chris Evan’s office and said look these are the circumstances, two small kids here,

loves the place, would a great asset, got a job for him, he is a welder, Mildura needs a

welder, they need him, he needs them. So they said we will give him a bridging visa until we

determine, because it could take 88 days, from the time of application, we will give him a

bridging visa because it sounds like a good idea. Never heard any more from them, poor

bugger is back in County Tyrone, I spoke to him earlier this week.



SCOTT MORRISON: Right.



RAY HADLEY: And has had no word from the Department of Immigration on whether he can

come here, whether he is allowed to come here. You see the problem being, I would think

when you look on face value, apart from the fact he already speaks English. ..



SCOTT MORRISON: Yes.



RAY HADLEY: And has been here and loves the joint, and wants to come back with his wife

and kids, we seem to prioritise the wrong sort of people.



SCOTT MORRISON: One of the things that is driving a lot of the immigration policy

particularly when it comes to skills, Ray at the moment, is the unions are basically saying

they don’t want any competition for people who are in trades skills or semi skilled

occupations, chefs or tradesmen or other things like this. That is the agenda Chris Evans

has picked up and is running. But I would be happy to take up the case you have raised.



RAY HADLEY: I think we are probably closer to the end than the start now.



SCOTT MORRISON: That is good, he sounds like a top bloke.



RAY HADLEY: Good fellow, good fellow and takes it in good spirit, isn’t blueing about going

back home, said if that’s the law, that’s the law. He is a man who wants to observe our laws

unlike the 36, including the three named, who went to a Coroner’s inquest in Darwin and

refused to offer evidence of what they saw and what happended. The other thing is

yesterday, I don’t know if you caught up with it, Dick Smith spoke to my colleague Alan

Jones about the rate if immigration under this Government.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yes.



RAY HADLEY: And is terrified that we are being told by this Government and by the

bureaucrats we need 7 million people in Sydney, Melbourne and 5 million in Brisbane and

we are going to pour them into the joint. When we get to this what will be the policy from

your government, if you are elected to government, at the next election?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well what we are working on Ray is we don’t accept that we should

have as a given there we should have 36 million people in Australia by 2050. I mean the

Prime Minister signed Australia up to that without asking anyone. We think ….



RAY HADLEY: Wasn’t part of the policy. Didn’t talk about it, bang, crash wallop. Record

number of immigration under his government without one word to the electorate about it

before the election.



SCOTT MORRISON: There is 285,000 people, nett, who came here in 2008-2009, which is

a record. That is unsustainable. That forecast of 35 million….



RAY HADLEY: Would they all be Labor voters do you think?



SCOTT MORRISON: [laughter] I think there might be a proportion, particularly under certain

programs. But putting that aside, I will be impartial for a second…



RAY HADLEY: Try to be.



SCOTT MORRISON: Out to 2050 they are assuming 180,000. So look there is already a

100,000 gap in terms of what is being experienced and what needs to happen to even reach

35 million. So that forecast could actually be quite underestimated. Now we actually think

there should be a population debate about what is sustainable. I mean issues like housing

affordability, road congestion, support of infrastructure. The states and the territories and

local government need to be involved in the planning process to work out what your annual

migration intake should be because at the end of the day they are the ones who have to put

the services in place to support the population. We are very happy to engage this. We have

supported The Greens, amazingly, but we have supported The Greens this week, they have

been putting up a motion…



RAY HADLEY: It’s amazing. We have got the Teachers Federation of NSW supporting the

Liberal/National Party Coalition and now we have got you supporting The Greens on this

issue and I might mention Dick Smith. Him and I think entirely differently on refugees,

entirely different, we are poles apart even though I have a great love and respect for him for

what he is, a very great Australian.



SCOTT MORRISON: Sure.



RAY HADLEY: But we are poles apart on refugees but on this issue, I am like you and The

Greens, I find myself in complete agreement with him.



SCOTT MORRISON: Yeah the debate is important, we think we should have it, that’s why

we’ve supported The Greens to have a national inquiry into this issue. The government

should be initiating this inquiry actually. But the fact that they have failed to want to have a

debate on this issue means there are very strange alliances being formed all around which

shows the depth of concern there is in the community about a population out of control.

There are arguments to have population growth, there are economic arguments for that

which we are all familiar with but it’s a question of balance, it’s a question of sustainability

and what we can have that doesn’t adversely impact our quality of life and that’s the bottom

line.



RAY HADLEY: Will you be asking the Prime Minister to correct the mistake he made in

Parliament, if he didn’t mislead Parliament, about people having to have a criminal

conviction before he can take what’s past and present general conduct against them?



SCOTT MORRISON: I would certainly hope to get that up today Ray.



RAY HADLEY: Ok.



SCOTT MORRISON: You know how this place works but that’s certainly a question that the

Prime Minister does need to answer.



RAY HADLEY: He needs to answer, he needs to get it right because he got it horribly wrong.



SCOTT MORRISON: Absolutely.



RAY HADLEY: Ok, but that is just a long list of things. Thank you very much for your time.



SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks for your time Ray.



