Stephen Smith, MP  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade

Interview with Radio National PM, ABC Radio

9 July 2010

MARK COLVIN: So first the Prime Minister mentioned East Timor as a possible site and said she'd begun

talking to the Government in Dili, then she rode back on that and said she'd never said it would be in East

Timor. So is anything about the Government's regional processing centre plan getting any clearer?

The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade Stephen Smith is speaking to Lyndal Curtis.

REPORTER: Stephen Smith if we could just clear up any remaining confusion, is it the government's

preferred position or starting point to have the regional processing centre in East Timor if East Timor says

yes?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well we've started a dialogue with East Timor. I think people should frankly just take a

cold shower and calmly go through where we're at.

The Prime Minister, the first leader in our region to do so, has indicated that we should have, for very good

policy reasons, a regional processing centre.

She approached President Ramos Horta and despite some commentary to the contrary that was an

entirely appropriate response as has been indicated by the Prime Minister of East Timor saying that he

wants the President, President Horta to be responsible for discussions from East Timor's point of view.

We made it clear we're in dialogue and discussion with East Timor, but at the same time we are taking our

suggestion to the region because we need this suggestion, if it is to go anywhere, to have regional support

and also to have United Nations High Commission for Refugees support. So we're pursuing this with East

Timor and we're pursuing it seriously.

Now other countries in the region may indicate an interest, may indicate that they want to be considered for

a possible regional processing centre as part of a regional framework, you know as Chris Evans has made

clear, as I've made clear. That would be entirely a matter for them, but so far as we're concerned we are in

a dialogue with East Timor and we're proposing to pursue that.

REPORTER: Did you advise the Prime Minister that it was okay to speak to the President?

STEPHEN SMITH: Look I see Tony Abbott is out there making a range of outrageous comments about a

quiet invasion of Australia by asylum seekers. Also asserting without any evidence whatsoever or any basis

whatsoever that the Prime Minister and I hadn't had a conversation about this matter.

There was a full Cabinet discussion about all of the aspects of this matter that are now out there in the

public arena. There was also a conversation amongst National Security Committee. So I've previously

made the point that in national security and national interest areas you have to be very careful about how

you proceed, and Tony Abbott making outrageous comments with no basis, no evidence, no foundation

doesn't do anything other than add to the risk which he poses to these sorts of issues...

REPORTER: But aren't the usual protocols when a matter's being raised with a foreign government to

speak to the head of that government? Did you advise the Prime Minister it was okay to speak to President

Ramos Horta?

STEPHEN SMITH: Anyone in Australia who has taken a passing interest in East Timorese matters, in its

independence, in its close relationship with Australia knows that President Ramos Horta is more than just a

head of state. That's reflected by the fact that the Prime Minister has asked him to be responsible for the

discussions with Australia on this matter. He's not just a token head of state, he is a person who's integral

to East Timorese life, East Timorese society, and anyone with a passing interest in Australia's relationship

with East Timor knows that. It was entirely appropriate for Prime Minister Gillard to start a conversation with

East Timor by having a conversation with the President...

REPORTER: [Talking over] Why not start with the Prime Minister?

STEPHEN SMITH: ...it is also crystal clear from President Horta's remark that the starting point of

President Horta's deliberations would be a conversation with Prime Minister Gusmao, which they both

regarded as entirely appropriate. It is a complete furphy. Where have we ended up? We've ended up with

Australia and East Timor in a serious dialogue for the first occasion about trying to find a long-term,

sustainable regional solution to a significant problem of people movement, people smuggling and human

trafficking.

REPORTER: Have you spoken to anyone in the East Timor Government about this and what do you

understand East Timor's current position?

STEPHEN SMITH: As I indicated yesterday when I was in Papua New Guinea publicly, that on my return to

Australia I wanted to have a conversation with my counterpart, the East Timorese Foreign Minister

Zacarias da Costa. I've done that today, we've had an initial conversation, and we'll have a further

conversation in the course of the next couple of days.

What I have done with him is that we have started the process of a formal consultation between Australia

and East Timor through our officials, a team of officials from Australia or a number of officials from Australia

will have discussion with East Timorese officials in the course of next week to start mapping out the details

of a conversation between Australia and East Timor. And of course as I've also indicated publicly Zacarias

da Costa from East Timor is not the only counterpart from the region that I've had a conversation with.

This will only proceed if there is regional support for it, either through the Bali Process or generally. And in

the course of the last few days since the Prime Minister's announcement I have had a conversation with

Marty Natalegawa, my Indonesian counterpart, and I've had a conversation in PNG with my PNG

counterpart Sam Abal and I've also had a conversation with my New Zealand counterpart.

If I could just make a point about the feverish excitement that I've seen from journalists commenting upon

journalists, I've been asked a series of questions and the Government's been asked a series of questions

today about Manus Island and Papua New Guinea.

I did a joint press conference with Sam Abal yesterday in PNG. There were Australian journalists there and

I made it quite clear that all I had done was to indicate to Sam Abal the substance of the Prime Minister's

speech, her approach to East Timor. And Sam Abal, my PNG counterpart, made it crystal clear that he had

received the briefing and PNG's position was to essentially not take the matter any further at this stage.

So there's been also a lot of feverish excitement about PNG today. It would be helpful if people actually

looked at what their Foreign Minister had had to say yesterday.

REPORTER: But as you say a lot of the details are coming after the announcement. Was this decision

rushed because of the impending election and should you have taken more time to consult before

announcing?

STEPHEN SMITH: This is an issue, the possible solution that has been the subject of conversation at

officials' level through the Bali Process over a period of time. It's not the first time we've seen a suggestion

that one of the ways to combat the people smugglers, one of the ways to stop women and children getting

on boats and running the risk of drowning, one of the ways of trying to bring some order to this very difficult

problem that our region and the world confronts, is a regional processing centre under regional framework.

That's not novel. But what we've seen for the first time is a regional leader, our Prime Minister, saying I

want to take this up.

Now as soon as you do that and say that there'll be a thousand different views from a thousand different

directions both in Australia and in the region. She did what was appropriate to do. She consulted...

REPORTER: But, but...

STEPHEN SMITH: ...East Timor, she consulted East Timor to see whether East Timor wanted to have a

conversation. She consulted the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Commissioner Guterres to see

whether the UN High Commission for Refugees was prepared to entertain consideration of such an idea.

And she gave the New Zealand Prime Minister a courtesy of a conversation because this will need to

involve not just source and transit and destination countries but also those countries throughout the world

who are part of the settlement and resettlement programs so far as refugees in our area is concerned.

She made it crystal clear in her speech that this was the start of a conversation, we were trying to find a

long term, long haul solution. It’s not going to be solved overnight, and it would never be solved by

conversations behind the scenes. We had to bring the thing to the public fore and have that conversation in

public.

We're now starting our dialogue with East Timor, we're also briefing through our officials all of the countries

in the region with an interest. We hope that we can make progress but we're not going to make progress in

a day or a week or a month.

This is a long term project to try and bring a long term solution to a problem which has bedevilled Australia

since we first saw Vietnamese refugees come to Australia in the 1970s by boat.

REPORTER: But couldn't you have been taking those soundings that you have been taking over the last

day, having those conversations before the announcement was made to get a better idea of the feel in the

region for this proposal?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well what is the feel so far? Firstly the feel is we have an express invitation from the

East Timorese Government to have a conversation and a dialogue with East Timor about a proposal for a

regional processing centre. And we are pursuing that through officials and through my own conversations,

and I and the Minister for Immigration, Minister Evans will pursue this assiduously in the forthcoming days

and weeks and months.

Secondly we've got an understanding so far as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Commissioner Guterres is concerned that he is prepared to entertain us moving forward on this matter.

We're not proposing to do it in the way in which John Howard did it which was unilateral, bilateral and using

countries who weren't parties to the Refugee Convention. We've made it clear it needs to be a country

which is a party to the Refugee Convention. We need to have regional support, we need to have the

agreement for support of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and we need to have the

involvement, cooperation and effectively the agreement of those countries like Australia, like New Zealand

and others who resettle asylum seekers and refugees in our own region.

You can't engage in all of those conversations without a proposal being made public. The proposal that the

Prime Minister made public was to start the conversation with East Timor, and that is what we are now

assiduously following.

If there's any other country in the region who wants to take part, wants to indicate an interest then that's

entirely a matter for them, and they will do so if they so desire.

REPORTER: Stephen Smith thank you very much for your time.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks, Lyndal. Thank you.

Media inquiries Minister's Office: (02) 6277 7500              Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

