





THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND  INTERCEPTS VESSEL

[3 January 2009] Border Protection Command this morning successfully intercepted a  suspected irregular entry vessel.    HMAS Bundaberg, operating under the control of Border Protection Command,  intercepted the vessel at approximately 10.57am (AEDST) approximately three  nautical miles north of Christmas Island.    Initial indications suggest there are 76 passengers and four crew on board the vessel.    Australia is proactively working with its neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the  Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime,  to address this serious issue.    People smuggling is a global and regional problem. According to the UNHCR 2008  Global Trends report, there were 42 million displaced persons worldwide at the end of  2008, including 15.2 million refugees.    The Australian Government has committed more than $654 million to border  protection and national security measures, including implementing a comprehensive  people smuggling strategy to combat this issue.The Government has expanded its  presence in the region with the Australian Federal Police, Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade, Department of Immigration and Citizenship and the Australian  Customs and Border Protection Service recently setting up or expanding liaison posts  devoted to deterring irregular migration.    Agencies are working closely with their counterparts in country exchanging and gathering  information, and strengthening our regional capacity to mitigate irregular migration to  Australia. Our strengthened offshore approach is working. Since September 2008 there have  been 92 disruptions of people smuggling ventures in Indonesia, and the arrest of 40 people  smuggling organisers.     The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks as well as establish their reasons for travel.      Media Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02)  6275 6793

-----------------------------

To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au





If you have received this transmission in error please  notify us immediately by return e-mail and delete all  copies. If this e-mail or any attachments have been sent  to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver  of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect  of information in the e-mail or attachments.

