

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

Tony Abbott interview on MIX 104.9 -  Border protection; Julia Gillard’s great  big new tax on mining; federal election   07/07/10

Subjects: Border protection; Julia Gillard’s great big new tax on mining; federal  election.

PETE DAVIES: Tony Abbott, good morning.

TONY ABBOTT: Morning, Pete.

PETE DAVIES: It’s nice to have you on 360 and of course the opening shots have  been fired with regards to the asylum seekers debate. Of course, the Prime Minister  Julia Gillard came out of the boxes yesterday suggesting that she’d started the ball  rolling to cut a deal with East Timor, yet it would it appear that while she’s spoken to  East Timorese President Jose Ramos Horta, apparently she hasn’t included Prime  Minister Xanana Gusmao in the loop?

TONY ABBOTT: No, and one of the other senior leaders, the Deputy Prime Minister,  has basically rejected the idea, so this is another sign, Pete, of an incompetent  government, a government which announces a policy which depends upon the  agreement of a foreign government which they have not got. It’s typical of the  incompetence that we’ve seen from this government in pink batts, in school halls and  also in the mining tax fiddle which is not going to raise the $10.5 billion that they  claim it will, and I’m afraid what we’re seeing from this government is a series of pre-election fixes, all of which will unravel post-election if people are conned this time as  they were in 2007.

PETE DAVIES: Tony, as an outsider looking in, I haven’ had time to completely  digest what the Prime Minister is putting on the table with regards to the East Timor  solution. However, as an outsider looking in, isn’t she basically ticking off on John  Howard’s policy?

TONY ABBOTT: That’s a good point, Pete. I mean, this is the same Labor Party  which denounced John Howard as immoral and which has now claimed to adopt his

policy. Now, the fact is that off shore processing in third countries is an important part  of stopping the boats. On its own it won’t stop the boats but it is an important part of  it. But how can something that was supposedly immoral when done by John Howard  be a stroke of political genius when done by Julia Gillard? But, as I said, she’s not  going to do it. This is about striking a pre-election pose, it’s not about serious policy  to stop the boats because she hadn’t got an agreement from the East Timorese  government before she announced the policy and she’ll never implement it.

PETE DAVIES: Tony, is this a case of, are you suggesting that this is a case of the  Prime Minister putting forward policy by perception? The whole of Australia is under  the impression that she’s ticked off on a deal with the mining industry and solved that  problem, now she’s come up with the off shore processing option in East Timor for  asylum seekers. Is that…

TONY ABBOTT: I think that’s exactly what’s happening. I mean, there’s a series of  con jobs being perpetrated here. You see, what she’s doing on the mining tax, Pete, is  she’s saying to the mining companies you won’t actually pay any more tax under my  proposal. She’s saying to the public, oh, we’re still going to raise $10.5 billion. Now,  someone is being conned here. She’s made the promise to the miners because she  needs them to stop their advertising campaign. She’s made the promise to the public  because she can’t afford to revise the Budget, but the truth is that the two promises are  completely incompatible and it will all unravel after the election, but all she’s got to  do is keep the pretence going for the eight weeks or so before the election is held.

PETE DAVIES: Just getting back to the asylum seekers issue, Tony, the fact that Julia  Gillard has put on the table the possibility of  shore processing, surely you would  support that?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, that’s our policy and so what she’s doing here is a form of  ‘me too’, but you can’t trust her to deliver because when we came up with this policy  she denounced it. When John Howard put this policy into practice, she denounced it.  Now, she’s embracing it for cynical political reasons because she knows she’s got a  problem with the electorate. She knows the electorate is very unhappy with these  boats that just keep coming under Labor and so she’s pulled this particular rabbit out  of a hat but she hasn’t even spoken to the East Timorese to get their agreement. So,  the whole thing is a bit of a sham. She doesn’t really believe it, she won’t really do it  but it’s out there in order to try to con people before the election.

PETE DAVIES: Ok, Tony, will you support this legislation if it gets to the Senate?

TONY ABBOTT: Well, there’s no legislation for something like an off shore  processing centre. It’s basically an agreement that you do with a foreign government.  Now, yes it’ll have to be funded and I suppose that would require an appropriation in  the Budget. Normally, Opposition’s don’t block the Budget and as I said if it ever  happens it would be an implementation of our policy, at least in principle, but as I said  it’s not going to happen. This is not a policy that is designed to be implemented. This  is a policy designed to get the Labor Party through an election.

PETE DAVIES: Ok, Tony, speaking of elections, a lot of us are of the opinion that  August 21 is starting to firm. What’s interesting though, I don’t know whether I’m

reading between the lines here or looking for things that maybe aren’t there but a  campaign meeting called by the Prime Minister for this Saturday in Sydney is surely a  sign?

TONY ABBOTT: Yes, it is but you know up there in Darwin we’ve had a candidate,  Natasha Griggs, in the field now for quite a few months and so we’re ready whenever  they call it but I think there’s no doubt that the powerbrokers who installed Julia

Gillard to try to cover up for the incompetence of the Government, they are hoping to  surf a wave of goodwill back into office and I think you can be pretty confident that  there will be an election very soon.

PETE DAVIES: Tony Abbott, thank you so much for taking the time to talk to us and  my studio door is always open.

TONY ABBOTT: Thank you so much, Pete.



