

429 Magill Rd, St Morris, SA 5068 ▪ Ph: (08) 8431 2277 ▪ Fax: (08) 8431 2288



Transcript

Hon Christopher Pyne MP  2GB Ray Hadley Show  13 April 2010

SUBJECTS: BER Taskforce; Gillard and the media; Berridale

Ray Hadley: You’re jumping up and down as most people are at the moment saying you  want a judicial inquiry not just some sort of taskforce, can you tell us why it’s important to  have a judicial inquiry, not a taskforce?

Christopher Pyne MP: Well a taskforce gives the Government the ability to push a lot of  these issues under the carpet, and they go to the taskforce basically talk to the hand is the  message. A Judicial Inquiry is an independent body that can compel witnesses, it can  subpoena documents, it can summons people. It has it’s own timeline, it’s own secretariat,  and can make recommendations for all sorts of things. A Judicial Inquiry is the only way to  get this out of the hands of the Government, and put it in the hands of somebody who,  without fear or favour, can give a report that we all know is going to be genuine.

The problem with this taskforce, and it’s no reflection on the man that has been put in charge  of it, but it actually reports to Julia Gillard, it reports to the Department of Education, it’s no  more independent than any other part of it.

Hadley: But wouldn’t Mr Orgill, given where he has come from, he’s not some bureaucrat,  he is a highly credentialed person in the private sector, an investment banker, or former  investment banker, Mr Brad Orgill, wouldn’t he be jumping up and down if he files a report  that says this stinks the whole thing stinks, and I believe it goes hand in glove with an  Auditor-General’s report that says it stinks as well, wouldn’t he be jumping the joint upside  down and talking to either the Australian, or you or me about this if they try and duckshove it  away somewhere?

Pyne: Well you’d hope so, and he has his own reputation to take care of, but what are his  powers? If for example he turns up to one of the seven or eight contractors in New South  Wales who have been getting these amazing fees that you’ve been talking about and I’ve  been talking about and says, I want you to give me the documents that shows how you can  justify these fees, well he has no power to compel them to do so. If they say, well that’s great,  good on you, we’ll see you in a couple of months, he can’t actually compel them to do it,  where as a Judicial Inquiry can actually subpoena those documents, and has all the power of  the courts. This is my great concern.

Hadley: Well given, with all due respect, we’ve had to carry the Deputy Prime Minister and  Education Minister kicking and screaming to this point; do you think it’s almost impossible  that she’ll accede to another request from you for a Judicial Inquiry instead of a taskforce that  she just set up?











Pyne: Well you might be right Ray, this is a political fix, this taskforce, designed to get them  through the election campaign and make them look like they are doing something.

Hadley: That’s my great fear Christopher, I’m talking to Christopher Pyne, my great fear is  this. Every time we have something set up, whether it’s the boat people from Sri Lanka or  Afghanistan it’s three months for them, six months for them and of course whatever time  frame it is it is highly likely the election will be gone by the time this is all over, so they go to  the electorate saying these are the problems we’ve had. Insulation, Greg Combet is doing his  best to fix that and he’s appointed these contractors to go into homes, and that will be  announced shortly I’m sure.  The boat people, well we have reacted quickly to that, despite  the fact we’re still coming we’re not processing them we’re assessing them and in relation to  the other problem, BER well there you go, we’ve appointed Brad to fix this up, Brad Orgel  and it will be fixed up. So they go to their electorate and everyone who doesn’t take a keen  interest in this like I have or you have says oh well there you go, it was a problem but they  fixed it.

Pyne: Yes well that’s right, I think the whole problem with this Government is that it’s built  on spin and controlling the media cycle, and if it wasn’t for your program and yourself and  the Today Show and as you pointed out the Australian, and the Opposition pursuing this,  Julia Gillard would still be laughing off these problems as isolated incidents…



Hadley:  Can I ask you a question, and I don’t live in Canberra where most of the media who  report on this do live and I guess it’s a question because you were there in the previous  Government as well. Why would there be, barring the Australian and barring this program,  I’m independent I don’t have people in Canberra I talk to about it, I talk to you or I talk to the  Government about it. Why would there be reluctance in relation to firstly insulation and then  this for the Canberra press gallery barring the Australian and other people, it appeared to me,  and the Australian made that point this morning that it was largely ignored by people who  you think would be talking about it all the time and I’m talking about the senior bureau  chiefs, be it for TV or radio or for newspapers. Is there a secret handshake society down there  where you don’t talk about it?

Pyne:  There isn’t a secret handshake society but certainly the press gallery in Canberra has  been accused of being very insular and I think there is a bit of professional envy involved too  in the press where if one media outlet in pursuing something another media outlet sort of

down plays it.

Hadley: But I don’t understand that, the Australian made all the running on this and I was  happy to get on their coat tails because I thought they were right…

Pyne: Yes

Hadley: …so I don’t know why other reporters from radio and TV wouldn’t jump on the coat  tails, not just because it’s in the Australian it’s right, but when you get emails and get it  backed up by your listeners why wouldn’t you go after it? I made the point earlier that in my  other life I am a sports commentator and I don’t do it anymore but in the early part of my  commentary years I used to go on tour with the Kangaroos (inaudible) and the Wallabies and  you stay at their hotel, and it’s very hard to be critical of them and be objective when you’re









sitting down to breakfast, lunch and dinner with them.

Pyne: Yeah you’ve got to try to stay at arms length

Hadley: Because you know some big prop is likely to get you by the throat and choke you…

Pyne:  But I also think there is a bit of a starry eyed ness about Julia Gillard in the media, I   think there are a lot of people…

Hadley: I think there are some people having a love affair with her and I don’t mean that in  an, untoward way, I mean there are people who think she can do no wrong.

Pyne: Well that’s true and I think one of the difficulties we’ve had in this issue which has  now been running since before June last year, it’s actually been amazing we’ve kept it going  as long as we have and Julia Gillard has tried her best to laugh it off and dismiss it but it’s  such a serious issue because mums and dads are so angry about it that it hasn’t gone away. I  think that’s testament to Australians common sense that a lot of the media have not wanted  Julia Gillard to be seen to be failing because there is a bit of a starry eyed…

Hadley: There is a cheers squad there for her…

Pyne: She’s a bit of the next big thing and they all want her to be a success.

Hadley: And I quite like her as a person.  I think she’s a charming person from my  interviews with her, from what I read of her, from what I hear of her.  She seems like a very  nice and capable person, but if she buggers things up; you know we had Peter Garrett  sidelined over what he did.  Admittedly four young men died and one point two billion was  wasted and they’ll have to spend another one point two billion via Greg Combet to fix it.  But  this is at the moment about 10 billion dollars of our money and instead of her being criticised  today there are people saying, “well isn’t it wonderful she’s instituted this task force.”  I  mean, what about the fact that she for the last six months or particularly the last three months  has been telling people like me to pull our heads in; that we’re dopes.

Pyne: Well she actually said that the Australian was fabricating stories.  And we’ve asked her  72 questions in Question Time in Parliament House over the last nine months and she’s  dismissed them all, with a laugh basically.  There’s no reason at all Julia Gillard should be  praised for establishing a Clayton’s inquiry which is designed to get them through an election  cycle.  Unless they establish a judicial inquiry with real power, it is just a media cycle  political fix, and any praise for Julia Gillard today is misplaced.  What they should be saying  of course is that she’s been dragged kicking and screaming to recognising what everybody  else has been recognising for many many months.

We were down at Berridale yesterday.  You know Ray they are still not using the core seven  library that should have cost them 285 thousand (dollars), which cost them 908 thousand  (dollars) because it doesn’t have a fire exit.  We’re talking about a place that’s a few  kilometres from Jindabyne and that they have no air conditioning.  They’ve been given  louver windows and told to themselves to coll down with louver windows.









Hadley: And this is of course where we had a double brick building; think it was toilet  block…. And then I had an argument with Verity Firth and with Julia Gillard that I got the  sizes wrong.  That the reason one cost so much and the other didn’t cost as much because one  was 60 square metres and the other one I think was 130 square metres.  When I got my tape

measure out, thanks to the people at the PMC, I found out that they were very close to the  same size and one was out of double brick and the other one wasn’t.

Pyne: Exactly.  When you actually see them next to each other it is laughable.  It is actually  sad and tragic.  I mean there is three metre by two metre piece of concrete which cost the  school nine thousand dollars; an access road that cost them eight thousand dollars that was  already there.  There were charged eight thousand dollars for an access road which was  already there.

Hadley: Look, I don’t think you’re going to get what you want; I’ll be honest with you, but  let’s just hope Mr Orgill, and he comes here highly recommended with an outstanding  reputation, is strong enough to survive all this.

Pyne: Look, we will get a judicial inquiry eventually Ray because it’s the only way to  resolve the issue.  And we’ll just keep plugging away because it’s the right thing to do.

Hadley: Well thank you for your help and thanks for talking to me.

Pyne: Thank you.

Hadley: Christopher Pyne, the Federal Shadow Education Minister.







