Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Transcript - 2GB Ray Hadley program  Tuesday 11th May 2010



Subjects: asylum seekers in Brisbane motel, illegal boat arrivals, Federal Budget

EandOE



RAY HADLEY: This is another disaster in terms of the way they manage this problem Scott.



SCOTT MORRISON: Absolutely. This is what happens when you lose control of your

borders. When Christmas Island is full, when every detention centre around the country is

full and all the accommodation is taken up and you have got 4,500 people who have turned

up this financial year alone, people end up in motels. Now it’s not the first time it has

happened I should be up front about that Ray. When there was that massive surge arrivals

that occurred in 1999, 2000 and 2001 we had to do that when we were in government for a

brief period of time but the difference here Ray is that the surge in arrivals we have seen this

time is a result of this government’s policies. The only way you are going to keep people out

of motels is if you stop the boats.



RAY HADLEY: Exactly. Well the point I made earlier, this is not foreign territory to Australia.

The reason that the Temporary Protection Visas and the Pacific Solution were installed by

your government when they were in government was because they found themselves in

exactly the same position this government finds itself in at the moment but we get this 3

month and 6 month moratorium which gets them off side with their left and the Greens but

does nothing to alleviate the problem.



SCOTT MORRISON: It’s as ineffective as it is discriminatory this policy they have

introduced. I was interested yesterday that all of those bleeding hearts in the Labor Party

who used to attack us for the Pacific Solution and the stand we took to stop the boats didn’t

say boo to Kevin Rudd yesterday in their party room, only Michael Danby said something,

the rest of them hid under their chairs. So this government isn’t going to do anything to stop

the boats Ray, they will put on a show, they will say one thing, they will do another and

people will end up in motels all around the country and that is what we are seeing play out

because their policies are failing.



RAY HADLEY: I made comments this morning on the Channel 9 Today program about this.

Allison from Newcastle sent me an e-mail Scott, she says that ‘at last a voice for the poverty

stricken refugees that have been waiting years in atrocious conditions to get here legally

while the illegals who pay thousands of US dollars per head to people smugglers are

obviously living a much more prosperous lifestyle, jump the queue, make their chances even

slimmer and legal entry a joke. Bleeding hearts, grow a brain.’ And this is the point I make

time after time, we only allow 13,500 in to the country, for every one of these people that is

allowed in illegally it puts some poor bugger in another part of the world in a UN camp further

down the list.



SCOTT MORRISON: That is exactly what happens Ray and it is not just the single male who

gets on that boat and pays the people smuggler but then they have access under this

government to the family reunion program because they have permanent protection visas,

so for every one that comes they have the opportunity to ask another 2 or 3 or 4 depending

on how big their family is and it is their spouse and children. So that was all taken out of the

refugee and humanitarian program as well so it affects next year’s intake and it is very, very

unfair.



RAY HADLEY: Ok, get your crystal ball out, go 6 months down the track after the next

federal election and if they are returned this government, under Kevin Rudd, what will

happen to all these people that arrived since the announcement of the moratorium for either

3 months for Sri Lankans and 6 months for Afghans, what will happen to those people who

are currently being housed at various centres across the country?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well they will get their assessments and if they are considered to be

legitimate refugees they will get a permanent protection visa.



RAY HADLEY: So in other words this is mere window dressing until when the election is

over.



SCOTT MORRISON: That’s right and it is just like what he said about population. He puts

Tony Burke in charge of it and says he will report back on the other side of the election, we

have the same issue here with the freeze on asylum applications. He wants to put every

uncomfortable issue where he has failed off until the other side of the election, we want to

hold him to account for that and what we are seeing in Brisbane is the consequences of

failed policy. We will see it again in the budget tonight, hundreds of millions of dollars extra

would have to be spent this year alone and in the years that follow because these policies

have failed.



RAY HADLEY: And don’t forget he will balance the books, Wayne Swan tonight by telling

everyone there will be $9 billion coming in from the super profits mining tax but it doesn’t

start until 2012.



SCOTT MORRISON: It is a budget built on quicksand as Joe Hockey said. This tax we are

opposing strongly, it’s a tax on everyone’s superannuation at the end of the day. I have a lot

of self-funded retirees in my electorate in the Sutherland Shire and they have investments in

these mining companies which have taken an absolute hammering. So it is an attack on self-funded retirees as well who have worked damn hard over their lives to not have to rely on

the state in their retirement and they deserve a better go.



END



