Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release



Mr Rudd must fix his border protection mess as new year's  resolution  Friday 1st January 2010

Mr Rudd and Minister Evans must make 2010 the year they put an end  to their weak decisions and failed policies on border protection, following  the   arrival of   yet another boat in the last few hours of 2009,   Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott Morrison said today.

“The last   illegal boat   arrival on new year’s eve, carrying 58 passengers  with one   passenger   in need of critical   medical care, highlights again  the dangerous nature of   the people smuggling   business that puts lives  at risk. It also highlights once again the magnetic effect of the Rudd  Government’s failed polices and weak   decisions on border protection,”  Mr Morrison said.

“We need to stop this trade and put   the   people smugglers out of  business. You cannot do this with weak   decisions and failed policies,”  he said.

“The Coalition   supports the resettlement of legitimate   refugees in  Australia.

“It was the Menzies Government that signed the   UN Refugee    Convention.    It was the Fraser Government that   raised our refugee  intake following the   Vietnam War. And   it was   the Howard Government  that accepted over 100,000 refugees and   smashed the people  smuggling business that preyed on their   desperation.

“To put this last year in context, more people arrived   illegally by boat  during the past twelve months under the Rudd Government,   than during  the   12   years following the Vietnam War.

“In total, Australia   accepted 108,641 Indochinese refugees between  1976 and 1988.   However during this time, only 2,059 people arrived  illegally by boat.  More than 97% were processed offshore, as also  occurred under the Howard Government,   and   accepted into   Australia  under our refugee   resettlement programme.

“This is a debate about   the fairness and integrity of our refugee and  humanitarian resettlement programmes.

There is not a debate about   Australia’s   willingness to take refugees. It  is about ensuring that   the Australian Government makes the decisions  on our   refugee intake, not people smugglers.

“Under the Rudd Government, we have lost control of our borders.   People’s lives are being put at risk and   the fairness and   integrity of our    refugee and humanitarian settlement programmes has   also   been  compromised.

“In 2010 Mr Rudd and   Minister Evans must make a new year’s  resolution to clean up the mess they have created out of our border  protection regime,” Mr Morrison said.



