The Hon Julia Gillard MP

Minister for Education. Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations

Minister for Social Inclusion

Deputy Prime Minister

11 April, 2010

Transcript

Television Inteview - Insiders Program, Sunday 9.00am

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  900AM SUNDAY  11 APRIL 2010  INSIDERS

ISSUES: Potential AEU NAPLAN test ban, Asylum Seekers, BER, Health reform

BARRIE CASSIDY, PRESENTER: We'll go to the source of the story now and that is the  Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, who is our program guest this morning. She's also, of  course, Education Minister. She joins us in our Brisbane studios.

Good morning, welcome.

JULIA GILLARD, DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So let's take it one at a time. Are you persuaded that these teachers'  unions are about to vote in this, on whether or not they will supervise the literacy and  numeracy tests - does it look to you as if a national boycott will be in place?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, it's not too late for the Australian Education Union to change its  mind and to cancel any proposed national boycott.

The AEU is meeting tomorrow and my words to them are very direct and very clear. Banning  the tests would be bad for students, bad for the kids, bad for parents and bad for transparency.  The nation should know what is happening in our schools.

So I would be saying to the AEU: take the opportunity tomorrow; change your mind;  administer these tests.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Well, their words to you are they say that they talk about "the principle  of their profession against the stupidity of politicians".

JULIA GILLARD: (Laughs) Well, that's a slogan of course. But let's look at the profession  overall.

Principals aren't banning these tests. Principals will administer them. Teachers in independent  schools aren't banning these tests. They will administer them.

I meet teachers every day that are pro the test and pro My School.

What the Australian Education Union is asking me to do is to gut My School and I just won't  do it. My School is all about putting more power into the hands of parents than they've ever  had before by giving them more information about their child's school than they've ever had  before.

I'm asking parents if we need them to consider working with us to make sure that the tests  continue to run out this year.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But what will you be asking them to do?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, we're obviously looking at a range of options, Barrie. We haven't  closed in on a final option yet.

But one option clearly on the table is asking parents to assist with supervising the test.  Obviously they would do that under instruction from qualified supervisors and we would  need to make sure that people had working with children checks and the like, but asking them  to work with us to make sure that the test goes ahead.

BARRIE CASSIDY: They would need the support of the principals would they for that to  happen?

JULIA GILLARD: They certainly would but the national principals association, which  represents principals in state schools, independent schools and Catholic schools, is not  supporting any ban on the tests.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So this is in effect inviting parents to revolt; to revolt against the  teachers?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, it's certainly inviting parents to help us do what we know parents  want.

If we look at the My School website, Barrie, the current statistics are we've had around 2.7  million visits. We've had 140 million pages of the My School website looked at. Parents have  literally voted with their fingertips in extraordinary numbers because they want this  information.

And if you look at what the AEU wants us to do, it is gutting the My School website. They  want us to engage in the kind of publication bans we've seen in New South Wales. They want  to stop the comparison with similar schools. They want to stop the comparison with the  national average. They even want things like the colour coding - the red and the green - gone.

It would be gutting the My School website and I'm not prepared to do it. And I'm not  prepared to negotiate under threat.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But you heard Malcolm Farr's throwaway line about my mum the  scab. But there's a serious side to that isn't it, that some of these teachers will be accusing any  parents who take part in this exercise of being strike breakers?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, I think it would be my mum who cares about my education.  Mums and dads want the test results for their own child. These national tests give them a  report on how their child is going in literacy and numeracy. And mums and dads obviously  want the information that the My School website is giving them.

But Barrie, my message is it's not too late for the Australian Education Union to make a  decision in the interests of Australian children and Australian education.

Mums and dads want the reports for their child. They want My School. And of course, as a  national policy maker, I want the information that My School gives me.

The reality is we identified struggling schools we didn't know about because of the My  School information - 110 schools benefiting out of our $2.5 billion of new money and new  reforms to help schools that are struggling. We would not have identified those 110 schools  extra without My School.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Does it worry you that this might create a rather unpleasant  atmosphere around some of the schools when you're pitting, you're essentially pitching,  parents against teachers?

JULIA GILLARD: Even if the AEU boycott goes ahead I think it will only have impact in  some areas. There are teachers around the country who will still administer these national  tests.

For those areas where we have problems we are obviously canvassing all options. And one  option is to ask parents to work with us to get these tests out.

Now it's not my intention to create problems. But it's not me, Barrie, that's considering a ban.  It's the Australian Education Union that's considering a ban. So the message is: do the right  thing; call the ban off; administer the national tests.

That'll be good for kids because they'll get more information about their education. Their  mums and dads can have a look at it.

It's good for the nation because it means we will be able to continue My School in its current  form.

It also means we will be able to add to My School. This would be the first year that we are  retesting children who have participated in national tests earlier.

It's the third year of national testing. We test grade three, five, seven and nine. So it will be  the first year that kids, for example in grade three, sit a test again.

Teachers talk to me about the power of value added measures. This will be the first year we  can do value added measures because we've got the same kids being retested. Why would  you stop that?

BARRIE CASSIDY: And the first year they'll be doing it with mum and dad looking on too  perhaps.

JULIA GILLARD: (Laughs) You never know, Barrie. That may improve results in and of  itself, with mum and dad looming over your shoulder.

BARRIE CASSIDY: It could well do.

I want to ask you about asylum seekers now. And do you accept that this tightening of the  policy, there must be a lot of Labor Party supporters and members who are very  uncomfortable about what you've just done?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, we make decisions in the national interest, Barrie, and this was a  decision in the national interest.

Circumstances are changing in Sri Lanka. They're changing in Afghanistan. It makes sense to  halt processing whilst we assess the impact of the changes on the ground in Sri Lanka and  Afghanistan.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But you say that circumstances are changing and in support of that  Stephen Smith and others quoted the UNHCR and saying that they're holding a review. But  in fact they've made it quite clear since that these reviews are routine and nothing should  necessarily be read into that.

JULIA GILLARD: Well, we've made a decision. Obviously UNHCR is looking at the  changing circumstances...

BARRIE CASSIDY: But they always do. They do it regularly.

JULIA GILLARD: ... in Sri Lanka and Afghanistan.

BARRIE CASSIDY: They always do.

JULIA GILLARD: Well, and some, well they do. Obviously UNHCR looks at these things  regularly. Obviously we look at these things regularly.

And having looked at the circumstances in Sri Lanka and in Afghanistan we believe that  there is the prospect of change that matters to the assessment of refugee applications.

In Sri Lanka they're in an election process. Obviously there's been a long-running civil  conflict and civil war in Sri Lanka. They are now stabilising through an election process.  We've got to see what that means on the ground in Sri Lanka.

Afghanistan obviously still faces very difficult circumstances but parts of the country are  certainly stabilising and different to what they were in the past. And our advice is that the

circumstances of Hazaras, who are the main ethnic minority that seeks asylum - the  circumstances of the Hazara people could be changing.

Now I don't mean to say by that that we think that there's some magic solution for Hazara  people in Afghanistan, but certain parts of the country. Obviously we need to get more  information and we will do that during the six months that there is not processing to finality  of claims from people from Afghanistan and three months in the case of Sri Lanka.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And in the case of Sri Lanka the travel advice on the foreign affairs  website here in Australia, it says, "while the conflict has ended there remains a high risk of  politically motivated violence in the country."

Now politically motivated violence - surely that is a form of persecution?

JULIA GILLARD: Well Barrie, I don't think that really we can do that comparison.  Obviously as a Government we provide the best advice we can to our nationals who are  contemplating travel. So we are advising them about their likelihood of meeting violence or  problems in nations overseas.

When we're looking at the refugee convention what is being assessed is whether someone  who is seeking to be classified as a refugee is fleeing a well-founded fear of persecution.

They are obviously two different things.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yeah sure, advice to Australians, but if you're advising Australians  that there's a high risk of politically motivated violence throughout the country, then surely  there's an even higher risk that that violence will apply to local Sri Lankans?

JULIA GILLARD: Well, but the tests are not the same, Barrie. I mean obviously here in  Australia we are getting the best possible advice we can to people who have some discretion  about their travel. Your thinking will I go somewhere in the world, you look up the travel  advisories and that helps you make your decision.

When we're looking at the refugee convention what we are looking at is whether people  would face persecution, they have a well-founded fear of it and it is unsafe for them to return.  That is different.

And Sri Lanka is changing. We are in the election process there. We're going to look at that  change in Sri Lanka. That's what the decision about suspending asylum seeker processing for  people from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan announced by my ministerial colleagues was all  about. Things are changing and we're going to look at the nature of those changes.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And the suspension runs for between three and six months and very  conveniently you're going to have an election within that window.

JULIA GILLARD: Well, we've made those determinations so we can look at the changing  in country conditions. That announcement was made loud and clear obviously by the Minister  for Immigration on Friday.

We believe that's the right thing to do. What we are looking at is we are testing whether  people have a well-founded fear of persecution. Obviously to do that you need the most up to  date advice and information about what is happening in the country.

The circumstances in these countries are changing so it makes sense to allow those changes  to happen and then to review what they mean for asylum seeker processing and asylum  seeker claims.

I mean obviously if people can be returned to their home countries in safety then that is what  we will do.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I just want to go back to schools again and the schools stimulus  program, and ask you specifically about the suggestions that major companies are  overcharging. And quite specifically again the Reed Group, for example, reports that they're  charging fees of up to 21 per cent.

Have you had a close look at that? Are you able to satisfy yourself that that is not the case?

JULIA GILLARD: Barrie, I want to make sure that the dollars spent in the Building the  Education Revolution Program are spent well.

I have seen the claim that you refer to and we have had a look at that claim. And when we  looked at it we obviously have a target of 4 per cent for project-management fees.

The group you refer to is doing more than project management. If they do more than project  management obviously they're entitled to be paid for it.

And to give you an example of that they're doing on the ground-site management. That is  literally the person who is there saying: you need to move that pile of bricks from here to  there; you need to move that glass window back over there - that kind of direct site  management...

BARRIE CASSIDY: Yeah sure, but does that take it from 4 per cent to 21 per cent? Does  that...

JULIA GILLARD: ... which is a different task and separately charged for.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But does that justify raising then the fee from 4 per cent to 21 per  cent?

JULIA GILLARD: That is not the explanation of the difference from 4 per cent to 21 per  cent. I was giving you an example. And the example was that this group is providing more  services than project management. They're providing a range of additional services and they  are obviously entitled to charge for additional services when they're provided.

Moving beyond this specific example all up to Building the Education Revolution, of course I  want to make sure that the money is spent well.

That is why when we announced this huge program which has played a major part in keeping  this country out of recession and supporting jobs, we announced within it auditing and

monitoring mechanisms at every stage; not just in retrospect when things had happened but  during the course of the program being rolled out.

And I have said that if we need to add to that auditing and monitoring, then we will to make  sure that we're getting value for money and good projects.

But Barrie, I could happily take you to schools around this country where people are  delighted with their Building the Education Revolution project and the transformation it's  working in their school.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But I'm sure a lot of people could also take you around the country and  show you where private projects are being carried out and nobody, no middle man, gets paid  21 per cent commission on anything.

JULIA GILLARD: Well, different schools and school systems are doing these things in  different ways.

But Barrie, we've also got to get a sense of the dimension of the task here. The biggest  construction is in the nation's primary schools and overwhelmingly primary schools are  government schools. So the task that we asked state governments to undertake was a far  larger task than, for example, the independent school system was being asked to undertake.

Consequently you would expect there to be some different rollout and management structures  given the real scale difference in the size of the task.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Okay, just finally with COAG coming up next weekend, the Victorian  Premier, John Brumby, demonstrated this week that he can play tough politics. But you were  once his chief of staff, so I guess you already knew that.

JULIA GILLARD: (Laughs) Well, obviously I know John Brumby well. I was his chief of  staff. I know Kevin Rudd well. Kevin Rudd is determined to deliver hospital reform to make  sure that we've got a sustainable health and hospital system for the nation's future - to make  sure that we've got proper funding nationally going locally into hospital networks.

I am sure the dialogue will continue fast and furious in the lead-up to COAG. But no-one  should underestimate the Prime Minister's determination to get this done.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So you know them both well. When the clash heads, who will win?

JULIA GILLARD: (Laughs) Well Barrie, let me just say it again. No-one should  underestimate the Prime Minister's determination to get this done.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning.

JULIA GILLARD: Thank you.

ENDS.



