Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship    Media Release





Transcript - Doorstop interview

Tuesday 25th May 2010

Subjects: Escapes from Villawood Detention Centre, Coalition immigration and border

protection policy



SCOTT MORRISON: Well we have had reports confirmed to media today that 9 detainees at

Villawood have broken out of the detention centre and that a number of them, we

understand 6 of them, are at large. What this is all about though is a system that has been

pushed to breaking point. We have had, just in the last 5 months, an increase in the onshore

detention population because of the chaos on Christmas Island, it has increased by more

than 240%. We had just over 300 people in onshore detention centres at the beginning of

this year, we had just over 1,100 based on figures just released by the Department in the

last couple of days.



The reason for this increase is because Christmas Island has been full and this government

has been transferring people to the mainland for many, many months. So effectively the

break outs are a result of a system being pushed to breaking point because of this

government’s border protection failures. We have a system now where under this

government they are transferring people onto the mainland and somehow they don’t think it

is going to cost anything at all. In the budget just the other week, there was not one extra

cent, not one extra cent for additional costs for onshore detention despite the fact there has

been a 240% increase in the detention population. They are going to re-open the Curtin

Detention Centre for what could be up to 1,000 people who have arrived since the asylum

freeze was put in but there’s not one extra cent to run the Curtin Detention Centre. They can

build it but they have to operate it, apparently it is going to run itself.



Then you have the pressures on the detention centres, whether it is Villawood, whether it is

the Northern Detention Centre in Darwin, whether it is people staying in motels, where we

have had break outs, whether it is Maribyrnong where we have also had breakouts, the

reason for all of this is because of the pressure on the system and the pressure is not going

to go away, it is only going to increase as the border protection chaos continues under this

government’s policies.



QUESTION: People broke out under the Howard Government too. How is this any different?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well the reason for the break outs is the point I am highlighting here.

The reason for these breakouts is because of the pressure on the system. The pressure on

the system is a significantly increased detention population that is the product of the border

protection blow outs.



QUESTION: But how do you know that’s the reason, because these are Chinese nationals

that have escaped, they are not people who have necessarily come from Christmas Island.



SCOTT MORRISON: No, they are Chinese detainees and back at the start of January we

only had 100 or so people in detention in Villawood, now we have over 400 and the reason

for that increase is because of the transfer of people from Christmas Island to the mainland.

Now that has happened in Darwin, it has happened in Maribyrnong, it has happened in the

Northern Centre, it has happened all across the country and that’s the sort of stress that has

been put on the system. That is what is being fed back to me by people who are working in

these areas, the stress is incredible, our immigration officials, people working for Serco are

under extreme pressure and as a result, when there is pressure you are going to have these

failures. When we had the last break out the Deputy Prime Minister said this wasn’t to be

tolerated. She blamed the contractor, she said it was all their fault, she needs to take

responsibility now. The government said there would be ‘swift action’ in the department

release, well we are still here, they are still breaking out, our borders continue to remain

[inaudible].



QUESTION: If you were Minister, Mr Morrison, and this break out had occurred, would you

be sacking Serco, which is paid $300 million plus of taxpayer’s money, appointed by the

previous government to manage…



SCOTT MORRISON: Well that’s not true. The contract was awarded by this government to

Serco. The process for the contracting of those services started under the Howard

Government…



QUESTION: [inaudible]



SCOTT MORRISON: No they weren’t, they were appointed by this government, they

continued the contracting process. But, regardless, the point I would be focusing on is why

our detention centres are full. Our detention centres are full because this government has

lost control of our borders. That’s the issue that needs to be solved. All of these issues,

whether it is people in motels or whether it is too many people in onshore detention centres

or $1 billion cost blow outs in detention programs, all of this is a product of the border

protection system that has completely failed. That is the problem that needs to be solved.



QUESTION: But isn’t the problem here that taxpayers are paying a very large amount of

money to a private company that’s not doing its job and keeping these sorts of facilities

secure?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well this is a contract that was let, for example, when there was

around, I think, 6 people on Christmas Island, there are almost 2,500 people on Christmas

Island now. The blow outs in both the detention population, the costs that are associated,

are a product of the policy failures. Now the contractor has to do its job, the government has

to ensure the contractor does its job. This government is making this one of the hardest

detention jobs anywhere in the world today.



QUESTION: The Coalition has said that it would set up a detention centre offshore. Have

you made any progress as to where you would set it up offshore?



SCOTT MORRISON: We said we would maintain an absolute commitment to offshore

processing. That’s what we have said.



QUESTION: Can you guarantee that if you were immigration minister there would be no

breakouts?



SCOTT MORRISON: No that’s not my point today. My point today is why these breakouts

are occurring. You have got to address the causes of this problem. The causes of this

problem is the failed border protection policies of this government.



QUESTION: …In 2001 there were 157 break outs in that one year, that’s almost five times

as many. Are you saying this government is doing a worse job than the previous

government?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well in 2001, as we know, we had a massive surge in arrivals. We

know that was the case and the government did something about stopping the surge in

arrivals and when you dealt with this surge in arrivals then this problem was addressed and

that is what I am saying this government should do. They need to address the cause of this

problem which is the surge in arrivals.



QUESTION: The Shire president of the area around Leonora in the Kalgoorlie District is

saying that they are refurbishing a mine site in that district to take Christmas Island asylum

seekers. If you inherited this facility as an active detention centre, what would you do with it?



SCOTT MORRISON: I can’t confirm those reports but frankly nothing would surprise me in

terms of what this government is now doing. You have got them ringing around churches for

extra beds, what’s next? The granny flat? The spare room out the back? So will just have to

wait and see. So nothing would surprise me with the chaos they have created by their own

policies.



QUESTION: The claims of family members that up to 100 asylum seekers may have

disappeared on a boat travelling down from Java, the government can’t even confirm

whether that boat existed. Is that good enough?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well look, this is the human tragedy of this situation. I have often

referred to this vessel. It left Indonesia in October, there were 105 people, as I understand,

aboard. There were family members of those people who live in Brisbane and they have

waited for that boat to turn up since. I think it just highlights what is at risk when we don’t

stop the boats. People get on them and people die on boats.



QUESTION: What’s your policy? It’s to process asylum seekers offshore so does that mean

you would set up another detention camp offshore?



SCOTT MORRISON: We have said that we will maintain offshore processing…



QUESTION: But you haven’t said how, you have got to be credible and say how.



SCOTT MORRISON: We will outline all our policies before the next election Paul as I have

said to you.



QUESTION: But is your policy open to processing these people in another country or would

it be done on Australian territory that has been excised?



SCOTT MORRISON: As I said, we will make all this clear before the next election.



END



