1







ATTORNEY-GENERAL   HON ROBERT McCLELLAND MP

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL



[8 January 2010 ] Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected irregular entry  vessel.    HMAS Maitland, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted the vessel at  3:30pm (AEDST) on 8 January 12 nautical miles north west of Ashmore Islands.      It was initially detected by a Customs and Border Protection Dash 8 aircraft operating under the control of  Border Protection Command.    Initial indications suggest 27 passengers and 3 crew are on board the vessel.     People smuggling is a world-wide problem and Australia is committed to working closely with our  neighbours to address the issue.    Situations around the world mean that large numbers of displaced persons are looking for settlement in  stable, democratic nations such as Australia, and can be targeted by, and fall prey to, people smugglers.    People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The commitment of  our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People Smuggling, Trafficking in  Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing this most serious issue.    Recent meetings with government officials in Indonesia and Malaysia have led to positive steps forward in  bilateral and regional cooperation to deter people smuggling.    The AFP continues to provide support to foreign law enforcement agencies in their efforts to combat people  smuggling activities in the region. These close working relationships have resulted in a number of arrests  and disruptions to people smuggling ventures in countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, and Sri Lanka.    Since September 2008, the AFP has charged 80 people with offences under the Migration Act 1958 (Cth).  These offences attract a maximum penalty of 20 years imprisonment.    The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s borders.

2

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity and health  checks. Their reasons for travel will also be established.

Media Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02) 6275 6793





-----------------------------

To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au



If you have received this transmission in error please  notify us immediately by return e-mail and delete all  copies. If this e-mail or any attachments have been sent  to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver  of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect  of information in the e-mail or attachments.

