Joe Hockey, MP  Shadow Treasurer  Member for North Sydney

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - MELBOURNE - TUESDAY 9 NOVEMBER, 2010

9TH NOVEMBER 2010

Subject: MYEFO

JOE HOCKEY: Today the government has delivered a recipe for higher interest rates. The government lacks  ticker, it lacks courage and today is a further illustration of that fact.

How on earth Wayne Swan can describe these as remarkable numbers when you’ve got a Budget deficit that’s  deteriorating, a debt that’s deteriorating, a surplus that is smaller and at the same time you’ve got lower  unemployment.

This is a government that shows no courage when it comes to running a Budget. It is a government without a  core and in doing so, in failing to take the hard decisions, we are going to end up with higher interest rates  because of this government’s incompetence and lack of ticker. I say to you, the issues that are addressed in this  Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook are worthy of careful consideration.

The first thing is the Budget is clearly deteriorating as the economy gets better. To have a reduction in  unemployment, down to 4.5%, and yet the Budget deficit’s getting worse and the debt’s getting bigger illustrates  the fact that this is a government that doesn’t know what it’s doing.

Secondly, the debt is now growing out to $95 billion. So the debt’s getting worse when the economy is meant to  be getting better.

Thirdly, the surplus in 2012-13 is a marvel of accounting trickery - even this is by Labor standards. Firstly what  they’ve done is they’ve increased spending now and they’re putting the savings back to 2012-13 so that they can  claim to have a surplus in that year.But it gets better - the government and the Treasury said that we had a black  hole in our Budget numbers when we took money out of the conservative bias allowance in the contingency  reserve. We took out $2.5 billion. In this statement today, the government itself, with the support of Treasury, is  taking $3.4 billion out of the conservative bias allowance. They called it trickery then, well it must be trickery now.

And finally, and this comes out of Wayne Swan’s own mouth, he said that nearly half of his election commitments  aren’t funded yet in these papers. So nearly half the government’s own election commitments , there’s no money  in these Budget papers and yet they’re still showing a surplus in 2012-13 which could be best described as  heroic.

Now in these numbers, there does not appear to be any money for the on-going effort in Afghanistan. There does  not appear to be any financial support for the regional processing centre that Julia Gillard has promised to deal  with unauthorised asylum seekers. It is also the case that there is no additional money for the on-going  commitments that the government’s going to have to make to the Independents to get legislation through the  Parliament.

The government claims that the rising Australian dollar has taken a baseball bat to their revenue, but the fact of  the matter is, you get that sort of volatility all the time. This government has taken no hard decisions. The  Coalition laid down nearly $50 billion of savings and offered them to the government and the government hasn’t  taken them up, because this is a government that has no ticker and if it has no ticker, Australians are going to  face higher interest rates and higher taxes into the future.

JOURNALIST: What are the hard decisions does the government need to take?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, the hard decisions, for example, dump the Cash for Clunkers proposal. What a dopey idea  it was during the election and it’s an even more dopey idea today. But that’s just one of illustration of the fact that

the government just doesn’t have the courage, doesn’t have the courage, to stand up on the Budget. It doesn’t  have the courage to do the hard yards.

JOURNALIST: Do you have a forecast on how much you think debt will rise to pay for all of the promises that  aren’t in these papers already?

JOE HOCKEY: Well, quite frankly, if the Budget debt is rising to $95 billion and nearly half of the government’s  election commitments aren’t even funded here, Australians are facing yet again $100 billion of debt thanks to  Labor.

And I say again, and I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again emphatically, Labor will never deliver a Budget  surplus. They’ll never pay off their debt and they’ll never deliver a Budget surplus.

And on seeing Wayne Swan today with all of his slides - the more slides Wayne Swan shows you, the more spin  he is engaging in. There’s lots of cunning but no courage. And if Wayne Swan continues down this path of  claiming it is the biggest fiscal consolidation since oxygen was invented. I say to you, they’ve gone on the biggest  spending since oxygen was invented. These guys don’t know how to manage an economy, they don’t know how  to manage a Budget, and Australians are going to pay for it writ large, because if the economy is getting better,  why is the Budget getting worse?



