

INTERVIEW WITH DEBORAH CAMERON

ABC 702 SYDNEY

TUESDAY, 6 JULY 2010

SUBJECTS: Government's Stronger and Fairer Superannuation  reforms, Cooper Panel report into superannuation, MySuper,  Government's Future of Financial advice reforms, 'lost'  superannuation, First Home Saver Accounts, asylum seekers

DEBORAH CAMERON: The Minister for Financial Services is Chris Bowen, who  joins me now. Minister, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Deb.

CAMERON: First of all, the reality of personal financial management and  financial security in Australia. Everybody is saving for super; they're saving to  get a house; they're saving to, you know, find time to have a family and live  happily in the house. Now, when you're dealing with all of those things, they all  seem to come to a crunch point in about your early 30s. Personal  superannuation contributions often just slide by. Does that need to change?

BOWEN: Well, we do need to save more for retirement, there's no question  about that. We need to save more individually. There's a big savings gap  because we're all living longer and when you're living longer you've got to make  your superannuation last longer. Of course, that means more health costs as we  get older as well. And we simply haven't been saving enough for retirement, and  that's why we've done three things: we've increased the superannuation  guarantee from nine per cent to 12 per cent; brought in some other reforms,  particularly for low income earners; we've tried to get rid of commissions and we  are getting rid of commissions, which eat away your retirement income over a  long period of time.

That was Stage One and Two, and then Stage Three is improving the efficiency  of the superannuation system to get fees lower because even a small reduction  in fees over the 35 years or so that you might be in the workforce, longer in  most of our cases, can make a big difference to your retirement income by the  time you come to retire. So that's on superannuation, and then of course we've  got some other initiatives to encourage and make it easier to save outside the  superannuation system as well.

CAMERON: Now, what's interesting also, though, is the sort of national attitude  to saving, particularly among people in their late 20s and early 30s. They need  money to spend because they need to have a life, but at the same time, you

know, they look at superannuation, it is decades away and they're just simply  not focusing on it.

BOWEN: Yeah, look, I think that's one of the great challenges of superannuation  and there's no easy answer to that. I think there's two things we need to do: we  need to make superannuation simpler and easier to understand, and easier to  navigate. You know, there's a whole lot of people who've lost touch with their  superannuation. There's millions of lost super accounts out there. There's billions  of dollars sitting there that people won't be reconnected with when they retire  because they changed jobs, their super fund's changed, they didn't move their  super over and then they might have moved house and just lost touch with the  money. That is something we need to fix and something we are fixing through  this response to the review I announced yesterday.

And then secondly, for those who just won't engage in super - and I'm realistic  about how much improvement we can make if you're 19 or 23 and focused on  having a good time or focused on starting a family, then you may not be  focusing on your super - we need this low cost account which you have basic  protections for. So you have at least peace of mind to know that your savings  will grow over time; they won't be eaten away by excessive fees because you  haven't been focused on your superannuation.

CAMERON: Now, I drew a bit of a comparison to a universal health cover-type  model in that low cost structured superannuation scheme that you've outlined  there. Is that a wrong comparison?

BOWEN: Well, I'm not sure I'd describe it that way. I think what we're doing  here is just basically saying there will be an option for those who don't actively  pursue their superannuation, or indeed there might be some people who are  interested in their super and are engaged in it but don't feel necessarily qualified  or inclined to be getting in and making changes to investment decisions or  analysing options. They would just like the peace of mind to know that there's  an account there with low fees which is building your super over time, not being  eaten away, and where the trustees, the directors, have some very fundamental  responsibilities to you as a non-engaged superannuation investor. And that  should be available for everybody.

For those who are more comfortable and don't want that protection, that's fine,  and there's a range of options outside that which go to having an investment  fund or an investment option within your existing superannuation account which  is more complex, which might be higher risk, or all the way to self managed  super, taking it on yourself. All those options would remain.

CAMERON: What message are you sending to the superannuation industry? The  Cooper Review has highlighted some complaints with the way that the super  funds are run, especially those that seem to be run more for their own benefit  and the benefit of their commission agents than for those who've made  investments in the super.

BOWEN: Well, look, there's plenty of things that the superannuation industry as  a whole agrees on, agrees with in this report, and that is making the

superannuation system more efficient. I term it 'dragging it into the 21st  century'. It's served Australia well, but hasn't kept pace with technological  advances. For example, there's far too much paper in the system, there's  cheques being written. It's very hard for people to keep track electronically of  their super in many instances. So we need to shake it up and modernise it, and  most of the superannuation industry agree with that.

There are some parts of the superannuation industry that agree with this  MySuper idea, the basic default fund option. There are several sectors which  say, 'Yep, that makes sense, we will do that, no problem.' There are other  sectors who oppose that and say, 'Well, no, that doesn't fit our model.' It's my  job to sit down with all of them, as I have been doing and continue to do, to try  and reach a position which benefits the investor, the superannuant and the  worker, which is my job. But at the same time, the superannuation industry, I  must say, has served Australia well, has developed our national savings over the  last 20 years in a very robust fashion and we need to keep that, but we need to  build on it and improve on it significantly.

CAMERON: Now, what's interesting there is to hear the tone of the way you're  speaking. The superannuation industry is, in some comparisons, classed as  bigger than the mining industry. The quality of public policy debate has not been  brilliant in recent examples: climate change and the miners' tax debate were two  of them. Now, do you think that dealing with the forces of the superannuation  industry you might encounter some of the same sort of destructive turbulence  that came from opposing forces in the miners' and the ETS debates?

BOWEN: Well, I hope not, and I don't think so. I've been Superannuation  Minister for 12 months and we've done a lot of reform, and we've worked  together. There's some people who agree with everything we've done and other  people who disagree with some of the things we've done, but everybody in the  superannuation industry would acknowledge we've had an open door. Anybody  who wants to get in to talk about their issues can.

And I'd point to our Future of Financial Advice reforms, for example, which I  announced in April. Very significant reforms for the way we regulate financial  advice in Australia, particularly in relation to superannuation. Controversial in  some parts, but everybody got in, had their say, and everybody had an  opportunity to contribute to the policy development, and as a result we brought  in some very significant reforms which were then welcomed, not only by the  industry funds, as you would expect, but also by the Financial Planning  Association and the Investment and Financial Services Association, now the  Financial Services Council.

So I think if you sit down and talk with the superannuation industry, you can get  reform, which some people agree with and some people won't, but which is  based in the best interests of the superannuant and the investor, and that's my  job at the end of the day. But I'll be doing so in a way which tries to bring the  superannuation industry with us.

CAMERON: My guest this morning is Chris Bowen, who's the Minister for  Financial Services, Superannuation and Corporate Law. We've had a note come

in from Robert, who asks why are there lost super accounts if everyone provides  their tax file numbers and they never change?

BOWEN: Well, Robert's hit the nail on the head. The trouble is the law has  prohibited superannuation funds from using tax file numbers to put people back  in touch with their superannuation. Tax file numbers were originally used as  simply a tax mechanism - they weren't envisaged to be used for superannuation  - and for 20 years that's been the case, and I think that's silly. I think people  should be able to use their tax file number to get back in contact with their  superannuation and superannuation funds should be allowed to do it with them.  So that's a significant reform recommended to us yesterday which I'm very, very  attracted to because it's in nobody's interest to have millions of dollars lying  around in lost super.

CAMERON: Now, how radical are you prepared to be, because for example, the  Reserve Bank is considering an interest rate rise today. It probably will stay  steady but who knows? Housing affordability is a huge issue in western Sydney  where your electorate is. Saving for a house deposit is very difficult and it proves  to be an enormous drain on families and family time spent together. Now, do  you think people who are building up a healthy superannuation balance, should  they be able to draw on it or borrow against it if they're buying their own home?

BOWEN: No, I don't support that, Deb. That's an idea that's been around for a  long time and I can see the superficial attractiveness of it. I can see that. But  superannuation is about retirement, and as I said earlier, we're all living longer,  we're all going to be in the retirement phase much longer. The average age of  retirement 40 years ago was much less than it is now, so we all need to make  our super last longer. Once you start dipping into it to say, 'Well, let's use it for a  house deposit or let's use it for education, let's use it for health costs,' which are  arguments that come up from time to time, and I can understand why they  come up, then you are really eating away at your retirement income.

Now, there are things that we can and are doing to help people saving for a  house deposit. For example, the First Home Saver Accounts. Now, I suspect a lot  of people who are eligible for a First Home Saver Account, which gets very  similar taxation treatment to superannuation, so gets very concessional tax  treatment, aren't taking that option up. And I'd encourage people who are trying  to get the money together for their first home deposit to have a good look at  those First Home Saver Accounts because they can be helpful in getting together  that deposit.

CAMERON: Minister, the Prime Minister is making a major policy announcement  on asylum seekers today. Now, you are in the relatively safe western Sydney  seat of Prospect. But the Prime Minister says everyone should now say what  they want to say, what they think about asylum seeker policy. How much  balance is there in the debate where you live?

BOWEN: Well, look, I've been asked this over the last 24 hours, Deb, and  certainly asylum seekers is a big issue in western Sydney. Of course it is. I've  made the point that my electorate, Prospect, about to be renamed McMahon, is  an area where we have a high proportion of refugees settling, and so my

community, I think, understands the benefits that refugees bring to Australia  and they also understand the trauma that many of these refugees have been  through. I spend a lot of time in schools in my electorate talking to kids who are  refugees and in intensive English centres, in particular. There's one school in  particular, Holroyd High in my electorate, which does a fantastic job.

Having said that, I also spend a lot of time in my electorate office dealing with  my constituents who have relatives in refugee camps in Africa and in the Middle  East, and trying to help them resettle. And so my electorate, I think, fully  understands the nuances and complexities of the argument to say, 'Well, we  need to have a compassionate policy but by the same token, we also need to  have an orderly policy.' And the people who have been waiting - I see some  pretty awful cases, Deb - people who have been waiting many years in refugee  camps and I see the pictures of the circumstances in which they're living, and  you need to have an orderly process to get those people in as well, because we  take 13,500 refugees and year and for every one who comes in as an  unauthorised arrival, that's one less we take through the orderly process. I think  my electorate understands those arguments and it is a nuanced issue. It's not as  simple as simply saying, 'We'll turn the boats back.' What are you going to do if  there's a boat in distress through fair means or foul? It's just not that simple;  you do need to have a nuanced and methodical approach and that's exactly what  we'll be doing.

CAMERON: Minister, thank you very much for your time this morning.

BOWEN: Nice to talk to you, Deb.



