Tue, 12th January 2010

ABBOTT DOORSTOP - PRIVATE MEMBER'S BILL TO OVERTURN THE WILD  RIVERS ACT, WHALING, KEVIN RUDD'S FAILED BORDER PROTECTION  POLICIES

The Hon Tony Abbott MP

Leader of the Opposition

E&OE

TONY ABBOTT:

I am very pleased to be here today with Peter, with Lizzie, with Deon, Thanks for coming up.magazines…

traditional owners of some of the areas that are affected by the Queensland Government’s Wild Rivers

legislation. Like me, like my colleagues, Warren Entsch and Ian Macdonald, they are outraged by this attack on

the rights of Aboriginal people and other people in Cape York to develop their land, to build a future for

themselves and their families. It’s outrageous that Premier Bligh has locked up these lands without any serious

consultations with Aboriginal people. It’s cowardly of Prime Minister Rudd not to get involved in this issue. He

used to say that he was Kevin from Queensland. Well if he’s fair dinkum about Queensland he would be fair

dinkum about the rights of Aboriginal people to have an economic future and that’s why I’m moving this private

member’s bill in the national Parliament when it resumes in February and to try to ensure that this attack on the

rights of Aboriginal people to an economic future is defeated.

PETER KYLE:

The thing is here, I’m very disgusted with Anna Bligh and her party and also the Rudd Government. From day

one we were totally against the Wild Rivers scheme. There was no in-depth consultation. Every meeting that we

had up at Coen with the Kulla Land Trust, they turned up; as soon as people knew that there was going to be a

consultation about Wild Rivers everyone walked away. So there was not an in-depth consultation about Wild

Rivers although it was still declared. We approached members of green movement, we’ve approached the then

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs. We had meetings with him to no avail. I’ve written a letter to the Premier of

Queensland, Anna Bligh on behalf of the Kulla Land Trust stating that we were very angry with Wild Rivers being

thrown upon us after we went into an agreement with National Parks. I held off for ten years, I didn’t want to sign

it because I could see that a lot of land was going to be taken off us. If one hundred per cent of the country was

given back to you, you’ve got to give fifty per cent of the country back to be made up into National Parks and now

they’re coming along I’ve just heard about an hour ago that they’ve got a ten kilometre zone that’s going to be

thrown on us to as well. What have my kids got, what’s going to happen to the kids behind them, my great grand

children, my great grand children. We’ve got nothing as it is. All we’ve got is rubbish country like salt pans and

stuff, because we thought going into a partnership with National Park on the say so of Anna Bligh everything was

going to work out good. I’ve got to tell you, Minister, thank you very much for being here to support people like us

and our problem. Warren thank you. Senator Macdonald thank you very much too as well for supporting people

with no voice as it is to the media.

TONY ABBOTT:

Thank you so much Peter. Well said mate. Okay, Lizzie do you want to say something.

ELISABETH LAKEFIELD:

I am very angry with Mrs Bligh for doing this to our indigenous people for the Wild Rivers and gotta think that we

get younger generations coming up and now they are confused and we don’t want them fighting for what’s

happening now with the Wild Rivers.

DEON CREEK:

Like I was saying a bit earlier, you know we had no consultation and the traditional owners of the headwaters of

the Archer River, we did not agree to any Wild Rivers. You know Miss Bligh and the Minister and not forgetting

Mr Garrett as well - he should also be held responsible for all of this happening. But you know we can’t build a

future you know if people want to build a future on our land. You know, it’s probably less than eighteen months

that all this land’s been handed back. You know my generation haven’t had a chance to build anything, we just,

you know all we are asking for the Bligh Government is just to give us a chance. That’s the main thing. You know

we haven’t had the opportunity yet. You know we had people like Peter that spent many, many years trying to get

land back and now that we’ve finally got it, it’s just being taken away from us again.

QUESTION:

Deon, did you say you’re looking at a tourist camp somewhere up your way?

DEON CREEK:

Yeah, there’s been a lot of confusion about these rivers and stuff, you know, there saying that we want to tear it

down and we want to build dams. There’s nothing like it, we don’t want to dam these rivers, we don’t want to do

wide scale clearing. All we want to do is just to clear a small area so we can have tourist parks up there and, as I

said, our future, our generation can build some lodges and stuff. You know, so the whole of Australia can see

how these rivers look.

QUESTION:

And you don’t think you’ll be able to do that now?

DEON CREEK:

Not with this Wild Rivers we won’t be able to, no. And like I was saying, this Wild Rivers is just the tip of the

iceberg. Now we’ve got the ten kilometre high preservation zone on the coast and now we’ve got the world

heritage that they are looking at putting over us. I don’t see how we can build any future with all of these different

legislations and all these different acts that are coming in.

QUESTION:

How did your time in the Cape, in Aurukun…influence what you’re doing now?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, obviously I’ve had quite a bit to do with the Cape for quite a long time now. Back in 2001, as the Minister for

Employment I first visited the Cape as the minister with whole of government responsibility for federal services in

the Cape. I date my close familiarity with the work of Noel Pearson from that time. I just think that the vast

majority of Aboriginal people on Cape York, they want an economic future and that was the message that I got

constantly when I was a teacher’s aide at Coen for three weeks in 2008; that was the message I got constantly

last year when I was helping with the truancy programme in Aurukun for ten days. I think I know the Aboriginal

people of Cape York as well as any federal politician except Warren Entsch. They want economic opportunities.

The Wild Rivers legislation takes those opportunities away. The Queensland Government keeps saying ‘oh, show

us the projects that have been stopped’. Well, you can’t even get a proposal ready because of this Wild Rivers

legislation. It would take tens of thousands of dollars to prepare a proposal and to shepherd it through this jungle

of bureaucracy and regulation. Aboriginal people haven’t got that kind of money. So what they’ve done is they

have effectively suffocated at birth all proposals for the economic development of Cape York.

QUESTION:

What discussions have you had with the Queensland Government about your private member’s bill?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well once I’ve got the bill drafted, I will be writing to the Prime Minister and to Jenny Macklin urging…

QUESTION:

…state government…

TONY ABBOTT:

…as we’ve just heard from Peter, Aboriginal people in Cape York have been protesting long and loud to the

Queensland Government about this legislation. They’ve been ignored. I don’t expect that I would be listened to

any more by the Queensland Government than local people would be listened to, but I have a voice in the federal

parliament and my voice will be heard in the federal parliament on this subject. Kevin Rudd will no longer be able

to ignore this and pretend it’s just a Queensland problem. Because when a state government is effectively taking

away the fundamental rights of people - particularly indigenous people - the federal government cannot ignore it.

And, as I said, Kevin Rudd will be hearing from me formally once the legislation is drafted and if Kevin Rudd and

Jenny Macklin are fair dinkum about wanting to help secure Aboriginal people’s economic future, they will take

my legislation seriously.

QUESTION:

It’s a very bullish approach though isn’t it, to just go straight over the top of the state government? Why not sit

down and see if you can work it out, you know, cross party, and come to some negotiation rather then just say

we’re going to overturn it…

TONY ABBOTT:

My LNP colleagues in the state parliament have been making their position on the Wild Rivers legislation clear for

months and if the state government won’t listen to them I have no reason to think they’ll listen to me. Look, this is

a smokescreen. The only way to get the Queensland Government to listen is to appeal to a higher authority. It is

now in the hands of the national parliament and the national parliament must be involved in this issue.

QUESTION:

It’s a very evocative campaign that you’re launching here isn’t it? You’re creating these images of a Franklin-style

intervention, on the other we’re challenging the ‘sorry’ generation to stand up and take up the flag?

TONY ABBOTT:

You see we all have responsibilities here. Aboriginal people have a responsibility to create a better future and the

rest of the Australian community has a responsibility to allow Aboriginal people the real freedom that they need to

make that better future. Now, I think that the Aboriginal people on Cape York want to grab the future. I think they

want a future that is about opportunity not just about welfare and it’s up to the rest of us to make that possible.

QUESTION:

Do you agree that Cape York is a very different landscape to the Franklin River? We can’t be drawing those

comparisons, do you think?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, the fact is that where a state government is doing something that is fundamentally wrong and where the

federal parliament has the potential to make a difference it should do what it can to help, and if it fails to do so

then it becomes complicit in the state government’s error. The state government plainly is doing the wrong thing

here. I am advised that the federal parliament does have the potential to make a difference and we should act.

Simple as that.

QUESTION:

Stephen Robertson is saying that your move is a stunt. What do you say to that?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well it would not be necessary if the state government had consulted with Aboriginal people. Aboriginal people

need someone to stand up for them and the voice of Aboriginal people on Cape York must be heard and it will be

heard through my private member’s bill.

QUESTION:

Michael Johnson thinks that Australia should send orchestras and football teams to North Korea to encourage

engagement. Is that official party policy?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, look I think it’s important that the strengths of Australian culture be widely acknowledged around the world

and I’m broadly in favour of Australians taking their gifts to the wider world, and I have no problem with that.

QUESTION:

Do you think Australia should re-engage with North Korea?

TONY ABBOTT:

I think that North Korea is one of the world’s most singularly unattractive regimes, but if Australians can engage

with people everywhere I think that they should take that chance.

QUESTION:

There has been some confusion about your position on Japanese whaling.

TONY ABBOTT:

No, the confusion is about the Government’s position. I mean the only person confused on this issue is Kevin

Rudd. Kevin Rudd said in opposition that he would take Japan to the International Court. Well, if he’s fair dinkum

he would’ve done this two years ago. It’s still not too late and I challenge the Prime Minister either to take Japan

to the International Court or to admit that that was always just an empty gesture.

QUESTION:

Does ASIC need to have a win with its Opes Prime prosecution in order to recover from the embarrassment of

Jodee Rich and Twiggy Forrest and the AWB?

TONY ABBOTT:

Look I think that the law enforcement authorities should do their job and I trust them to do their job.

QUESTION:

What are your thoughts on the four Sri Lankan asylum seekers that have been refused visas on security

concerns?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well again this is a problem of Kevin Rudd’s making. He created this problem by caving-in to the would-be

unauthorised arrivals on the Oceanic Viking. He caved in to people who had effectively been holding this vessel

hostage for more than four weeks. It’s his problem and he should deal with it, but he shouldn’t have created the

problem in the first place.

QUESTION:

Does his decision vindicate Wilson Tuckey’s comments that terrorists could be hiding amongst boat people?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, one of the reasons why we have to maintain a strong system of border security is that we owe it to the

Australian people to ensure that as far is as humanly possible we get the best migrants to this country.

The final point I would make - and it’s prompted by the Oceanic Viking - is that if Kevin Rudd was fair dinkum

about trying to protect whales, about trying to prevent the Japanese whaling exercise, he would send the Oceanic

Viking to the Southern Ocean immediately because if the Oceanic Viking was there, if it was able to interpose

itself between the whalers and the protestors, not only would the sort of ugly incidents that we’ve seen over

recent days be less likely, but we would probably end up much more effectively protecting the whales, so that’s

really the issue.

QUESTION:

Do you think the increase of drought and bushfires are a direct result of climate change?

TONY ABBOTT:

I think that climate change is certainly an issue. But drought and fire and flood have been a permanent part of the

Australian landscape. They always have been and I imagine that they always will be.

Thank you.

