

Transcript: Julia Gillard, Interview, 3AW  Julia Gillard posted Thursday, 19 August 2010

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Federal election campaign; National Broadband Network; Australian Labor Party;  Border protection; Commonwealth Games.

HOST: You’ve got to vote. You should vote, somebody’s got to lead the country. This might  help. On the line the Prime Minister Julia Gillard, good morning.

PM: Good morning Neil.

HOST: Thanks for speaking with us

PRIME MINISTER: No problems I hope you are feeling a bit better.

HOST: Thank you very much. I don’t want to be disrespectful, but can we try to do this without  sort of a scripted messages and just be to the point and direct I think it’s been coming through  from people in this campaign they are sick of the automatic answers.

PM: Well Neil I always try to do my best to be as frank and honest as I can with people.

HOST: Good on you. What is your one big idea from this campaign, the one big idea?

PM: The biggest thing for me, the thing closest to my heart, is obviously the education policies I  have announced and making sure that every child gets a great education. We have got more to do  if we are going to achieve that Neil, we’ve got great, great schools, but we have also got schools  where kids fall behind.

HOST: But isn’t that a philosophy not an idea?

PM: Well I think it’s a motivating force for me. I got into politics, I got into public life, because I  passionately believe that the best thing we can do to give everybody in this country a fair go is to  give every child a great education.

HOST: (inaudible)

PM: It changed my life I’d like it to change the lives of kids of today.

HOST: Prime Minister with respect I have heard you say that at least 20 times through this  campaign I mean -

PM: And I believe it Neil, it’s in my bones, it’s in me, it’s what motivated me to get into politics.  So excuse me for saying it more than once, but it is absolutely central to who I am and what I  believe.

HOST: Fair enough. But where is the one big idea. That’s an aim, that’s an ambition, that’s a  philosophy. Where is the one big idea, from either side in that matter in this campaign?

PM: Well Neil in the education area, big idea there, empowered school principals. Rewards for

the best teachers, rewards for schools that improve the most. That is not the best performing  schools, but the schools that have made the biggest difference in a child’s life, I think that’s a big  idea. I think the National Broadband Network seizing the possibilities of the future -

HOST: That’s not a new idea.

PM: But it’s a big idea in contest in this campaign. If I am not the Prime Minister on Sunday, no  National Broadband Network. I think that’s a big idea.

HOST: Do you agree people are crying out for leadership through this campaign. Have you ever  seen such cynicism and doubt and indecision.

PM: Look I’m out and about talking to people every day and people are talking about the issues  that matter to them. And Neil I just don’t, I don’t dismiss somehow as pedestrian and lacking  vision, actually meeting people’s needs. When I meet people on the streets they are desperately  concerned about having a job and so they should be. I mean how can you run your life, keep  your home if you are at risk of losing your job? That’s why the economy and how strong it is, is  central to this campaign. People want their kids to get a great education that’s not a small vision,

that’s a big vision.

HOST: So you feel you have connected with people through this campaign? You don’t feel that  they are underwhelmed by both you and Tony Abbott.

PM: I’ve done, look people will judge on Saturday, but I’ve done what I can to connect with  people and to put before people my vision for the future of this country. And I just simply don’t  accept, I know there’s this sort of flavour around the debate that’s somehow if you are talking

about you know jobs and health and education: Oh heavens how boring -

HOST: There is nothing wrong with talking about it, but we are looking for answers. We are  looking for vision we are looking for fresh ideas.

PM: Ok well and I have outlined large numbers of them during this campaign Neil. Let’s go  through them I am very happy to.

HOST: Well before we do can I just -

PRIME MINISTER: Ideas for jobs let’s talk about those, they’re important to people.

HOST: Before we do that another boat load of asylum seekers arrived overnight, the third in a  week. But there are figures that show that nearly 90 per cent of people refused refugee status,  refused status, have that overturned on appeal. If elected, would you look at changes those laws  so it’s tougher?

PM: Well let’s just get to the facts here I know that’s on the front page of a newspaper this  morning.

HOST: The Australian.

PM: Yes and that’s a sample of 14, 14, one-four cases.

HOST: Well they do extrapolate it by (inaudible) -

PM: Well, well you know can you extrapolate?

HOST: So is it wrong?

PM: Well can I give you the stats Neil?

HOST: Please

PRIME MINISTER: The stats are as I outlined them when I first spoke on this matter at the  Lowy Institute. The refusal rate is at 70 per cent, 70 per cent refusal rate.

HOST: Yep.

PRIME MINISTER: And the overwhelming majority of those refused cases are still in the  review process, so you can’t make a conclusion about what is going to happen to them.

HOST: So what percentages that have been reviewed have in fact had that refusal overturned?

PM: Well the overwhelming majority are still in the review process, that’s the point.

HOST: What percentage have been through it?

PM: Well Neil I can’t give you that stat -

HOST: Well you’re the Prime Minister you are knocking the stats that have been reported.

PRIME MINISTER: Ok, Neil can I just explain this to you in a time sequence and the reason I  can’t give you that stat in a meaningful way. If we look at the processing of Afghan asylum  seekers, acceptance rates used to be quite high. As country conditions change in Afghanistan  they’ve been coming down. They’ve been coming down so much now that we are refusing 70  per cent of cases.

HOST: Yeah but the appeal is the important thing.

PM: Well hang on, the 70 per cent refusal rate now, cases that are on appeal from there are  overwhelmingly in the review process, so there is not a new stat to give you about how those  cases under current conditions will go because they are still overwhelmingly in the review  process.

HOST: Well let me put it this way -

PM: So it’s not that I’m not giving you a stat that’s knowable it is not knowable now.

HOST: Well let me put it to you this way. If it turns out that the refusals are being overturned at  the rate that is being extrapolated from this small sample, will you look at changing in the laws?

PM: Well, Neil the laws and the processes here are the same processes that the Howard  Government used. We haven’t changed the definition of refugee or the processes for appeal, they  are the same.

HOST: So you don’t need to change them?

PM: Well I don’t think they need to be changed and they are exactly the same ones as when  Tony Abbott sat round a Cabinet table; we have not changed the way which appeals are dealt  with, that’s true.



HOST: Ok Timor. Both the church and the armed forces overnight rejected your plan, strongly  rejected plans for an asylum seeker centre in East Timor. Do you agree it’s coming undone?

PM: No I don’t. We are in discussions with the government. Obviously in caretaker period

during the election campaign Neil, we can’t formally pursue dialogue with another nation, but  the door is open, discussions will proceed if I am elected on Saturday. Obviously this is a tough  tight close election, so there will be a lot of nail biting Saturday night, but we will continue the  dialogue with East Timor.

HOST: Dean Mighell an old mate of yours on this program yesterday predicated bloodletting in  Labor after the election, win or lose, because of the knifing of Kevin Rudd. Can you guarantee  that won’t happen?

PM: Yes I can.

HOST: How?

PM: Well, Kevin Rudd is campaigning for the re-election of the Government and will be a senior  member of the team.

HOST: There is that message again, that’s not what he is saying, he is saying -

PM: (inaudible) Neil, Neil you don’t -

HOST: He is saying after the election Prime Minister.

PM: And yeah I’m going to answer your question Neil, but I don’t think it’s fair for you to listen  to my answers and then just dismiss them, as if somehow I’m not trying to tell you the truth.

HOST: Fair enough.

PM: What I have just said to you then is the honest to God truth. If you spoke to Kevin Rudd this  minute, you know what he would say to you Neil? He would say with all of the passion he could  muster, every fibre of his being, he’d say go out and vote Labor on Saturday. He wants to be a  senior member of my team in Government. That’s what he will be.

HOST: So no bloodletting after the election?

PM: That’s completely ridiculous.

HOST: Will Peter Garrett be in the Ministry?

PM: Look I’m not going to go through. You can put any name to me, you can put any name to  me and I’m not going to go through a discussion of that.

HOST: Wayne Swan?

PM: My focus, my focus is on election day. Neil, I’m not taking anything here for granted -  quite the reverse. This is a tough tight, close election, every vote counts. If we are elected on  Saturday, if, and I deliberately say ‘if’, if we are elected on Saturday, then I will pick my team.  What you can know about my team of course is Wayne Swan will be Deputy Prime Minister;  Kevin Rudd will have a senior role; there is a lot of talent in Labor’s ranks and I will make the  best use of that talent.

HOST: But Peter Garrett’s in a different position and I think it’s reasonable to ask you on the eve  of the election whether a man who failed so badly, so miserably, that it was one of the reasons  that led to the overthrow of Kevin Rudd, whether that man will keep his job.

PM: Well, look, I’ve got a lot of respect for Peter Garrett. I think he, as a Minister, you know  he’s been out there, he’s been acting on important environmental concerns. He’s obviously out

with his other hat on today, talking about arts policy. If your point to me Neil, if the insulation  scheme became a mess—

HOST: Yes.

PM: Yes, it did. Absolutely. Tick that box.

HOST: Will he pay the price?

PM: Well, Neil, obviously some Ministerial changes were made at the time that we first dealt  with the emerging problems in the insulation scheme.

HOST: Yes.

PM: But I'm not trying to resile, Neil, from responsibility here. I was Deputy Prime Minister at  the time. You know, I take my fair share of responsibility, insulation scheme was a mess, I'm not  going to personalise that to one individual.

HOST: If re-elected, does the buck stop with you on health?

PM: Of course the buck stops with me as leader of the Government. The buck stops with me for  delivering the health reforms that we have promised.

HOST: Can the Australian Government stop the execution of the members of the Bali Nine,  facing the death penalty in Bali.

PM: I've got to be really careful with every word here, because that’s in the best interest of the  individuals involved. We, as a Government, will do everything we can to support their pleas for  clemency.

HOST: Do you personally oppose the death penalty?

PM: Yes, I do.

HOST: Strongly.

PM: Yes, absolutely.

HOST: In any circumstances?

PM: Yes.

HOST: Commonwealth Games security. Should we be going to India? Dawn Fraser says today,  no.

PM: Look, we get the best of our security advice and we provide it to the organisations that look  after the athletes, and they work through and make the decisions. So, that’s the circumstance  there. I'm not going to make an off-the-cuff remark about something as serious as security  advice. You know, the sporting organisations will work through, but what we do is make the  resources of government available to them and our security assessments.

HOST: Was it accidental, was it an oversight that at your campaign launch that you only  mentioned the word Labor twice in your speech and the word Labor appeared in none of the  signage? Was that just an accident?

PM: Well —



HOST: Or are you ashamed to be a Labor Prime Minister?

PM: Oh, Neil.

HOST: No, seriously, it’s a very strange thing to do.

PM: Honestly. Because you think unless there was a sign next to me, no-one would know I was  from the Labor Party. Is that your point Neil?

HOST: I think someone made the point today, Gough Whitlam mentioned Labor about 60 times  in his campaign speech, so I just, it’s a bit surprising. Was it deliberate or not?

PM: Look, I gave my speech in my own words. I didn’t think at any point, you know, I didn’t at  any point do a tabulation of how many times have I said ‘Labor’, how many time have I said  ‘Government’, how many time have I said ‘fair’, how many time how I said ‘good’, or anything  like that. I didn’t do a tabulation; I spoke in my own words, directly to the Australian people, on  my vision for the future.

HOST: Will you stay as leader if you lose?

PM: Look, Neil, I am not going to speculate about the days beyond election day. You know, I'm  in the fight of my life, I'm using this time to campaign on what I passionately believe is in the  interest of the future of this country, a vision about a strong economy, about better schools, about  decent health care, seizing the possibilities of the future like the National Broadband Network.  That’s what I'm focusing on and what I'm going to be doing between now and when people are  voting.

HOST: Well, will you stay in Parliament if you lose.

PM: Well, of course I'd, well, look, subject to the good people of Lalor giving me their trust on  election day, which I don’t take for granted either, Neil. Obviously I will be the Member for  Lalor.

HOST: The HECS idea, what’s wrong with it? This is the one Tony Abbott floated last night. It  came out of the Kevin Rudd 2020 Summit, where kids can get $10 an hour to pay off their HECS  bill equivalent, for volunteering, what’s wrong with that?



PM: Well, I obviously think volunteering is good. What I don’t think is so good is floating  uncosted promises. I've taken a different approach from Tony Abbott in this campaign. Plenty of  good ideas out there, Neil, no doubt about that, but score board. I have announced $3.8 billion of  new spending in this campaign, and every dollar has been offset, the budget will come back to  surplus in 2013. I haven’t added a cent to the budget bottom line, but —

HOST: So the HECS idea -

PM: Hang on Neil, I’ll finish that sentence. Tony Abbott has announced $38 billion of  expenditure in this campaign; ten times more and it is not properly accounted for and because it’s  not properly accounted for now he’s talking about slashing the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme  by a billion dollars, putting the price of medicines up. So there are plenty of good ideas, but do I  believe in funding things by chucking additional costs on to the price of medicines for  pensioners, no I don’t.

HOST: Well is the HECS thing a good idea, you’re just worried about the funding?

PM: Look I am always happy to reward people who do volunteering, but we have of course, as a

Government, adopted costed, implementable policies about encouraging people to go teaching,  to go nursing, to go to areas of need.

HOST: Should we mandate debates in an election campaign?

PM: Well look I’m happy, was happy to have a debate with Mr Abbott, I was happy to have  another debate about the economy. I think these things work themselves out during the course of  the election.

HOST: We don’t need legislation that says there must be two or three or whatever?

PM: Look I don’t, I think every election’s going to be different, different circumstances. I’m not  sure you want one uniform rule.

HOST: Tim Mathieson, it’s reported today, your partner, will step down, may step down from  his job as consultant to a property developer if you win the election. Is that an issue?

PM: Well look, you know if I’m elected on Saturday and Neil it’s if, I’ll obviously make  appropriate arrangements, as will Tim, for our future but the focus here is on election day. And  you know, I mean there are lot of things we could talk about today, but there’s genuinely big  issues for decision on Saturday. One I’m particularly concerned about today, particularly  concerned after Mr Abbott put out some costings yesterday is that he’s going to cut the  Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and that’s going to put the price of medicines up.

HOST: Well we’ll have a look at that, just very quickly, I know the Sex Party is hardly the most  reputable party running around but a number of people have raised this with me and that is the  tax on sanitary products for women. Now they’ve said Julia must understand this. GST on  sanitary products, would you remove that?

PM: No we haven’t got any plans to change GST arrangements, we won’t be making any  changes.

HOST: Ok. Any rabbits left in the hat?

PM: Well I’ll be speaking at the National Press Club today Neil, so you’ll have to wait for that  speech. But what I can say to you Neil is I’m continuing to campaign. Nothing more important to  the future of this country than a strong economy, a budget that adds up. I’m campaigning to get  the budget back to surplus in 2013. My budget adds up, Mr Abbott’s full of costing holes and  now he’s going to put the price of medicines up.

HOST: Where will, we’ll follow that through. I’ve noticed on the campaign you’re a very tactile  person. Describe for me in a few words your leadership style?

PM: Well I think my leadership style is to be inclusive of people. I’m genuinely interested in  what people have to say to me; that’s whether they’re a Cabinet colleague or someone that I meet  on the street. I’ve met a lot of warm, enthusiastic, lovely Australians on the campaign trail.  They’ve raised with me all sorts of issues, I’m always happy to listen to what people say, think  about it, respond to it. A leader has to lead, but I believe the best way of leading is when you’ve  listened to people.

HOST: You tougher?

PM: I’m tough.

(laughter)

HOST: Thank you very much. One last thing, will you come and do a regular spot on the  program if you’re re-elected.

PM: Oh well, we’ll talk about that Neil -

HOST: Kevin Rudd did but it didn’t do him much good.

PM: Well we’ll talk about that Neil after election day. If I’m in that position, tough and tight, and  if I see you after election day you’ll see my nails chomped down to the quick. This is a very you  know tough, tight race. It’s going to be a long night Saturday night, every vote counts.

HOST: Good luck, thank you for your time.

PM: Thank you.

Tags: 3AW, border, broadband, commonwealth, election, games, Gillard, Labor, Mitchell, NBN,  protection



