Public Audit of Immigration Providers Is Vital  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au)



Public Audit of Immigration Providers Is Vital





Australia's immigration detention system is failing, and this makes the need for transparency  greater than ever, according to Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.

Senator Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson on Immigration, says she is concerned at reports that  immigration service provider SERCO may have sub-contracted unlicensed security guards in a  number of detention facilities in the Northern Territory.

"Anyone who works in the immigration detention system should have appropriate training and  knowledge to work in such a sensitive area, so we are extremely concerned at any evidence that  standards are slipping - but there is a wider problem here,'' Senator Hanson-Young said.

"From evidence at estimates hearings it is clear that there is no real public oversight of service  providers like Serco. This is the critical problem with using private contractors to run a sensitive  system like immigration detention.

"This also flies in the face of Labor's commitment in 2007, when it promised to return the  management of detention centres to public hands.

"The Greens call for an urgent public audit of the performance of service providers, so the  community can have the information it needs and deserves to have confidence in the way the  system is being run.''

There has been a backlog of vulnerable asylum-seekers in detention following decisions by the  Government such as the suspension of processing of asylum claims from Afghans and Sri Lankans.  The Greens support a much faster processing of claims, and a move to limit the maximum time that  asylum-seekers can be detained without judicial review.

"Immigration detention is a damaging environment for anyone who has fled persecution in their  own country,'' Senator Hanson-Young said.

"In the absence of a move to limit detention time, the absolute minimum that's needed is to have  appropriately trained staff who can deal sensitively with the pressures on asylum-seekers in an  increasingly overcrowded system.''



Detention Centres  Immigration  Refugees

Source URL:  http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-release/public-audit-immigration-provi

Page 1 of 2

Public Audit of Immigration Providers Is Vital  Published on Sarah Hanson-Young (http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au)

ders-vital

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Page 2 of 2

