



07 Nov 2010



TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH BARRIE CASSIDY, INSIDERS,  ABC

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 7 NOVEMBER 2010



BARRIE CASSIDY: Stephen Smith, good morning.

STEPHEN SMITH: Good morning Barrie, thank you.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now, the Prime Minister has announced this morning that  she's going to a NATO summit later this month to have further talks on Afghanistan.  You'll be going with her on that trip. Given there are AUSMIN talks going on right  now, why is there the need to do this?

STEPHEN SMITH: The NATO-ISAF summit in Lisbon later this month will be  dealing very directly with the transition in Afghanistan. So we're obviously part of  the 47-country International Security Assistance Force. Everyone has agreed we've  got to transition to Afghanistan security competence and responsibility, and so  Lisbon's a very important both NATO and ISAF summit to start mapping out the  transition to Afghan responsibility.

We continue to be of the view that we can do our bit, our job in Uruzgan, in the next  two to four years, training the Afghan National Army and Police in Uruzgan  Province.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Is this a heads of Government meeting?

STEPHEN SMITH: It's a leaders' meeting. But there will also be Defence Ministers  there. Obviously it's a NATO-ISAF meeting, so I'll be accompanying her. In  addition to the formal meeting itself of course, there's opportunities for a range of  bilaterals.

So it's an important international community meeting on Afghanistan, and it's a very  good thing that the Prime Minister's been able to find time to go.

BARRIE CASSIDY: What will Australia essentially be telling the other  participants?

STEPHEN SMITH: We'll be saying to the rest of the international community that  we are committed to transitioning to Afghan-led security in Afghanistan, that whilst  we can't leave tomorrow, we can't be there forever. So we have to train the Afghan  National Army, the Afghan National Police and the local police forces to be in a  position to manage security arrangements themselves. And this is the strategy and  the approach that we have outlined.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Not there forever, but you will be there for at least 10 years.

STEPHEN SMITH: Our current training mission we see being done in two to four  years, which is consistent with the timetable set by the Afghanistan Conference in  Kabul earlier this year.

But after that we do envisage the capacity for us to be there in some oversight or  embed capacity. Time will tell what the detail and circumstances of that are, but the  Prime Minister and I have outlined that in the course of the Parliamentary debate.  But also we envisage that we'll be there in terms of making a contribution on the  civilian capacity building and development assistance front for a long time, and I  expect the international community will be there in that respect as well.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now, the Secretary of State said yesterday that Australia has  offered more accommodation on ports and facilities. Why do they need to increase  their access at this point?

STEPHEN SMITH: I think we need to take it step by step. There's been a lot of  leaping to conclusions in the media over the last couple of days. But the United  States is conducting what's called a Force Posture Review, looking at how it  positions its forces throughout the world.

It has bases in other countries - Japan, for example; it has a presence in the Republic  of Korea. And in Australia, of course, we have joint facilities. So in the course of the  United States considering its Force Posture Review, the possibility arises that the  United States could utilise more facilities in Australia. And that's very high on the  agenda for AUSMIN tomorrow.

And we've been cooperating for a long period of time under the Alliance, both in an  exercise sense, in a cooperation sense, in a training sense. We certainly envisage that

that will increase and enhance, but in terms of detailed positions there's a bit more  time to go for that.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Okay, but why would they want to?

STEPHEN SMITH: The United States is a significant power. It conducts strategic  reviews from time to time, as we do, and so you look to the future. But it's also  making changes to the disposition of its forces throughout the Asia Pacific,  reducing, for example, the number of forces it has in Japan. So it's looking at those  matters.

But we welcome it very much, because we want to see the United States engaged in  the Asia Pacific. That's very important to Australia, it's very important to stability in  our region. We've had that stability since the end of World War II, largely as a result  of the United States' presence.

So an enhanced engagement is something we very strongly support, whether that's,  for example, through the United States joining an expanded East Asia summit or the  United States taking part, as Australia did, in the ASEAN Plus Defence Ministers  Meeting.

All of these are unambiguously good things for our region and also for Australia. It's  certainly in our national interest to be very positively disposed to enhancing our  engagement in that military and defence cooperation sense.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now, whenever Australia and the United States get together  there's a lot of talk about China. Is it true to say that the Americans are generally a  little more wary of China, more suspicious of China, than Australia is?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, I wouldn't characterise or categorise it in that way. China  is obviously on the rise, it's a rising power. And, indeed, as the Incoming  Government Brief, made clear, that rise is even quicker and stronger than people  anticipated a relatively short period ago.

We believe, Australia believes, that China will emerge as - to use a Chinese phrase -  into a harmonious environment; it will be a responsible international stakeholder.  And that's what we want to see.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Do the Americans believe that?

STEPHEN SMITH: I think the Americans, well, I'm not putting words into the  mouth of America, but I think both Australia and America want to have positive and  constructive relationships with China. Certainly from Australia's perspective, a key  bilateral relationship into the future will be the bilateral relationship between China  and the United States. We want that to be a positive and constructive one.

But sometimes when people think about the rise of China they somehow think that  the United States is going away. Well, to use an American expression, the United  States ain't going anywhere. Of course its relative power will be eclipsed as other  powers like China and India rise, but it's not going away. Indeed, all of the evidence  is that it wants to enhance its engagement in the Asia Pacific, and that's a good  thing.

But the rise of China, the rise of India, the bilateral relationships between the United  States and China, the United States and India, and India and China will be the most  important, in very many respects, bilateral relationships in the second half of this  century.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Well, given the language you've used - and Hilary Clinton did  use words like that, positive and she wanted a cooperative relationship - would it be  true to say that this Administration is more open to that than the previous  Administration in the United States?

STEPHEN SMITH: Again, I wouldn't reflect on respective Administrations. I think  what not just the United States, not just Australia, but the international community is  seized of is China's rise and how rapid that has become.

In addition to its economic and social growth, of course, we also see military  modernisation, and Australia says on that front that any country, as it expands  economically, is entitled to see a comparable expansion in its defence or military  arrangements. But we have made the point to China, both privately and publicly,  that there does need to be transparency about China's military strategy. And that's an  issue which we raise with China, as does the United States, as do, for example, our  ASEAN colleagues in our region.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And, given what Hilary Clinton had to say about Kevin Rudd's  role in the region and his knowledge of China, was it a deliberate decision, then, that  he should go to China in the week leading up to these talks?

STEPHEN SMITH: I think the Foreign Minister's travel is not necessarily linked  one to the other, but the United States does very much appreciate not just Kevin's  expertise on China, but the fact that Australia is in the region. We have, in terms of  our own relationship with China, been, in very many respects, on the ground floor  with China's development with our early recognition of China back in the 1970s  through the Whitlam Government.

So they value very much our analysis of China's rise, just as they value very much  the sorts of intellectual contribution we bring to the table.

BARRIE CASSIDY: You say it's not only Kevin Rudd, but Kevin Rudd's name was  the only one mentioned yesterday. She didn't say she'd be picking Julia Gillard's  brains on China.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, they pick Australia's brains, which is one of the reasons  why one of the things that the United States very much appreciates are our embed  offices dealing with them in a direct basis, whether it's in Kabul Headquarters in the  International Security Assistance Force, or just doing what we do this weekend with  the AUSMIN Meetings. We let America know what our view is - what our strategic  view is, what our tactical view is; we work very closely with them as our Alliance  partner. That's appreciated, but certainly that relationship remains the bedrock of our  strategic and security and defence arrangements, and it's unambiguously in our  national interest to keep on that path and, indeed, to enhance it, which is the  prospect that this particular meeting holds out.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now, on the issue that Brian Toohey raised before on the F35,  the Joint Strike Fighter, the Pentagon - apparently - is about to announce a major  cost blow-out. How much wriggle room have we got on this project?

STEPHEN SMITH: We’ve committed to buy 14. We've got what's called the  conventional, or the Strike Fighter A version. Bob Gates commissioned a ground  floor or a basement review some time ago; he's expecting to receive that before the  end of this month. We have already calculated into our thinking both the capacity  for cost and scheduling - scheduling delay and cost blow-out.

So it's never a surprise in a very big project that's technologically challenging that  these things occur. But we're going to take it step by step. We will wait and see what  the basement review that Bob Gates has commissioned says. I'll obviously have the  opportunity today and tomorrow to speak generally to Secretary Gates about this  matter, but we'll wait to see that analysis and what implications, if any, flow.

One of the advantages we have is that the Strike Fighter we propose to purchase is,  as I say, it's described as the conventional Strike Fighter. It's already been the  subject of testing and trialling in the United States in advance of its schedule, so we  may well be better placed than other countries who have committed to buy different  versions...

BARRIE CASSIDY: … but this conventional aircraft, that's the one that some  experts describe as a second rate aeroplane.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, we don't describe it in that way. Every major defence  capability project, whether it's one we're doing in conjunction with the United States  or one we're doing by ourselves, will always have these challenges, will always be

subject to criticism. Our job is to make sure that we make the right strategic  decisions and we match that with capability.

Now, this has never been an easy area. And now, as a result of the White Paper, as a  result of our Force 2030 Review, as a result of the budget decisions we've made in  respect of Defence, we've now got external parameters in which we make all of  these judgements. We do need, in my view, to bring more rigour to individual  projects of this nature, and that's one of the things that we're working very hard on  doing.

BARRIE CASSIDY: So you're not committed to buy 100 aircraft?

STEPHEN SMITH: We've said in general terms we're looking at purchasing up to  100. We've committed to buy 14, and that will occur. The timetable for that is  effective delivery into Australia and operation into Australia 2017-18. But we  expect, on the current timetable, that they'll come off the assembly line in 2014.  There will then be some training and operational matters in the United States.

But that timetable hasn't been disturbed - subject, of course, to what we discover  when Secretary Gates's review comes into his hands. And we'll obviously, once that  has occurred, have detailed discussions with the United States. But I'll speak to  Secretary Gates about it in the course of the weekend and tomorrow.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Okay. Just on domestic issues, there does seem to be quite a  divide between State Labor in WA, in your home state, and Federal Labor. Eric  Ripper, the Opposition Leader there, is with the Premier and against you on the GST  receipts, on the national health agreement, on the mining tax, on the Northam  facility for asylum seekers. Have they got a better feel of what West Australians  really want than Federal Labor?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, with respect, I think it's a bit of simplistic bundling up of  those issues. I'm not going to put words into Eric Ripper's mouth, but on the mining  tax he like we believe that the mining industry can pay more tax under a resources  rent proposal.

Eric does want to see changed arrangements to the GST formula. The point I've  made, both to Eric and to Colin Barnett and generally, is that the current GST  formula was effected by the Howard-Costello Government in conjunction with the  Court Government of which Colin Barnett was a senior Minister. We understand the  capital pressure which is placed on Western Australia as a result of a mining boom,  and that's why both to date and into the future the current Government, the current  Commonwealth Government, our Government, is investing in Western Australia on  infrastructure in a manner in which we've never seen before. And that will also  include $2 billion - $6 billion from the proceeds...

BARRIE CASSIDY: … that's not the way it's being seen though. You've got three  out of 15 seats in WA, you've got your state opposition leader running a contrary  point of view on a number of issues. There has to be a problem there that they  identify and you don't?

STEPHEN SMITH: I don't think anyone from Federal Labor, certainly not me, is  denying that the handling initially of the mining tax was very bad from a political  and perception perspective in Western Australia. Since we've made the changes we  have the support of the key players in the mining industry, in terms of BHP and Rio  and Xstrata. We're also working very hard with the so-called transition group to get  the detail right so far as the smaller players are concerned. That process is going  very well.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Sure, but what about now the issue in Northam, and there's a  lot of emotion in that discussion. During the week people were talking about, you  know, the asylum seekers jumping fences, somebody said they'll slit your throat in a  second. These sorts of emotions are being stirred up in that community - are you  determined to go ahead with it?

STEPHEN SMITH: Yes. Yes, there are a lot of emotions, at two levels - and you  use the phrase 'stirring up'. At the meeting at Northam the other night, there were  people there who weren't local Northam people. There were, for example, office  bearers of One Nation. They were there for their own political purposes. Our  experience in this, is that - and to use the phrase that Minister Bowen has used, he  believes that local residents are entitled to be cynical until such a time as they see  the services delivered and concerns met.

So we're working very hard at that level, but there was always, in an emotion-charged environment, the capacity for other people to get up to political mischief.

But Northam, of course, was a site which Premier Barnett himself recommended to  Chris Bowen's predecessor, Chris Evans. It's an appropriate site, and Minister  Bowen's working very hard with the locals to make sure that their concerns -  legitimate concerns about pressures on the local community - are met.

But our experience has been that often there is this sort of reaction, but once things  settle down, the local community does come to see that there are benefits which  flow. And it's not as if the commentary on Northam is all one way. Chris Bowen had  a very good meeting with local members in the local council. There are significant  economic benefits which come to a town like Northam with the siting of a detention  centre there.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Okay. We're out of time, but thanks for your time this  morning.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks Barrie, thanks very much.



