Senator Gary Humphries  Liberal Senator for the ACT

Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Families, Housing & Human Services,  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Citizenship

BUDGET 2010: A SHAMELESS CON

This is another big taxing, big spending Labor Budget, with no serious reform for the Canberra  community.

Federal Labor has not taken a single tough decision to rein in its reckless and wasteful spending.

The Budget’s return to surplus relies upon a great big new tax on Australia’s resources sector, not  tough decisions. Labor’s mining tax is a dagger to the heart of the Australian   economy, putting major projects at risk and sending jobs offshore.

Labor want to sacrifice Australia’s future economic prosperity and to put Canberra’s economy at risk  to improve the numbers in this Budget’s bottom line.

Spending in this Budget will increase by $26 billion over the next three years relative to last year’s  record spending forecast. The Government will have to borrow over $700 million a week to fund its  reckless and wasteful spending - putting upward pressure on interest rates and the cost of living for  Australian families in the ACT.

The peak debt bill of $93.7 billion will be the amount owed by the Australian people to pay for Kevin  Rudd’s spending spree.

The Budget also exposes the costs of the Government’s waste, mismanagement and policy failures.

There has been a $1 billion Budget blowout as a result of Kevin Rudd weakening Australia’s borders  and $1 billion will be spent to fix Labor’s tragic home insulation mess.

The Budget confirms that Kevin Rudd’s health policies will be about more bureaucrats and not better  services. The Government will spend around $500 million to establish new layers of Commonwealth  bureaucracy. In less than a month, Kevin Rudd has broken his promise of no net increase in health  bureaucrats.

Having broken his election promise and built just two of 36 GP super clinics, Kevin Rudd is now  asking the Australian people to trust him when he says he will build 23 more.   The Labor Budget does not invest a single additional dollar in Australia’s major road networks.

And in an undisguised election campaign strategy, the Government will spend $126 million on print,  radio and television advertising.

11 May 2010

Media Contact is Josh Manuatu on 0421 115 365



