







THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS



TRANSCRIPT

E&OE PROOF ONLY

2SM Mornings with Leon Delaney  Friday, 9 July 2010  Topics: Proposed regional immigration processing centre

LEON DELANEY: Federal Minister for Home Affairs, Brendan O'Connor good morning.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning.

LEON DELANEY: How are you today?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm well thank you.

LEON DELANEY: All right. Is the Government's asylum seeker policy taking on water and  is it about to sink?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look that's a metaphor but it's an unfair characterisation, I really  do believe that. The Prime Minister on Tuesday said of course she'd spoken with the  President of East Timor and the Prime Minister of New Zealand about a possibility of setting  up a regional processing centre.   And since then we've had the President of East Timor meet with his Prime Minister and they

both now agree that the President will sit down with this country and talk about the proposal  in detail. That's a step forward, it's the next logical step because in the end we need a regional  approach to this regional challenge.

LEON DELANEY: It does seem to have been a bizarre sequence of events though. After the  Prime Minister made her speech earlier in the week, her remarks, whilst not specifically  stating that such a centre would definitely be located in East Timor, clearly implied that and  when the rest of us all made that inference, nobody made any effort to change that until  yesterday when all of a sudden we're being told oh no, that's not what I said. You know, that  seems a little strange.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look I understand people may say they weren't fully clear on  issues, but the speech itself was very clear, there had been a discussion with a very significant  figure in the region. I mean President Ramos-Horta is a renowned international figure and is  concerned about humanitarian matters and is indeed an appropriate person to discuss such  issues with. And for that reason, that engagement with East Timor was entirely appropriate.



LEON DELANEY: Yes.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And I think it's important we take stock on what was said. What  was said on Tuesday by the Prime Minister is we need a regional approach. We need a  regional framework. And we need to talk to our partners in the region to deal with this  problem.   The next step was of course the President of that country engaged with the Prime Minister,  after which the Prime Minister of East Timor has asked, has charged in fact the President of

East Timor to now engage with this country, with Australia, in the detail of the proposal.  That's entirely appropriate. But what Julia also said, what Julia Gillard also said is that there  is no quick fix to this.   And I think we need to have a sustainable long term approach and indeed that's why this  approach has been endorsed by a former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser because he had to  deal with the same issue.

LEON DELANEY: Whilst the conversation with the President of East Timor may be  appropriate, is East Timor the appropriate location given the concerns that have been raised  by that country's Prime Minister and other parliamentarians in East Timor? Quite legitimate  concerns it would appear about the social impact in East Timor which is a rather  impoverished country with an unemployment rate somewhere between 40 and 50 per cent,  with many of it's citizens living on 50 cents a day. It could have quite a significant adverse  social impact if not correctly managed, couldn't it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's why we need to talk about the proposal and talk about the  detail so that they can properly consider this matter. East Timor is a democracy. It's going to  have different views and they are a robust democracy in so far as they do have a real debate  and that's welcomed, as we have a debate in this country.  And the debate at the moment in this country is we either have a regional approach, a long  term sustainable approach to dealing with this challenge of millions of people that have been  displaced around the world but in our region and how we deal with that together.

Or we actually go with the slogan that's been proposed by the Opposition Leader Tony  Abbott who thinks we can turn boats around and of course we know that it will only endanger  the lives of our Customs and Defence personnel and indeed lead to drownings at sea.

LEON DELANEY: Has the debate, if you can call it that, been distorted out of all proportion,  by focusing on the fate of a few thousand asylum seekers in boats when the real issue is the  many millions of refugees around the world and the challenge that is presented to the  international community?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look I think there has been some distortion and therefore that has  led to a greater level of concern in the community about the scale of the issue. As we've said  all along, we know this is an important matter and we know Australians are concerned about  us getting this right, but also it's important to note that there is a very small number by way of  comparison to other countries, a very small number of people coming here in this manner.   And indeed also we have been successfully intercepting these vessels and processing people

in an orderly manner. So our borders are protected. We've not had undetected arrivals on our  mainland, the way in which occurred under the Howard Government. We do have a lot of  resources to do that.

So therefore the approach taken to date has been good, but for a more effective sustainable  approach to remove the product that's been sold by people smugglers, we do need a regional  processing centre and that is the objective of the Government and that's why we want to  engage with New Zealand, East Timor and Indonesia and other countries about how we do  that.

LEON DELANEY: All right. Obviously it needs to be a multi-national approach otherwise  it's not really an international processing centre is it?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's right.

LEON DELANEY: If East Timor turns out not to be a suitable location for that, what are the  other alternatives realistically? Nauru?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well the Prime Minister has made clear that we will engage with  all willing partners in the region that are signatories to the Refugee Convention, in so far as  having a centre. And we need to make sure that we engage fully.

Now there is a Bali process that's led by Australia and Indonesia that deals with this issue.  That's been in place for some years now but we do need now to focus our energies in  ensuring we take away the product that's being sold by people smugglers and that is luring  people onto dangerous vessels on perilous journeys with a promise that they will get to their  destination.   Now that endangers lives and of course at the same time it creates the capacity for people to  be sold a promise that may end up being empty. What we need therefore is a centre so when  people are considering embarking on these vessels, embarking on these perilous journeys,  they understand that they will be dealt with the same way as other people are, properly, with  dignity, but at a centre and that's the way forward in this very complex area of international  policy.

LEON DELANEY: If you won't identify possible alternatives to East Timor, would you at  least advise us if it's possible for such a centre to be set up in a country which is not signatory  to the United Nations Convention?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we've said that we believe that we need a regional approach.  We need a multi-lateral approach. We do not believe you can unilaterally impose your will on  another country and we need to have our partners in the region working together.   That's source and transit and destination countries dealing with this matter as a region, as a  regional community. And that's why we are focusing on those countries that are signatories to  the convention. But that includes a whole array of countries.   But at this point I think it's important for those countries to come forward and show a  preparedness and willingness to engage. We'll be engaging with them. At this point also, I  think it's important to remember that we have the Prime Minister of East Timor charging the  President to engage with us now on the detail of such a centre.

LEON DELANEY: Thanks very much for your time today.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Not at all. Thank you very much.

LEON DELANEY: Brendan O'Connor, the Federal Minister for Home Affairs.

