The Hon Julie Bishop, MP  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Deputy Leader of the Opposition  Member for Curtin





MTR 1377, Mornings with Steve Vizard

Monday, 20 December 2010

Subjects: Border protection; WikiLeaks

E&OE…

STEVE VIZARD    Joining me on the line is Deputy Leader of the Opposition and spokesperson for  Foreign Affairs and Trade, Julie Bishop. Hi Julie.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning Steve.

STEVE VIZARD    Thanks for your time. You’re over in Perth at the moment aren’t you?

JULIE BISHOP    Yes I am. Rainy day here I am afraid so some wet weather is coming your way.

STEVE VIZARD    Well at least it didn’t rain for our great victory yesterday.

JULIE BISHOP    That’s very true.

STEVE VIZARD    Can I start with the Prime Minister’s approach and policies towards boat people,  set up another committee, your reaction?

JULIE BISHOP    Oh this is deeply concerning, the lack of a response from Julia Gillard. She said  nothing in terms of what will change to ensure that such a tragic event doesn’t happen again. She  doesn’t say anything about what could be done to greatly reduce the risk of such a disaster occurring  yet she has raised this idea of another committee. She first raised it in a press conference without  consulting us, the idea of a Parliamentary Standing Committee that the Opposition would work with  the Government and the Independents and the Greens and, these are her words, “for managing the  response for this incident”, and she suggested that there be one meeting before the end of the year.

I rejected that proposal. The Government is in power and with all its resources it should be managing  the response to the incident and I said we would continue to seek briefings in accordance with  established protocols. The next day the Prime Minister changed her story. She said she didn’t say it  was about managing the response. Now as an aside, that is quite bizarre given they were her actual  words. But now she said the group is just for briefings so that all the parties come together and  receive the same information.

Now Steve this isn’t necessary. The Opposition is already is already having briefings, it is already  happening, so we see no need to wait until the Prime Minister can get everyone together in one room  to receive information that we’re already receiving.

STEVE VIZARD    What should the Government do, apart from forming a committee so that everyone  can in her words be briefed? What should the Government be doing?

JULIE BISHOP    Well this is evidence that Julia Gillard doesn’t have any answers to this problem  and she can’t bring herself to consider the Coalition policies which did disrupt the people smuggling  business. We can’t change the fact, it is true that the range of policies introduced under the Howard  Government virtually eliminated the people smuggling business. It got down to a couple of boats a  year, in some years no boats came, and we all know that since Labor changed those policies about  200 boats have arrived.

Now we have to stop the people smuggling business, we have to stop providing a product that they  can sell. So the Coalition’s policy on border protection is very detailed, it includes reintroducing  temporary protection visas, reopening the centre in Nauru which is taxpayer funded - it is already  there, it is ready to go - and a greater effort in dismantling the people smuggling trade.

Now we’ve got a very detailed document, it was released months before the election, and the  Coalition is very willing and able and ready to share that with Julia Gillard.

STEVE VIZARD    We read today that Delhi had said that East Timor solution proposed by the Prime  Minister suggesting that asylum seekers be processed in East Timor was sketchy and in essence  rejected by them. Your response to that.

JULIE BISHOP    Oh Steve, the Prime Minister has revived her so called regional processing centre  in East Timor, it was always just a political fix announced before the election to get her through the  election so it would appear that Labor had a policy on border protection. But let’s call it for what it is -  a political fix - and it is not a well considered policy, it doesn’t have support in the region and Julia  Gillard should admit that it will not work and it is very unlikely to progress beyond this piece of paper  that she sent to East Timor.

You see Steve she’s been unable to answer the most basic questions about her proposed regional  processing centre. What countries will be eligible to send asylum seekers to East Timor? Where will  asylum seekers be intercepted? And how will they be transferred to East Timor?

So when you look at what she is actually proposing, and I might remind your listeners that in July the  Prime Minister said she was going to - and I am quoting from a speech of hers - “stop the boats not  at our shoreline but before they even leave the far away ports from which they come”, so I ask, how is  Julia Gillard going to stop asylum seekers from say Iraq or Afghanistan?

STEVE VIZARD    We see, even as late as last week, that people who were charged with people  smuggling were released and presumably will escape the jurisdiction in Indonesia before there is any  chance of them being extradited to Australia to face trial. What should we do in respect of  strengthening our position towards people smugglers particularly?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Steve that is part of it. The people smuggling trade will continue for as long as  they believe they can charge people to get on these boats and come to Australia and that Australia  will provide permanent protection visas. That’s the issue. We must reintroduce our temporary  protection visas so that they don’t have the product to sell. You’ve got to take away the value from the  product that the people smugglers are selling.

But there are a whole range of other initiatives that we suggest should be put in place. Tony Abbott  offered yesterday to work with the Government in looking at some of the proposals we have in our  policy document. Now it worked in the past, as difficult as some people find that to accept. The  policies of the Howard Government which the Coalition are urging the Government to reconsider,  actually reduced the number of people getting on boats in some years down to zero. Now that saves  lives.

It is monsoon season here Steve. The seas are going to be very rough, its going to be very very  rough out there on the seas for many months. We’ve got to stop people taking the risk of getting on a  boat and trying to get to Christmas Island or Ashmore Reef.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, Andrew Wilkie is doing you no favours. He’s disclosed further  information about private discussions with Tony Abbott. Apparently Tony offered Wilkie a doubling, a  significant increase, in the approved number of boat people, refugees that he would intake and  Wilkie’s had no hesitation in disclosing that. Your response to that.

JULIE BISHOP    Well the discussions with the Independents involved implementing our policy. Any  proposed increase in our refugee and humanitarian intake would not be done in isolation, it would be  in the context of implementing our policy. And as I said, the range of policies introduced by the  Howard Government virtually eliminated the people smuggling business and that is what we will be  seeking to do. So any increase would of course have to be on the back of the implementation of our  policy.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, changing the subject dramatically to WikiLeaks. The Australian  Federal Police came out on Friday and said that they could find no criminal charges to bring against  Julian Assange or WikiLeaks. That does fly in the face, as we discussed at the time, as to what the  Prime Minster had said at the time. This really makes the Prime Minister’s remarks, in respect of an  innocent Australian citizen, untenable.

JULIE BISHOP    Well I have said from the outset that I was deeply disturbed that the Prime Minister,  who is legally trained, would state as a matter of fact that the placement of the cables on the  WikiLeaks website was illegal, in other words the work done by WikiLeaks or Julian Assange in  placing the cables on the WikiLeaks website.

For her to take away the presumption of innocence, for her to make a statement that it was a fact that  it was illegal I thought was highly prejudicial. And this is another example, disturbing example, where  the Prime Minister is now trying to weasel out of what she said. She now maintains what she was  talking about was the taking of the cables from the US State Department in the first place. Well that is  not what she said, she was talking about the placement of the cables on the WikiLeaks website.

So now that the Australian Federal Police have said that no offences have been committed under  Australian law the Prime Minister should, at the very least, explain the basis for her statement that it  was an illegal thing to do.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, appreciate your time. What are you doing for Christmas?

JULIE BISHOP    I am hoping to see my dad in Adelaide, have a Christmas holiday for a couple of  days with the family back in the Adelaide Hills.

STEVE VIZARD    Oh fantastic. Nice wineries around there too.

JULIE BISHOP    Very nice wineries, and it is cherry season. My father is a cherry grower so I will be  home to pick some cherries in the orchards.

STEVE VIZARD    And wear those cherry earrings again like you used to do.

JULIE BISHOP    [laughs] Oh it’s a while since I have worn them but now that you mention it.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, thanks for your time. Have a great Christmas and look forward to  talking to you in the new year.

JULIE BISHOP    Same to you Steve and happy Christmas to all your listeners.

STEVE VIZARD    Good on you. Julie Bishop, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Foreign Affairs and  Trade.





