



Brendan O'Connor

Minister for Home Affairs, Member for Gorton

Transcript: MTR transcript  Brendan O'Connor posted Thursday, 29 July 2010

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects: Imports of dangerous weapons; border protection

STEVE PRICE: We are joined by Brendan O'Connor, the Federal Minister for Home Affairs. The story this

morning on the front page of the Herald Sun suggesting the Federal Government's going to get tougher

on the imports of dangerous weapons. Minister, good morning.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning, Steve.

STEVE PRICE: I would have thought that we would have had the toughest possible import prohibit on

those sorts of weapons anyway?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, you can always, I guess, be tougher and ensure that certain goods don't get

into this country. And earlier this month the police ministers of all governments and police

commissioners met to discuss the way in which we could have a more consistent approach of the way in

we regulate possession in this country.

The one thing the Federal Government can do, I think more effectively, is restrict the importation and

really place the onus on the importer.

STEVE PRICE: But how does anyone mount an argument that they should be allowed to import a flick knife

anyway?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it's been going on for years and years and years.

STEVE PRICE: So what would they say would be the reason why they would want to import a flick knife? I

mean it's not gutting fish or anything.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, good question. I mean of course people have used all sorts of reasons to

import, and if you know, I mean - I know growing up you knew people who had flick knives, or certainly

had the capacity to get access to certain weapons, you know, it's a commercial concern, the people are

looking to import. People can't…

STEVE PRICE: Knuckle dusters. How do you say to the Customs people, I'd like to import 10 boxes of

knuckle dusters. I mean what's the reason when they say, yeah you can?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah well, it's a good question and that's why - that's exactly why we wanted to

make sure - to place the onus on the importer to have to demonstrate a legitimate purpose. That will

reduce the likelihood, indeed that will reduce the importation of these things. It will therefore reduce the

easy access to such weapons which, in my view, will reduce the likelihood of crimes being committed on

STEVE PRICE: Well let's hope you're right, let's hope it works.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah, indeed, yeah.

ANDREW BOLT: Minister, thank you for joining us. Look, just the - 15 minutes ago on the wires, we got

the news that yet another asylum seekers boat has arrived with more than 80 people on board. How many

does that make it for the year, do you know?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look it's been - of course it's a high - significantly high number.

ANDREW BOLT: How much would it be, do you think?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Oh look it's high. I mean we've been going through now…

ANDREW BOLT: Like what? Fifty?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Andrew, you write about this every week. We know…

ANDREW BOLT: Eighty-one, it's eighty-one.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yes, and the fact is we've gone through a significant surge in these vessels seeking

to get to our shores, and we have, in this case, this was an incident that was eighty five nautical miles

North-West of Christmas Island where the Customs and Border Protection vessel went to the aid of that

vessel and these 81 passengers and full crew will be processed the same way they should be processed

on Christmas Island.

ANDREW BOLT: Any idea where they're from?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, at this point, it's just recently happened, and again as you know, the first

things we do is make sure that we secure that vessel. We will go through security checks, identify checks

and health checks, so it's not yet been confirmed and I've not been advised at this point Andrew.

ANDREW BOLT: In the papers today, we get East Timor's foreign minister, Zacarias da Costa saying that he

still hasn't had any proposal from the Gillard Government about this centre that you're going to build

there to deter exactly these kind of boat people.

Still nothing - as far as he's concerned, the only details I've ever had is - came in Julia Gillard's brief talk

to the president - what about three or four weeks ago. I'm just wondering, when are you actually going to

put the proposals to them?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look the - we've sent government officials over to East Timor to discuss with the

East Timorese Government, the details of the proposed regional process centre, and as you know,

yesterday, the President, Jose Ramos Horta confirmed that those discussions are ongoing and indeed

they're legitimate discussions.

ANDREW BOLT: But when your officials went over there, he wasn't in the country. They're saying…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, which was entirely proper. I mean…

ANDREW BOLT: But he's their point man. He's the one detailed by the government to talk to you. You

haven't talked to him since.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no…

ANDREW BOLT: I'm just wondering why you actually haven't pursued this? Is it because it's actually a dead

duck proposal?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no, I think the first thing to do is that the Prime Minister of this country spoke

to the President of East Timor and spoke to the Prime Minister of New Zealand, as you say, some weeks

ago, after which there was discussions between officials from both governments when we visited that

country.

It just so happened, of course the president was on other business overseas, but that was something that

was already planned.

Now those details do not necessarily have to start with heads of state and governments, they happen with

officials and that has continued to happen and yesterday, the president of East Timor made clear that the

- this has been considered by that government.

ANDREW BOLT: East Timor's Foreign Minister says in the papers today, it is up to Australia about this -

when more meetings will be scheduled. We are hearing about this mostly through the Australian media.

That sounds a bizarre way. And look…

STEVE PRICE: How are we going to know before election day where - what you policy is going to be and

where you are going to send these people?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we've made clear that we want to see a regional process centre. We believe in

a regional approach. We want to have a…

STEVE PRICE: Time's running out. You got two and a half weeks until polling day. Are we going to know

when we go to vote - three and a half weeks.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And Prime Minister made it clear that this - there is no quick fix. There's no…

ANDREW BOLT: But there's no quick fix if you don't actually put a proposal to the government whose

island you want to use.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: You can talk over me if you like, but if I can just finish that's fine. I'm just making

clear that the Prime Minister said there is no quick fix we're engaging. There are officials of this

government engaging with the East Timorese Government. There are - there's been again concern by the

President of East Timor that these discussions are ongoing, but there is no quick fix, but of course our

intention…

ANDREW BOLT: But excuse me, I just have to interrupt there, there is a quick fix, there is a quick fix. This

week we actually had the foreign minister of Nauru arrive in Australia saying use our island, we have the

facilities. Both sides of politics in our island are keen on this, this is Mr Keke the Foreign Minister, Kieren

Keke, he came here and he said please do it, quote; it could have been done three weeks ago, that sounds

to me like a quick fix. Why wouldn't you even talk to him?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well firstly I don't agree with your representation of the discussions that have

occurred between the Deputy Opposition Leader and the Shadow Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison

with the Foreign Minister of Nauru that there was a confirmation that there'd be an agreement reached. I

heard that there was an inclination and I heard the Foreign Minister say that they're willing to listen. We

also know in that country they have some real issues about what they can deliver because they're a

stalemate and you know that Andrew…

ANDREW BOLT: No, look, no, no, no Mr…let me quote you…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Leaving that aside…

ANDREW BOLT: No, no you've made a claim here, let me quote you from the Foreign Minister of the very

country you say is in stalemate. This is Mr Kieren Keke who says there is a bipartisan support for the

centre across Nauru's political spectrum and the constitution allows the president to enter into an

agreement with Australia to open the centre immediately and I quote again his direct words; there are no

constitutional barriers, it could be done today, it could have been done three weeks ago.

Why didn't you even talk to him, talk to him? He's pleading with you, here you go and instead you send

your people to Nauru, off to East Timor to talk to a president who's not even in the country and still hasn't

talked to your for three or four weeks.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well again I'll confirm that President Jose Ramos Horta has indicated yesterday that

those discussions are ongoing, he's right, we want to ensure we have a regional approach to this, you

know very complex issues. We want to have a regional processing centre and we do prefer of course and

we made it very clear, we want to see that occur with a country that [indistinct] with the refugee

convention and for that reason our focus is entirely on ensuring…

ANDREW BOLT: All right separate question, why didn't you talk to the foreign minister of a country that

came here just this week begging you to open a detention centre on his own and why haven't you at least

talked to him?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Again I've made clear that Andrew I think that we want to ensure we have a long-term sustainable solution to this very difficult issue…

ANDREW BOLT: Why not talk to him?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …and we believe that it is far preferable that we engage with a country that has the

same approach to this issue as Australia and we want - and the fact that the prime minister of this

country spoke to the prime minister of New Zealand, another settlement country, spoke to the president

of East Timor, another signatory to the convention is to say we want a consistent approach regionally and

that's what we'll continue to do.

STEVEN PRICE: Appreciate your time, just before you go, are you fearful of more leaks against Julia Gillard

before this campaign's out?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think the Prime Minister yesterday made very clear the strong support for the

great initiatives that we've managed to achieve in the last three years, both the historic rise in pensions...

STEVEN PRICE: But are you worried about more leaks?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …and the first paid parental leave. We can't control what people might say to other

people. What we do know is that this government will not be distracted from those matters, we will focus

on the things that the Australian people care about; strong economy, good education system, health

reforms to make sure we've got good health services to our citizens, that's what we need to do and that's

what we'll continue to do.

STEVEN PRICE: All right, appreciate your time this morning thank you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yeah thanks Steve, thanks Andrew.



Tags: border, O'Connor, protection, weapons



