

BORDER PROTECTION COMMAND INTERCEPTS VESSEL

(11 April 2010) Border Protection Command today successfully intercepted a suspected  irregular entry vessel.

ACV Botany Bay, operating under the control of Border Protection Command, intercepted  the vessel during the morning on 11 April north north west of Browse Island.  Initial indications suggest 25 passengers and two crew are on board the vessel.

The group will be transferred to Christmas Island where they will undergo security, identity  and health checks and their reasons for travel will be established.

While their nationality is yet to be confirmed, if these asylum seekers are Sri Lankans or  Afghans their claims will not be considered for at least three or six months respectively,  under a processing suspension introduced by the government on 9 April 2010.

This suspension was introduced because of the evolving circumstances in these two  countries.  The Australian Government believes that asylum seekers should only be granted  the right to live in Australia if they are genuinely in need of protection.

People smuggling is not just an issue for Australia - it is a global and regional problem. The  commitment of our neighbours, through bilateral cooperation and the Bali Process on People  Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime, is critical to addressing

this most serious issue.

As a direct result of these strong working relationships, since September 2008, there have  been in Indonesia: 125 identified disruptions; 3,362 foreign nationals detained by Indonesian  authorities; and 60 arrests of facilitators/organisers.

The Australian Government remains vigilant and committed to protecting Australia’s  borders.  Today’s successful interception by Border Protection Command, coupled with  changes to the immigration processing system, continues to demonstrate this commitment  and the effectiveness of the proactive response program in place.

Contact: Brian Humphreys 0438 595 567 or Customs and Border Protection media (02)

6275 6793

-----------------------------

To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au

