Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Transcript - ABC Radio

Monday 5th April 2010

Subjects: Population, illegal boat arrivals



Alex Sloane: Joining me now is Scott Morrison who is the Shadow Minister for Immigration

and Citizenship; Scott Morrison thanks for joining me.



Scott Morrison: Good morning.



Alex Sloane: Scott Morrison what is your response to the appointment of Tony Burke.



Scott Morrison: Well I think the key thing we’ve seen, just listening to Tony then, is that the

Government is still committed to 36 million by 2050. Tony’s job is not to change that

outcome, Tony’s job is to go out there and sell to Australians why Kevin’s right and the rest

of Australia’s wrong in terms of having concerns about this issue. I think Bob Carr made

extraordinary sense about what the issues are. Of course Tony makes the point that its

about housing affordability, its about water management - its about all of these things but at

the end of the day the one lever you have to pull on this that can address the number of

people living in this country is the migration intake and under this government the net

overseas migration rate has risen to almost 300,000. So that’s what we have to get under

control. Obviously migration….



Alex Sloane: So you want to see that at the top of the list of any policies that come out?



Scott Morrison: Well, that’s the outcome. Once you’ve worked through what Bob talks about

as carrying capacity and what we’ve talked about in terms of sustainable population growth,

you have to make a decision about what you’re intake is going to be. The premise that

Tony’s working from is this: 36 million by 2050 at least. How are they going to do x, y, and z

to cope with that? The Coalition has a much broader view on this which says, well what is

our carrying capacity, what should our intake be? The Government has boxed itself into a

corner of this “big Australia” notion that it’s going to impose whether people like it or not.



Alex Sloane: What do you think the carrying capacity of Australia is?



Scott Morrison: Well, we have no idea and no-one in this country does and that’s the

problem, that’s the question we should be asking rather than locking ourselves into this

figure of 36 million, but if we keep on the rate of growth that we’re currently at - 2.1% - and

there’s research up on the ABS website today that talks about cities growing at even a

higher rate than that in Australia - then we’re going to be looking at a lot more than 36

million. So certainly in the short to medium term I think we have to take a very cautious

approach to our intakes in the years ahead until we can actually get a handle on just what

our carrying capacity is and what needs to be done to support that.



Alex Sloane: How much are you going to make this about border control?



Scott Morrison: Well, look, we just simply make the observation that if you can’t control the

population on Christmas Island; Kevin Rudd is out there saying we have a plan for a plan

after the next election, so you just have to trust me. Now, how people can trust him on an

issue as large as the future size of our population and the impact on our quality of life, when

he’s been such a hopeless failure on the issue of our borders and breaking his promises,

then the Australian people can draw their own conclusions on that. If he can’t protect our

borders, how on earth can they trust him on this.



Alex Sloane: Scott Morrison, at the top of the list you want to see migration, how would you

go on that list for developing a strategy there?



Scott Morrison: Well, the first issue is coming to terms with the notion of what the carrying

capacity of our current infrastructure, services, facilities, natural resources - all of those

things - is. That’s number one, and from there you basically have to form a view about what

your migration intake is going to be. Now I make this point, if the government had been

genuinely serious about this issue, they would have done a couple of things. First thing, it

would already be on the COAG agenda, and its not, its nowhere near the COAG agenda,

becaus4e the States and Local Governments are the ones that have to deal with

consequences of 2.1% population growth. The second thing is, that it was only a few weeks

ago that Bob Brown and I actually called for a national, independent inquiry into sustainable

population growth. Answer from the government…..?



Alex Sloane: He’s also calling for an increase in overseas aid as part of the solution…



Scott Morrison: Well, we’re not going to agree on every aspect of what Bob’s solution is, but

we certainly agree on this: that we need to start the journey on a sustainable population

debate in this country. That’s not what the government is engaging in. They’re saying, 36

million - we’ll tell you how we think we can do it, and you’ve got to trust us on that. Well, I

don’t think that Australian’s will trust them on that; I think that this is a very cynical exercise.

Tony (Bourke’s) job is to spin the Australian people about what the government’s number is.



Alex Sloane: Perhaps it is appropriate that an agriculture minister talks about this carrying

capacity. “Carrying Capacity” of course comes from the old DSE (Dry Sheep Equivalent)

measure, in rural Australia, Scott Morrison.



Scott Morrison: Well, look, agriculture I think is part of it but at the end of the day this is really

about what you’re intake is going to be. 60% of population growth is driven by migration. I

can understand why Kevin Rudd does not want to give Chris Evans any more to do, given

what’s going on in his portfolio at the moment, which is not going very well, but nevertheless,

Tony’s got that job, it’s a job basically to go out there and spin not to actually look at what

our inflows should be over, particularly, the next five to ten years, and whether we should

actually be looking at a different growth path. They’re locked into their growth path; the

Coalition wants to talk to Australians about it.



Alex Sloane: Scott Morrison, thanks for joining me.



Scott Morrison: Thanks.



