

Senator Chris Evans

Sri Lankan asylum seekers

Friday 12 March 2010

Interview with Alexandra Kirk - ABC PM

MARK COLVIN: The Immigration Minister, Chris Evans, says the government has  already started sending back more Sri Lankan asylum seekers. Senator Evans  spoke to Alexandra Kirk a short time ago.

CHRIS EVANS: We've returned three. There's another three on a removal pathway  and there's another 35 or so who've been assessed as not being owed our  protection but whom have got the opportunity to have that decision reviewed but  obviously if they fail it at that review, they'll be returned.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: And broadly, what's the reason for sending them back?

CHRIS EVANS: Well they each are given individual consideration but I think it is fair  to say that the country information in Sri Lanka about the safety of Tamils returning  has recently shown more positive outcome and therefore, I suppose, decision  makers are more inclined to say that it's safe for people to return.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: Now the UN has decided to reassess its protection guidelines  for both Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. They're not saying when they'll be ready, are  you considering delaying refugee decisions until what are expected to be more  relaxed protocols are issued, so that you can repatriate more of the Christmas Island  detainees?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, what we will do is look at both the UN information but also  other information. The UNHCR is not the only source, we have state department and  we have other advice. It is true that we have recently provided more advice to our  decision makers about the improvement of the situation in Sri Lanka. And it's also  the case that there has been reporting that the situation pro Hazaras in Afghanistan  has improved.

Clearly UNHCR advice is important to us and I understand the Sri Lankan revised  assessment shouldn't be too far away, there's an election in Sri Lanka, a  parliamentary election I think on April 8. So that may impact on their timing. I would  expect the Afghan one to be a bit further down the track.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: And would you be holding off making decisions on the fate of  asylum seekers until the new assessments in?

CHRIS EVANS: Now people have been assessed according to the country  information and their own claims.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: Isn't there a contradiction in all this that the UN is looking at  relaxing its guidelines, based on improving security in parts of Sri Lanka and  Afghanistan and you say that you've already started to make decisions on refugees  or on refugee claims because of that, because you agree with that.

But you and the rest of the government have been saying that the surge in asylum  seeker boats is due to quote, 'push factors' - in other words, things getting worse in  those two countries.

CHRIS EVANS: Well, we've certainly seen a large number of people flowing out of  Sri Lanka in recent times. What we're saying is that, that the Sri Lankan Government  has made some changes which seem to be improving the situation for Sri Lankans.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: But somehow the boats keep coming.

CHRIS EVANS: Well, yes, but as you'd be aware that there have been a large  number of people interned in northern Sri Lanka. They are being removed from the  camps now and that's an encouraging sign but there are still people in camps in  northern, in northern Sri Lanka. So the situation is changing.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: And how long before, do you think, the boats slow down,  considering that you think that conditions in Sri Lanka and Afghanistan are  improving?

CHRIS EVANS: Well, I think we obviously have to see how things develop. I think  we're still going to see fairly strong numbers of arrivals in the, in the short term. But  clearly if the situation is that people are increasingly found not to be refugees then  you'd expect, expect that to slow.

MARK COLVIN: The Immigration Minister, Senator Chris Evans talking to Alexandra  Kirk.



