Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Spin more important than policy says  Evans   14/07/10

Immigration Minister Chris Evans has acknowledged that spin is more important than  policy to the Gillard Government on border protection, in a frank admission at a  Sydney conference today, Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Scott  Morrison said today.

“Senator Evans has been reported to have said that his greatest failure as Immigration  Minister has been his inability to control the immigration debate,” Mr Morrison said.

“This is typical of a government that is more interested in polls and spin, than they are  in effective policies and real action,” he said.

“When will Labor learn that it is their failed policies that are the problem, not their  inability to spin a problem away?

“It is Labor’s policies that have failed, not their message nor their messenger.

“Chris Evans’ biggest failure has been to wind back the strong border protection  regime he inherited from the Coalition Government.

“Under his failed policies 146 illegal boats have arrived, carrying almost 7,000 people  and the number of people being detained has risen to the highest on record.

“More than 4,000 people including 561 children are now being detained by the  Department of Immigration and Citizenship on Senate Evans’ watch. This compares  to just four people being detained who arrived illegally by boat in November 2007.

“The cost to taxpayers of Labor’s failed border protection policies, on Senator Evans’  watch, has blown out by more than one billion dollars and continues to climb. Yet,  Senator Evans believes his only mistake has been to not control the debate.

“Labor have already terminated an elected Prime Minister because they believed it  was their message not their policies that were the problem.

“The problem is their own failed policies and the refusal to be accountable for these  failures.

“Senator Evans has confirmed today that the only way to change the policy is to  change the Government.

“Labor needs to stop focusing on their own political interests and start focusing on the  national interest.

“We have seen through their bungling of the East Timor ‘never never’ solution, that  they were simply looking for an election fix.

“Rather than engage with a government, such as Nauru, that is prepared to take on an  off shore processing centre, they continue to make excuses and talk to countries that  have rejected them.

“The last thing the Gillard Government wants to actually do is establish an off shore  processing centre for asylum seekers. They simply don’t believe it.

“Labor would rather talk than act on border protection. That is why Julia Gillard and  Labor cannot be trusted to fix the mess they have created through their own failed  policies,” he said.





