CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH VIRGINIA TRIOLI, ABC NEWS 24  BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 23 DECEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Negotiating with the Opposition, Malaysia Arrangement,  Nauru, offshore processing legislation, increase in humanitarian intake.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Chris Bowen, good morning and thanks for joining us.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure Virginia, good morning to you.

TRIOLI: Before we go through exactly what compromise deal and position  you’ve come to, we do have that response this morning from Tony Abbott saying  that temporary protection visas have to be part of the deal, also his plan to turn

boats around, and that Malaysia is not acceptable to him. What’s your response?

BOWEN: Well today’s the test for Mr Abbott. I’ve seen those comments. We’re  having a meeting today between the Government and the Opposition. The test is  whether they’re fair dinkum and will come to the table in good faith. If they’re

going to start ruling things out like that, then that is not a sign of good faith. If  he says ‘no’ to this deal then he’s saying no to Nauru and it would just show very  clearly that he will do anything and take politics to new lows in order to politick  around very serious issues in the national interest.

Now, we have, in the spirit of compromise, reached out to the Opposition. The  Prime Minister wrote to Tony Abbott nine days ago and said, ‘Why don’t we get  together and sort these issues through?’ He rejected that, he said he wanted a  written proposal. We said we wanted everything on the table; he said, ‘no, I  want a written proposal’. We’ve put a written proposal on the table and now he’s  rejecting that, it seems, from this morning’s comments.

But I do want to say, Virginia, we’re having a meeting later in the day. I think  that Mr Morrison is a man of good faith and that he and I would be able to sort  the issues through, if he is allowed to, by his party and by his leader.

TRIOLI: But if Tony Abbott at this very very early stage - so early this morning  and just after receiving this letter - is ruling out certain things and is insisting on

others; is there really any compromise to be reached here?

BOWEN: We’ll have to see Virginia. I think there is. I think we have shown a  great spirit of compromise. We have shown - the Prime Minister and the  Government have shown - a real willingness to work these issues through. It’s  very risky for us and not political orthodoxy to say, ‘Okay, well let’s put Nauru on  the table’, but we’ll do so because we think that’s what’s necessary to get this  done.

The Australian people want to see people not dying at sea to get to Australia. We  want the same thing. The Labor Party and the Liberal Party believe in offshore  processing. Now, unless the Liberal Party comes to the table in good faith then  they will be acting in their own political interest and not the national interest.  People will be able to conclude that Tony Abbott’s made the decision that boat  arrivals are in his best political interest despite all the negative implications of  boat arrivals, despite the dangers of people taking that boat journey, despite  people missing out on being settled in Australia from refugee camps around the  world.

This is the test for Mr Abbott. Today he has the chance to show leadership and  to work with the Government, or he can just continue the negative, ‘no’  consistency that he’s shown up until now.

TRIOLI: Chris Bowen, you’ve just said that this is a risk for the Government,  and it is, because Nauru is an option that you’ve never supported; you’ve always  rejected it and now, in the words of Wayne Swan, it’s one that you don’t even  believe will work - that’s the phrase that’s used in the letter to Tony Abbott. So  why on earth are you considering reopening it?



BOWEN: This is very important Virginia - it’s a legitimate question and a very  important point. We do not believe that Nauru by itself is anywhere near a  deterrent. Just a detention centre at Nauru is not a deterrent. It is Christmas  Island further away and more expensive. The people processed on Nauru, if  they’re found to be refugees, will be transferred to Australia. That’s not a  deterrent at all.

Having said that, we’ve said all along that we need the agreement with Malaysia,  which is a very effective deterrent, and that you need an offshore processing  centre as a complement to that to work with the Malaysia agreement, if there’s  people for whatever reason you don’t send to Malaysia. So, you have a suite of  options available to you. We negotiated that detention facility for Manus Island in  Papua New Guinea.

Now, if there’s another one in addition to that on Nauru that can be a useful  complement to the Malaysia agreement but it must be just that: a complement

to Malaysia. Just having the Tony Abbott position where he says, ‘Look if you’ve  got Nauru you won’t need Malaysia’ - he’s just wrong about that. All the expert  advice tells us that and unless Mr Abbott can come out today - and maybe he  will - and say, ‘Look if you’ve got a detention centre at Nauru, I’ve negotiated  with country ‘X’ so that the people who were found to be refugees on Nauru get

taken to that country’, well that would be a step forward; but he’s not done that,  he can’t do that.

The Howard Government, of course, said when they were in office, ‘We’ll send  you to Nauru and you won’t come to Australia, we’ll send you somewhere else’  and it never happened.

TRIOLI: Yep.

BOWEN: They weren’t able to negotiate that. A small number of people were  transferred to other countries but the vast majority of refugees were transferred  to Australia and New Zealand, so it is no deterrent by itself.

TRIOLI: But that’s right, and I guess that’s why it strikes so many people -  including me - this morning as just an extraordinary thing to suggest and by  your own words this morning it’s what - a meaningless and expensive  compromise? It won’t work, it won’t be a deterrent, it’ll cost a whole lot of  money but you’ll do it anyway? I mean, I just don’t see how you can make the  argument.

BOWEN: Well Virginia, there’s two points, there’s two points, as I say. Firstly, it  would need to be a complement to Malaysia. It would need to be part of a suite  of measures and would be -

TRIOLI: - A terrible expensive complement that would end up, as you say,  those people ending up in Australia anyway.

BOWEN: If we have a proper system in place which stops boat arrivals then you  can save all the money that goes into managing the detention network,  managing onshore processing. I agree with you on this point: Nauru by itself

would be an expensive white elephant, but Nauru as a complement to our  agreement with Malaysia would be part of a properly negotiated regional  response. But it must be that; and it is in the spirit of compromise. We are  saying to the Opposition, ‘We are prepared to give you what is the fundamental  centrepiece of your policy but we insist on the fundamental centrepiece of ours’.

I think the Australian people are saying to us, ‘Get this sorted, compromise, sort  it through’. We’ve shown a great spirit and willingness to do so. Mr Abbott hasn’t  shown any so far, but maybe today, just maybe today, he’ll authorise Mr  Morrison to do so.



TRIOLI: Would you compromise on the reintroduction of temporary protection  visas?

BOWEN: Well our position is that we don’t believe that they work and that they  are not an effective deterrent at all. We saw, last time, that the number of  people arriving by boats go up because temporary protection visas removed

family reunions. So people came to Australia and then contacted their family  members and said, ‘Sorry I thought I could sponsor you but I can’t, you’re going  to have to get on a boat’. Now, we’ll talk all these issues through with the Liberal  Party today. No doubt they’ll have an alternative view to put and I’ll hear their

case and I will attempt, in good faith, to come a conclusion with them.

We’ve put the offer on the table. As I said, our preferred position was that we  have no parameters to the discussion, no limits to the discussion and we’d come  to joint position. Tony Abbott said ‘no’ to that; he wanted a written proposal.  Well now he’s got one. The time for excuses is over.

Every excuse that Mr Abbott has ever put up is now gone. Either he believes in  offshore processing or he doesn’t. Either he wants to stop people dying on the  seas to get to Australia, or he doesn’t. They’re the choices today for Mr Abbott.

TRIOLI: Chris Bowen I wonder what you see as the moral position here. If you  go ahead with this compromise deal, if you do manage to get some kind of  compromise that includes Nauru, maybe Malaysia, maybe not. But in the Nauru  instance: you take people - possibly even illegally - from Christmas Island and  transfer them to an island state thousands of nautical miles from nowhere  against their will where they’re isolated for possibly years on end while their  claims are processed, as happened last time, and then - as you say this morning  and experience tells us - they end up in Australia anyway; where does that leave  the moral position of the Federal Government when it comes to our obligation to  people who do have a legal right to seek asylum in this country?

BOWEN: I’ll make a couple of points there: firstly Virginia, a lot depends on the  arrangements you put in place - whether it’s Nauru or Papua New Guinea or  Malaysia or anywhere else. The arrangements you put in place to ensure people  are treated appropriately; and where the detention centre is is not a particularly  relevant point, it’s how it’s run and what arrangements are put in place for  people’s claims to be processed.

The second point I make is this Virginia and I make it very clearly and strongly:  the objective of our policy - my objective as Immigration Minister - is to run a  refugee policy which lifts the maximum number of people out of misery. I want  more refugees coming to Australia. I want to give more people the chance to a  better life in Australia.



If we implement the Malaysia agreement, that’s an increase of 1,000 refugees  into Australia a year automatically. As I moved at the Labor Party National  Conference, then I’d like to move it over time to 20,000 refugees a year. That  would make us the second-largest resettlement country in the world. We’re

currently the third-largest - we take more refugees than any other country bar  Canada and the United States. Moving to 20,000 would move us to becoming the  second-largest resettlement country in the world. If I can do that, if I can do that  over time I’ll be very proud of that; but I also want to do it in a way which  means you don’t say to people, ‘Your best chance of a better life in Australia is to  risk your life to get here’. It is unsustainable and not morally acceptable to me.

TRIOLI: Chris Bowen good to talk you this morning. Thanks for your time.

BOWEN: Thanks Virginia.

Ends







