PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS  SKY NEWS  2 SEPTEMBER 2011



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Australian Labor Party; Pricing carbon; High Court

HOST: Prime Minister, welcome. Have you considered stepping down for the  good of the Party?

PM: I’m not going anywhere, David. I’ve got too much to do - too much to do  to realise a vision of this country’s future which is about opportunity for all,  about jobs, about education, but also about making sure people don’t feel left  behind doing things like the National Disability Insurance Scheme.

Yesterday when I was in Queensland I went to a school and I had the  opportunity to open a Building the Education Revolution building. That was all  about supporting jobs and we’ve got work to do today to support jobs as our  economy changes, and I saw what was happening in that school with our  National Partnership money - improving education. We’ve got more to do to  bring opportunity to all.

HOST: But can you understand the concern of your colleagues here? Under  your leadership Labor’s stocks have plunged, the carbon tax remains deeply  unpopular and the asylum seeker policy is now in tatters. These are two areas  that you vowed to fix when you took over as leader.

PM: And I’ll keep working on all of those issues, David, as part of realising my  vision for this country’s future.

Yes, I understand that carbon pricing has raised a lot of concern in the  community, but it’s about clean energy jobs, it’s about doing the right thing by  our environment whilst we get those clean energy jobs of the future. I’m not  having this country left behind as other nations seize those jobs.

And yes, we had a very disappointing High Court decision, one that changed  the refugee and asylum seeker law in this country, now we will respond to that  decision so that we are protecting Australia and its borders and working our  way through the refugee and asylum seeker policies we need under this new

law.

HOST: Has anyone approached you about stepping down?

PM: No.

HOST: The talk about Kevin Rudd can’t be ignored, given his continued  popularity in the polls. do you think he would be a better option for Labor?

PM: David, I’m not going anywhere and I’m doing this job because I am the  best person to do it, the best person to lead our nation as we realise what is a  Labor vision of the future. As I define my vision for our country’s future, of  course I’m bringing my Labor values.

We are a political party that has always believed in the distribution of  opportunity. That used to be about wages and working conditions and trade  unions and it’s still about all of those things, but in the modern age it needs to  be about more, so I’m very determined to keep doing what I have been doing  as Prime Minister to realise a vision of a future of opportunity for all and  making sure people, industries, regions, don’t feel left behind.

HOST: Which is all well and good, but if Labor keeps going backwards is  there any point at which you would consider whether changing leaders might  be better for the Party?

PM: We’ll have an election in 2013 and the Australian people will cast their  judgment then. That’s the time to do it. For the days in between, I will be  working on this vision of the country’s future, it’s certainly about jobs and as I  move around and talk to people, there is a sense of unease. People  understand that fundamentals of our economy are strong, but they also  understand that that really strong mining sector is a good thing, but it’s putting  pressure on other parts of the economy. They don’t want to feel they’re left  behind, their industries left behind, their regions left behind, so centrally about  jobs and opportunity - that’s what I’m doing and what’s driving me.

HOST: Let me ask you about the independents. Is their deal, their support for  the minority Government, a deal with Labor or a deal with Julia Gillard?

PM: Well, I’ll let the independents answer those questions-

HOST: -You were party to the deal, too. What’s your understanding of it?

PM: Whatever the answer is, David, whatever the answer is, my  determination to do this job and to realise this vision for the nation’s future is  not about any discussions I’ve had with Mr Oakeshott or Mr Windsor or Mr  Wilkie - it’s about doing this job as a Labor Prime Minister and being the best  person to do it.

HOST: But what’s your understanding of the deal?

PM: Well, my understanding is various of them put it in different ways, but I  don’t spend any time thinking about it. It’s not central to my think about what  we need to do as a Government now to build on the things we’ve already  done so far: big reforms in telecommunications, that’s about jobs and  prosperity in the future, we need a robust telecommunications system not  weighed down by the Telstra gorilla having the monopoly advantages; the

health agreement that we’ve struck; the budget with jobs and opportunity at its  very core.

We’ve got more to do before the end of the year - pricing carbon, the Minerals  Resource Rent Tax.

I’m getting on with those things because they are about my vision for the  country’s future.

HOST: There’s been criticism within your ranks of Chris Bowen after the High  Court decision on the Malaysian deal. Have you considered replacing him and  reshuffling your front bench?

PM: No, I haven’t considered replacing Chris Bowen. He has-

HOST: -Did he offer to resign?

PM: Well, can I just say Chris Bowen has done a good job as Immigration  Minister. It’s a hard job, it’s been a hard job in this nation for a long period of  time, since the days of Gerry Hand and the creation of mandatory detention-

HOST: -What’s he done that’s been good in the policy?

PM: Well, this is not an easy job. Chris Bowen looked and thought creatively  about what we could do to send the most powerful message to people  smugglers-

HOST: -And came up with an unlawful policy, so what’s he done that’s been  good?

PM: Well, hang on, David I think that’s a grossly unfair characterisation-

HOST: -Well that’s what the High Court has found, that it’s unlawful.

PM: Yes, but it’s a grossly unfair characterisation because Chris Bowen-

HOST: -It’s an accurate characterisation isn’t it?

PM: Chris Bowen worked, talking to his counterpart in Malaysia as early as  last December, worked through for an innovative agreement, took legal advice  along the way, the legal advice that he received was based on precedents  and what Australian law was known to say at that time. The High Court has  changed that law. It’s changed the law, made a new decision-

HOST: -Well, other legal experts differ with that opinion.

PM: Well, that was the legal advice that the Government received and I think  we’ve seen legal-

HOST: -Will that be made public?



PM: Well, we will get legal advice from the Solicitor-General about-

HOST: -But what about the legal advice that was received that you’re referring  to there, before this policy was bowled up? Will that now be made public?

PM: The legal advice we’ll make public is the legal advice from the Solicitor-General about the implications of the High Court decision.

HOST: Why not the advice on which the policy was-

PM: -We don’t routinely release legal advice, but we will release the Solicitor-General’s advice on the implications of the High Court decision, because I  think it’s in the public interest that we do so, given this shift in the law relating

to refugees and asylum seekers.

David, you’re right - of course legal experts are saying all different things in  the public domain about the implications of this High Court case. To some  extent that’s to be expected, that different lawyers would put forward different  views, but many of them are certainly putting forward the view that it was a  quite unexpected decision.

Now, our job is to get on and respond to it. Chris Bowen’s been doing a good  job as Immigration Minister and he will continue to do that.

HOST: If that advice from the Solicitor-General finds there is a way to process  asylum seekers offshore, in Nauru for example, are you in principle opposed  to that, or will you go with Nauru?



PM: Look, I’m not going to do a set of hypotheticals. We’re going to do what  we always do, which is careful work, detailed work, and it starts with getting  the Solicitor-General’s written advice. Of course, we’ve taken oral advice from  him at our Cabinet meeting already.

HOST: But do you have any in principle objection to Nauru?

PM: I’m not going to get drawn on possibilities at this stage. We’re going to  work through. I’ll work through, guided by, of course, the Solicitor-General’s  legal advice and my colleagues including Chris Bowen.

HOST: You have said in the past the Pacific Solution is costly, unsustainable  and wrong as a matter of principle. Is that still your view?

PM: Look, I was obviously concerned, as Shadow Minister for Immigration,  about the way the Howard Government created the Pacific Solution - about its  lack of perspective around regional solution. I was obviously concerned about  those things and I authored a policy when we were in opposition. Then we  worked and Chris Bowen and the Government worked to strike this innovative  arrangement with Malaysia. Now-

HOST: -Do you stand by that criticism of the Pacific Solution you made on  many occasions?

PM: Look, I’m well aware of what I said in the past David, but what I will do in  this area is not deal with a set of hypotheticals or statements now. We will  work through-

HOST: -So you are now open to it, in other words?

PM: No, the only thing you should draw from my words, David, is what I’m  saying.

I will respond with the Minister for Immigration to the High Court case at the  appropriate time, having taken careful legal advice. We have oral legal advice  now. We’ll get written legal advice, then we’ll respond and you’ll have the  opportunity to ask any question you want.

HOST: This previous criticism wasn’t about any legal advice, it was about  principle. Your words were costly and unsustainable, wrong as a matter of  principle. What I’m asking is, is that still your principled position?

PM: Look, David, I’ve just responded to how we will deal with this. I’m not  going to be drawn on policy questions of this nature at this time.

What we will do is when we respond to the High Court case. That’s the  obligation that we have now, and when we respond you’ll have a full  opportunity to ask any, or all, questions.

HOST: Other members of Caucus aren’t waiting for that legal advice. Doug  Cameron has told us this morning that, quote: “The position that’s beginning  to solidify in the left of the party is that the national platform should be  implemented. The national platform is a document that asylum seekers should  be processed onshore”.

PM: Well, party members, like Doug Cameron who are on the backbench, can  put their views forward. I’ll deal with this as Prime Minister, with the Minister  for Immigration.

HOST: You acknowledge, though, that a significant proportion of your Party  room wants now to just process asylum seekers onshore?

PM: What we will do is make decisions in the national interest, having taken  careful advice.

HOST: Did you go too far in criticising the High Court yesterday?

PM: What I did was point out matters of fact, and I think Australians are  entitled to those facts and I don’t resile from one word of what I said  yesterday.



There was of course commentary that the Government could have known that  this was going to happen, or should have seen it coming and words to that  effect. I thought it was important to explain to the Australian people the simple  facts, and the simple facts are that there were precedents that obviously those  advising us legally drew on. Some of those precedents are from the current  Chief Justice of the High Court himself. They were part of what the legal  advice to us rested on and that legal advice was that we had a sound footing  to take the actions that we took as a Government-

HOST: -But you won’t release that advice?-

PM: -simple facts and I put them in the public domain.

HOST: Yes, but you also pointedly referred to a previous judgement of the  High Court Chief Justice, Robert French, indicating that he had shown  inconsistency. Was that a breach of the separation of powers?



PM: I think that’s a ridiculous statement. People are entitled to the facts.

The Chief Justice’s decisions at an earlier point in his judicial career were  referred to by High Court judges themselves in their judgements, most  particularly in the dissenting judgement, so, I was pointing to simple facts -  precedents, the way the law has been, the way the law was understood by the  Government based on its legal advice: simple facts.

What the separation of power requires is for us to accept the decision of the  High Court and to get on and respond to it and we will.

And David, in all of this public commentary let’s be a little bit clear here about  what’s happened in the past - under the Howard Government Labor was  critical of some of the things that were said about the High Court. They  weren’t factual statements pointing to precedents in the past. They were  things like Philip Ruddock saying to High Court judges “if you want to get  involved in politics, why don’t you resign and run for Parliament”. That was the  tenor of the public debate then.

The tenor of the public debate now, from me and from Chris Bowen is simple,  factual, accurate. We were disappointed by the High Court decision. We were  explaining to the Australian people - and we will continue to do so - how we  formed the views we did about the Malaysia arrangement, and yes, that does  mean we will point to legal precedents in the past.

HOST: If you were to process all asylum seekers onshore, what would that  mean for boat arrivals? Would we see a flood of boats arriving, or do you think  this is an issue that can be better managed onshore?

PM: David, we’ll deal with all of this at the appropriate time. I’m not going to  speculate on policy options now, nor am I going to speculate about the impact  of various policy options on potential arrivals.

HOST: Just back on the difficulties that you’re facing, you did seem to indicate  earlier, but let me ask, will this Government run full term, to 2013? We’re not  going to see an earlier election?

PM: It will run full term to 2013, as I’ve always said we would.

HOST: And with you as leader?

PM: Correct.

HOST: Julia Gillard, thank you.

PM: Thank you.

[ENDS]

