Julie Bishop

Transcripts

Channel 9, Afternoon News

Tuesday, 20 September 2011

Subjects: Border protection; Migration Act amendments; Newspoll

E&OE…

JOURNALIST    To other news now and hypocrisy, negativity and recklessness have been the words  of the day in Federal Parliament as both sides attack each other for failing to support each others  asylum seeker policies.

JULIA GILLARD     He is terrified that the Malaysia arrangement will work. He is terrified it will work  and what he wants to see for this country is more boats because he believes that will serve his  political interest.

TONY ABBOTT    This Prime Minister should not project her thoughts and her failings onto others. It  is a serious psychological weakness in this Prime Minister.

JOURNALIST    Julia Gillard has managed to secure the support of her party room for her planned  changes to the Migration Act despite opposition from the left faction.

For more on this issue we are joined by the Opposition’s Deputy Leader Julie Bishop. Ms Bishop,  thank you for your time this afternoon.

Now we’ve just heard from the PM and the Opposition Leader. You’ve got the PM determined to get  the Opposition to work in what she is calling the national interest, support these proposed law  changes. What is your response, will we ever see an agreement on this?

JULIE BISHOP    Wendy this is a terrible mess of the Government’s own making. When the  Government came to office it couldn’t leave well enough alone and it unpicked the laws that the  Howard Government had in place in relation to border protection, and those laws worked.

We had offshore processing in Nauru, we had temporary protection visas and we had a policy to turn  boats around in international waters if we were able to do so, if it was safe to do so.

The Government changed those laws and stopped offshore processing, they closed down Nauru, and  that is why we’ve seen the flood of boats that have arrived since the Government changed the laws.

You know, it is very simple. We are assisting the Government by proposing an amendment that will  restore offshore processing but will retain the basic protections for human rights for asylum seekers  that are contained in the UN Convention on Refugees that Australia signed up to in 1951.

JOURNALIST    But you’ve got to agree there is a stalemate right now in Parliament, you’ve got a lot  of bickering yesterday, today and likely tomorrow. How are you going to end the stalemate? When will  we stop seeing the bickering?

JULIE BISHOP    If the Prime Minister wants to restore the offshore processing that Labor closed  down then it is very simple. She just has to embrace our amendments which will restore offshore  processing and she can re-establish the Nauru detention centre that was built with Australian  taxpayers’ money, she can re-establish Manus Island. So offshore processing can begin immediately

if the Government wants to embrace the very simple amendment that the Coalition has put forward.  That will restore what was in place and what worked when it came to stopping the boats and stopping  the overcrowding in detention centres.

JOURNALIST    You’re playing hard ball, we’ve got the PM playing hard ball, and then you’ve got the  polls out today if we could just talk about that for a moment. They’re reaffirming the Opposition’s got  greater popularity over the Government, great for you guys, but is that why you are playing such hard  ball at the moment?

JULIE BISHOP    What we are trying to do is act in the national interest by restoring integrity to our  borders. Since this Government came to office the people smuggling trade has been reinvigorated,  we’ve seen 12,000 people come by boats on very dangerous journeys to Australia, there are about  7,000 people currently in overcrowded detention centres.

Yet when the Government came to office we had stopped the people smuggling trade, virtually  ceased the arrival of boats, and we had less than six people who’d arrived by boats in the detention  network.

We want to restore integrity to our borders and I think the Australian people agree with us and that is  why, one of the reasons why, the polls are showing support for the Liberal and National Parties.

JOURNALIST    Julie Bishop, thank you very much for your time this afternoon, we appreciate it.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.



