

Nation welcomes new citizens on Australia Day  Wednesday, 26 January 2011

Some 13 000 people from 143 countries will today make the Australian citizenship  pledge to become our nation's newest citizens at 325 special ceremonies across the  country, as part of Australia Day celebrations.

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, said Australia's  newest citizens would join more than four million other people who had chosen to  become Australian citizens since the first citizenship ceremony in 1949.

'Australia Day on 26 January is a special day for all Australians, especially for those  who are becoming Australian citizens on our national day,' Mr Bowen said.

'Today they make a formal commitment to this country and will celebrate, together  with the rest of the nation, what it means to be an Australian.'

Mr Bowen will preside over a special ceremony today at Taronga Zoo in Sydney,  where an international pilot, a minister of religion, and a senior executive for iconic  Australian swimwear company Speedo will be among 42 people taking the  citizenship pledge to officially join the Australian family.

Some 3200 people will take the pledge in nearly 100 ceremonies across New South  Wales.

In the ACT, Prime Minister Julia Gillard will preside over her first citizenship  ceremony as Prime Minister, with about 50 people from 21 countries becoming  citizens in the nation's capital. The ceremony will be part of the national Australia  Day celebrations at Canberra's Regatta Point.

In Victoria, about 3000 people will become Australian citizens at local council-run  ceremonies around the state. In Melbourne, Brimbank City Council will host a

ceremony for about 200 people, while another 180 will participate in a ceremony  hosted by Melton Shire Council.

A ceremony at Adelaide's Botanic Gardens will be among 33 citizenship events  staged in South Australia, with former refugee and South Australian Young  Australian of the Year finalist Khadija Gbla to be the guest speaker.

About 150 people from 30 countries will become Australian citizens in Tasmania, at  15 ceremonies in locations including Hobart, Launceston, Glenorchy and  Kingborough. In the nation's west, some 2100 people from 93 countries will  participate in events ranging from a single-person ceremony in country Western  Australia to a ceremony for some 570 people hailing from 56 countries in Perth's  northern suburb of Wanneroo. There will be 53 local government ceremonies  throughout Western Australia, from Albany in the south to Kununurra in the north.

As the massive flood recovery effort continues in the north, Queenslanders will  celebrate Australia Day and welcome almost 3000 new citizens in their state, with  Brisbane City Council staging a ceremony for more than 1000 people from 76  countries at the Brisbane Convention and Exhibition Centre.

In the Northern Territory, more than 170 people will become citizens at ceremonies  in Darwin, Palmerston, Katherine, Nhulunbuy, Tennant Creek and Alice Springs.

Mr Bowen said Australia's new citizens enriched the nation's culture and traditions.

'Citizenship ceremonies are a special time for those involved and I offer my sincere  congratulations to all those becoming citizens today,' Mr Bowen said.

'I know all Australians will join me in welcoming our newest citizens, and I hope  everyone enjoys our nation's special day.'



