CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH ALISON CARABINE, ABC RADIO  NATIONAL

Tuesday, 26 July 2011



SUBJECT: Malaysia transfer arrangement.

CHRIS BOWEN: The elements of the arrangement are very crystal-clear and  there are elements that many people said that we wouldn’t be able to  achieve, said that Malaysia wouldn’t agree to. Its there, people who are  transferred from Australia to Malaysia will have the legal right to be in  Malaysia, they’ll be permitted to remain lawfully: that has been one of the  furphies we’ve seen from the Opposition and others about corporal  punishment, et cetera; that’s very clear that doesn’t apply. It’s very clear that  there will be work rights and that people will have the right to self-reliance.

The Malaysian Government has given a commitment to implement that in  terms of the agreement. In addition, we’ll have an implementation taskforce  which consists of representatives of Australia, Malaysia, the UNHCR and the  IOM, and also an advisory group which will have non-government  representatives on it and advise on day-to-day implementation.

ALISON CARABINE: But Malaysia does have a poor record when it comes  to the treatment of refugees in its country. What binding agreements has  Malaysia signed up to which will ensure human rights are upheld?

BOWEN: Well there’s this agreement, which is a very clear commitment on  behalf of the Malaysian Government and it’s an agreement which has been  very much formed by the feedback of the UNHCR. The UNHCR, while this is a  bilateral agreement, was consulted closely on its implementation and the  UNHCR’s feedback has very much shaped those protections that are built in,  and as Minister Hishammuddin said in the press conference today, ‘Judge this  by results, judge Malaysia by its results’. Malaysia is committed to  implementing this agreement and they have asked, ‘Judge us by the results’,  and I think that’s an appropriate thing to do.

CARABINE: But it will really be up to the UNHCR and the IOM, the  International Organisation for Migration, to make this deal work. Are they  adequately resourced for this task?

BOWEN: Well look, they believe they are, we believe they are and part of the  budget allocation is for us to fund appropriate UNHCR and IOM activities and

we’ve said we would do that out of the original budget allocation that the  Prime Minister and I announced on the 7th of May. We will fund the  appropriate measures in conjunction with the UNHCR and the IOM, so I’m  confident that all the resources and support necessary will be in place.

CARABINE: Australia has agreed to bear all of the costs for transfers, health,  education, welfare, processing, resettlement. Will that cost be capped at just  under $300 million or could it blow out, could it end up costing more than first  expected?

BOWEN: All the indications, all our estimates, all our budgeting shows that  we are well within that allocation we announced on the 7th of May and that  we put into the budget. Appropriate thought went into that allocation, a  substantial amount of money. Of course, the majority of that money is for the  4,000 people we’re transferring from Malaysia to Australia and all the  settlement costs that go with that, but there’s a substantial allocation for the  cost of processing the 800, and all the commitments that we’ve given are  covered by that allocation.

CARABINE: You were at the forefront of the negotiations which landed this  deal. Why were you happy to trust a country that hasn’t signed the United  Nations Refugee Convention, and did you press the Malaysian Government to  sign up?

BOWEN: Well the Malaysian Government has agreed to the fundamental  tenant of the Refugee Convention, which is not to return people to a country  in which they would be prosecuted, not to refoule people to use the term in  the Convention. Now that’s a big step forward, it’s the first time Malaysia has  made that commitment and I think, as other people have recognised, that  that is a very big step forward and that should be recognised as such.

The majority of the world’s refugees and asylum seekers are living in  countries that have not signed the Refugee Convention. In my view, you take  these opportunities to work with those countries to take steps toward better

protection - more consistent protection outcomes across our region.

CARABINE: With regards to the 800 people who will be transferred to  Malaysia, there’s no blanket exemption for vulnerable people. Does that mean  children and unaccompanied minors, plus people who have suffered trauma  and torture, could be forcibly sent to Malaysia?

BOWEN: Well look, as I’ve said repeatedly in recent weeks, a blanket  exemption would send all the wrong messages to people smugglers that they  could have boatloads full of children and they would not be covered by this  arrangement, and that’s the last message I want to send. I never want to  take another call like I did on the 15th of December, telling me children had  drowned off Christmas Island, including a two month old baby.



But of course, we will also have appropriate pre-transfer arrangements in  place to assess people’s vulnerabilities, to ensure that we’re making the right  decision in relation to particularly vulnerable people, and particularly in  relation to unaccompanied minors, and that if people are transferred, that  again individual support mechanisms are in place for each individual. We’ve

done that, again, in consultations and conjunction with the UNHCR.

CARABINE: Chris Bowen, now that the agreement has been signed, do you  expect the boats to completely stop? If not, what benchmarks will you be  using to determine whether this policy has worked or not?

BOWEN: Well look, I’m not claiming victory because people smugglers will  test our resolve and asylum seekers will test their luck. I think we’ve already  seen an announcement impact from the announcement, we’ve seen a  reduction in the number of boats arriving in Australia.

But of course, people will test our resolve and now that the arrangement has  been signed we will see people continue to do that. But I do think it  dramatically changes the equation, dramatically changes the decision about  whether people should take that dangerous journey to Australia: they do so in  the knowledge they are very likely to be returned to Malaysia where around  80 or 90 per cent of them start their boat journey. I think that changes the  dynamic and makes it a much bigger decision and a harder decision to get on  the boat and come to Australia.

CARABINE: But is there still an incentive to get on the boat? Asylum seekers  sent to Malaysia will be released into the community after 45 days, they’ll  have work rights, access to education and health, they’ll be treated better  than other refugees in that country; could that encourage people to get on  the boats to come to Australia, knowing that they will be treated relatively  well once they’re sent back to Malaysia?

BOWEN: People come to Australia to live in Australia, they don’t come to  Australia to get any other outcome. If that is denied to them, then it really  pulls the rug out from the people smugglers business model. If people want  to criticise us for having built-in too many protections into this agreement, for  having negotiated that too well, okay, I’ll cop that criticism because all the  criticism has gone the other way. The fact that we’ve managed to do that,  some people want to say we’ve done too well, well, I’ll cop that on the chin.

ENDS





