CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH STEPHEN DZIEDZIC, ABC PM

MONDAY, 25 JULY 2011





SUBJECTS: Signing of Malaysia transfer agreement, Papua New Guinea.

DZIEDZIC: Minister, you say that asylum seekers will have access to health,  education and work rights, but who will monitor and, more importantly, enforce this?

BOWEN: Well the arrangement is very clear: that people transferred to Malaysia will  be legally and lawfully permitted to remain in Malaysia. So a lot of the furphies and  misconceptions and things we saw raised in the recent weeks are dealt with by that.  And also, they will have access to work rights and to education and health.

Now, the Malaysian Government has indicated they’re committed to implementing  that. Of course, we’ll have an implementation taskforce which will consist of  representatives of Australia, Malaysia, the UNHCR and the IOM, as well as an

advisory group which will consist of non-government organisations as well.

DZIEDZIC: And how will you prevent mistreatment of asylum seekers sent to  Malaysia? Much of the abuse that happens is arbitrary; it’s often done by low-level  officials. How will you actually actively protect them against that?

BOWEN: Well, again, the arrangement’s very clear: the people transferred from  Australia to Malaysia will have identification documents, which make it clear that  they are permitted to be in Malaysia, that the law in relation to illegal migrants does  not apply to them, and those documents will be very clear in their implication. And  the Malaysian Government has issued clear instructions to its law enforcement  authorities that these people are transferred with the agreement of the Malaysian  Government and are to be dealt with accordingly.

DZIEDZIC: Are you creating a two-tiered system here; one for people who can  afford to take a boat to Australia and another for those who can’t? And isn’t this  fundamentally inequitable?

BOWEN: Well, look, people questioned whether we’d be able to get these sort of  protections built in and many people said we wouldn’t. We have been able to and I  make no apologies for that. It’s an appropriate thing to do.

The Malaysian Government has also made it clear, as late as today in our joint press  conference, that they are moving to a different arrangement for asylum seekers in  Malaysia across the board. They’re in the process of doing that and they see this as  very much as one of the important steps in doing that. The Malaysian Government is

very comfortable with the arrangements we’ve entered into, in terms of the  appropriate treatment for asylum seekers and I think they’re appropriate as well.

DZIEDZIC: Australia will bear the full financial burden of this agreement. How  much will this cost taxpayers?

BOWEN: Well, the cost is exactly as I announced with the Prime Minister on 7 May,  which is just over $290 million over the four years.

DZIEDZIC: Malaysia can reject asylum seekers under this agreement. Do you  anticipate this will happen regularly and will it dilute the disincentive that you’re  trying to create here?

BOWEN: No, it won’t happen regularly and no, it won’t dilute the impact. Malaysia  has made it clear that they would like the right to assess the names against their  terrorism watch list and their most wanted list. That’s perfectly appropriate they  would do those checks and they would implement that arrangement where somebody

came up on one of those lists. I envisage that being very rare indeed and of course,  Australia has the same rights in relation to the 4000 people we will take and that’s an  appropriate reciprocal arrangement.

DZIEDZIC: Do you anticipate that would only be if Malaysia had some sort of  security concern about the people, the person in question?

BOWEN: Yes, that’s as outlined in the operational guidelines which I’ve released,  that Malaysia would check their watch list, their terrorism watch list, their most  wanted list, and that’s when they would exercise their right to decline to take an

individual.

DZIEDZIC: You’ve said consistently that the 567 people who’ve arrived in  Australian waters after the 7 May original announcement would be processed in  another country. You’ve now said they’ll be processed here in Australia. When did  you make that decision?

BOWEN: Well, look, we have had to adjust our position there. That was an important  thing to say and it was the appropriate thing to say with the information we had  available to us at that time. It’s now clear that not only Malaysia but the discussions  we’ve been in with Papua New Guinea have taken longer than it might have been  expected they would. Therefore the only appropriate and reasonable thing to do is to  process those people in Australia, and that’s a formal direction that I’m issuing to my  department today.

DZIEDZIC: But when was that decision made, Minister?

BOWEN: The decision was made just very shortly before me leaving to come to  Kuala Lumpur. But obviously I’d been considering it for a period before that.

DZIEDZIC: So Ministers who maintained all throughout the weekend that they  would be sent to another country, were they aware of this decision in any way?

BOWEN: Well, the decision is operational as at my direction to the department  today. That’s as appropriate. Of course, just before I left to come to Malaysia, I  discussed the options with the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, and I came to  the view that that would be the appropriate decision and instruction to issue today.

DZIEDZIC: The UNHCR has agreed to work with you, but it also says it would have  been preferable for all asylum seeker who’ve arrived in Australia to be processed in  Australia. Can you really claim UNHCR endorsement of this deal?



BOWEN: Well, what I claim is what we have, which is UNHCR involvement. The  UNHCR has been very closely involved in the development of this arrangement. They  have very much shaped the final document and their feedback has been important, and  they’ve said that a) they appreciate that, and b) they’ll be involved in its  implementation.

I compare that to the previous Government’s Pacific Solution, where the UNHCR  refused to be involved and said it was a very sorry episode in Australia’s history.  That’s the comparison.

Ends





