Transcript - Interview with Leon Compton ABC936 1  September 2011   Thursday, 01 September 2011 13:03

Leon Compton: As the Federal Government’s policy on sending asylum seekers to Malaysia

for processing falls apart, work is reaching the final stages at the Pontville detention centre. But

I wonder how the need for the Federal Government to rapidly come up with a new plan for

processing asylum seekers will change what happens at Pontville? The Government has said up

to now that up to 400 people would be processed there. The Government has said up to now

that the site would be used for 6 months. I wonder if some of that will change now that the High

Court of Australia has ruled 6 to one that Malaysia processing is effectively un-Australian? Eric

Abetz is leader of the Liberal Party in the Senate, Senator good morning to you.

Senator Abetz: Good morning, Leon.

Leon Compton: And thank you for coming in this morning. Were you surprised by the

decision by the High Court?

Senator Abetz: We always had some concerns as an Opposition about the Malaysian deal.

First of all that it was rushed on the heels of the failure of the East Timor solution, that the

Malaysian solution was so rushed that it allowed 4000 Malaysians to come to Australia even in

the event, now as it appears, not a single one of the asylum seekers will go to Malaysia in

return.

Leon Compton: We’re not saying Malaysian people seeking asylum, through Malaysia would

be coming here.

Senator Abetz: That’s correct and if I didn’t express that correctly Leon thank you for

clearing that up to your listeners. The concern for us was that all the reasons, all the rationale

that Labor had given as to why Nauru was not a solution apply to Malaysia, but a lot more so. Of

course the advice that the Government got from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

seems to have indicated that and the High Court has latched onto that and that is where I still

believe there is a material difference between the Nauru solution and the Malaysian solution

because one of the comments by the High Court was that Australians would not be administering

the system in Malaysia but in Nauru it was Australians administering the system. And we all

know it stopped the boats. It fixed the people smuggling problem and then we were able to

have a very orderly refugee intake through the UNHCR in a manner that was fair and

reasonable.

Leon Compton: What should happen to the 4000 people that we have pledged to accept

from Malaysia under the terms of the deal? The other side of this deal if you like?

Senator Abetz: One of our concerns at all times was that Australia might have to accept 4000

in circumstances where we could not send anybody to Malaysia. That concern is now realised.

We have, it appears, an obligation to Malaysia. That was part of the deal and I think if our

reputation is to be maintained as a country, we are bound by it. Whether Malaysia is willing to

fore-go their entitlements under the agreement of course is another issue.

Leon Compton: Do you accept that Pontville has now become, or may well become a more

long term prospect?

Senator Abetz: It was always my suspicion that Pontville would become a long term prospect

because of the failure of the Government’s border protection policy and that is why I never

believed from day one it would only be used for 6 months and closed again in October of this

year. We know practical completion is due on the 26th of this month and in those circumstances

it would have only had a life of one month. I call on the Labor Government to come clean with

the Tasmanian people and tell them exactly how long it’s going to in operation? How long it’s

going to last? When they are going to start pulling down the security fences again, as we were

promised?

Leon Compton: What would be the problem with this detention centre running longer, longer

than one month, certainly longer than six?

Senator Abetz: I think the major problem is that it was only ever designed and built to be

temporary and only for a six month duration. If this now, because of their policy failure,

becomes a long term venture over 12 or 24 months you will have facilities that were not

designed for this sort of extensive usage over such an extensive period of time and I’m not sure

that the facilities would be able to cope.

Leon Compton: If you re-design the facilities, what’s wrong with Pontville as a possible place

to house people seeking asylum while their claims are processed?

Senator Abetz: On the face of it that sounds reasonable other than you will have had to have

flown them all the way from Christmas Island to Tasmania which of course is a huge expense to

the Australian taxpayer and it makes a lot more sense to house them in Western Australia or the

Northern Territory and as a result save that huge expense for the Australian taxpayer.

Leon Compton: People were concerned and you were one of them, over the expense claimed

in building Pontville divided by the amount of time that it was to be used. If it is to be used for

longer doesn’t it become a more economically sensible plan?

Senator Abetz: Yes it does, but not by design, but by disaster. It will turn out to be so

because of the failure of their policies. We were told at all times that everything was in hand,

that it would only be there for six months, it was only a temporary facility. As I understand it is

only being built and constructed as a temporary facility and so if all of a sudden it becomes a

permanent facility, one would imagine that other remedial works would need to be undertaken

because it stands to reason that if you build something as a permanent structure you would

make it more sound, you would have more facilities available than just for a six month stop-gap

measure.

Leon Compton: And do you have any questions, do you have any suspicions that, rather than

the 400 that long term it was designed to house, that Pontville might be used to deal with larger

numbers of people seeking asylum?

Senator Abetz: Leon, if we get the flood that most people are now expecting of asylum

seekers, then we may well end up with a situation like for example in Christmas Island where

there is a normal capacity, there’s a surge capacity, and Christmas Island is 200 above the surge

capacity. If that happens in Pontville then I do fear that we might get some of the circumstances

that we have seen at Villawood and Christmas Island right here on our doorstep. And I hope that

doesn’t occur. And that is why I do encourage the Government to consider temporary protection

visas, to consider Nauru and ensure that we don’t have this huge influx of asylum seekers that

then overcrowds the facilities and we know what the overcrowding causes, it causes riots, it

causes upset and we don’t want that on our doorstep.

Leon Compton: Liberal Senator, Leader of Senate business, Senator Eric Abetz is my guest

this morning on 936 ABC Hobart, ABC Northern Tasmania. I’d like to talk to you for a moment

about the poll results released into the State political scene yesterday. Sixteen percent support

for the Labor Party, forty four for the Liberals. How if, in many people’s view, the Labor Party are

performing so poorly, can you not be securing a majority of people with their intention to vote

for your Party at the next State election?

Senator Abetz: The Liberal Party has been increasing its support in this State exceptionally

well. We got an influx of new members at the last State election. They are now getting into the

community and the community is warming to them. Will Hodgman is growing in his role as

leader. People now see him overwhelmingly as the preferred alternate Premier at 52%. So he is

helping to lead the Liberal Party renaissance in this State. And I think it is a very, very good poll

result because as I understand it, in every electorate bar Denison, possibly, the Liberal vote is in

excess of the Labor and Green vote combined. So the Green/Labor experiment in this State has

been shown by these poll results to be a complete failure and in that vacuum of failure, Will

Hodgman and the Liberals have now shown themselves to be an alternative that the people of

Tasmania are willing to support. And on those poll results, and I admit they are only a poll, they

are not an actual election, but if those results were to be replicated at an election, Will Hodgman

would be the Premier of a majority Liberal Government in this State with a very clear majority.

And I think that’s what Tasmanians want.

Leon Compton: There’s still twenty two percent of people undecided according to that poll

result and again only forty four percent of people, less than a majority, say that they support

your Party, notwithstanding all that’s gone before in the year or so that this minority

Government have been in power?

Senator Abetz: Leon, I don’t have the results in front of me but the 44% I understand is the

primary vote, you then have 22% undecided. If you allocate those ‘undecideds’ out, as the EMRS

did, the Liberal Party has a clear majority. In the seat of Braddon for example, we are riding at

61% and on the figures it would be very clear that the Greens would loose their seat and the

Liberal Party would be in line to win three seats. So a very encouraging poll and very rewarding

for the hard work that Will Hodgman and the Liberal team have done.

Leon Compton: Wikileaks reporting that Will Hodgman was reported as being despondent

about the prospect of taking office. Is that still true?

Senator Abetz: Absolutely not. Will Hodgman has never taken it for granted that he would

become Premier. He always knew it was going to be a tough slog and he has shown himself to

have the stamina, the capacity to do that. And as I understand it those comments were made

before the last election and there is no doubt that since that self analysis, if it is true, and we

can only go what’s in the media, but he has really built himself up as the alternate Premier in

this State. The poll results show that. But also the positive policies that he is coming out with I

think is telling the Tasmanian people that he is the man for the time and Tasmanians are simply

waiting for an election to allow that to happen.

Leon Compton: How does your Government at a Federal level talk about workplace reform

and about productivity without bringing back the spectre of WorkChoices?

Senator Abetz: That is one of the things that the Labor Party and the Trade Union movement

will do whenever we enter the space of workplace relations.

Leon Compton: It’s one of the things that lost you an election, Senator.

Senator Abetz: Oh absolutely and they will automatically try to revert back to WorkChoices.

But we have made it clear that WorkChoices is dead buried and cremated, to coin a phrase, and

in those circumstances it does not mean that we should not re-enter the workplace relations

debate and find out from workers and employers alike what the failings of the systems are. As I

go around the country and around Tasmania I see great frustration with workers and with,

especially part time workers like University students that can no longer get part time work, or

have had their hours cut. I talk to small businesses that are cutting their opening hours because

of the problems associated with the modern awards. As a result the shops are earning less and

the people are earning less all in the name of award modernisation. Now any Government should

be alert to those sorts of concerns and we are listening to the people whereas Labor is saying

everything is fine and dandy when clearly it is not. You’ve got the Reserve Bank Governor,

you’ve got the Productivity Commissioner, you’ve got a lot of employer groups, and I have

hundreds of anecdotal stories of small businesses around Australia telling me that there are

problems with the system. And that is why we’re saying bring forward the inquiry, let’s listen to

the community and let’s see how we can enhance the Fair Work system.

Leon Compton: Good to talk to you this morning.

Senator Abetz: Thanks for the opportunity.



