CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO NATIONAL  BREAKFAST

MONDAY, 5 DECEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: ALP National Conference, increasing Australia’s refugee  intake, party reform.

FRAN KELLY: Immigration Minister Chris Bowen joins you now. Minister,  good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you Fran.

KELLY: You had a win at the ALP Conference, the Platform has been  changed to explicitly support offshore processing, but it’s a hollow victory isn’t  it? You can’t get third country processing, like Malaysia, through the Senate.

BOWEN: Well that’s true but I thought it was important that the Platform be  very clear, that the National Conference had the chance to debate it and that  we have a clear position. I thought the Platform before was ambiguous, it

could be interpreted various ways and was interpreted various ways  depending on your point of view. It’s now explicit that Labor Governments  should and will work with countries in our region to dissuade people from  making the dangerous boat journey to Australia.

But your essential point is correct. The parliamentary situation is that the  legislation can’t and won’t pass the Senate unless the Liberal Party changes  its position.

KELLY: So what are you going to do about that? Will you put this deal to a  vote, bring it into the Parliament in February?

BOWEN: There’s a couple of months to go before the Parliament resumes so  I’m not going to get into timetables, but we believe in it, we’ll be pursuing it.  But look -

KELLY: So you will bring it back into the Parliament?

BOWEN: We believe in it and we’ll be pursuing it and -

KELLY: But just to be clear on that Minister, because you believed it but you  didn’t pursue it last time because you didn’t have the numbers. Now you have

that extra vote I presume, because Harry Jenkins has moved from Speaker  back to your party room. Does that mean you will introduce it into the  Parliament? Is that your intention or your preferred option?

BOWEN: Well its certainly my view that we’ll be pursuing it through the  Parliament. But look, the essential point that you’re making is right and this is  why I’m expressing it this way, that we will need to see Mr Abbott change his  position if it is to pass the Parliament.

KELLY: So, as you’ve just heard Jenny Haines saying there pretty  emphatically, she says Tony Abbott won’t change his position, therefore  you’re going to look foolish. If Tony -

BOWEN: Well I don’t accept that - I don’t accept that analysis. I think it is  appropriate that the Government’s position be put and be put clearly, and  that Mr Abbott will have to explain to the Parliament why he said he supports  offshore processing but he won’t vote for it.

And we all know that he believes it is in his political advantage to have boats  arriving in larger numbers as they have done since it became clear the  Malaysia agreement won’t pass the Parliament. I mean, we saw the lowest  month of boat arrivals for a long time just after we announced the Malaysia  agreement - it had an announcement affect - and surprise-surprise, it  becomes clear that the legislation won’t pass the Parliament.

We had the highest month in a long, long time of boat arrivals through  November, and that is really concerning because when you have boats  arriving in the sorts of numbers that we’ve seen over the last month, there’s  two exact results, two clear results from that: more people risking their lives  and another tragedy becomes much more likely; and secondly, people in  camps and in desperate situations around the world missing out on the  chance of resettlement in Australia.

KELLY: And your response to that is to bring this legislation back into the  Lower House, even though Tony Abbott shows no sign of supporting it and  the Greens will definitely oppose it - it will go down in the Senate?

BOWEN: Well the Greens - look, I fundamentally disagree with the Greens  position. I think they have their immigration policy totally wrong and I think  they’re irresponsible, but I will give them this, they’re consistent. They’re very  clearly against offshore processing, they campaigned against offshore  processing - everybody understands the Greens position. I have no criticism  of their non-consistency, I think they’re wrong, but I respect their position.

It’s the Liberal Party who said for years, ‘We support offshore processing’, but  now that the Government has an agreement in place with protections built in  with Malaysia they say, ‘Oh no, you can’t do it with a non-signatory country’,  regardless of they fact they sent people to Nauru which was, at the time, a

non-signatory country. And their existing policy is to return boats to  Indonesia, have no pre-transfer checks, not check the age or the state of  people on the boat, simply go out on the high seas and turn it around and  send it back to Indonesia, a non-signatory country with no protections  negotiated - which I think underlines their hypocrisy.

KELLY: With respect Minister, Tony Abbott’s not the only one opposed to it:  the High Court’s opposed to it, most refugee advocates are opposed to it, a  lot in your party are opposed to it -

BOWEN: Well the High Court has a role in interpreting the law. They’ve  interpreted the law their way, it’s open to the Parliament of course to make  the law and to reassert the Parliament’s view. Now yes, look this is  controversial. Yes, it was a controversial debate at National Conference,  always was going to be, but a very clearly, clear majority have passed the  resolution - the amendment moved by myself and Brendan O’Connor - and  very clearly defeated the amendment moved by Labor for Refugees, which  was calling to explicitly ban offshore processing from Labor policy; a very  clear result.

KELLY: Okay, and the support was for a policy change to allow third country  processing - offshore processing. Does it have to be Malaysia? Is Malaysia  your only option or do you - or are you gathering another option here?

BOWEN: Well Fran, Malaysia is our policy, but I’ve said consistently that we’ll  work with countries in our region across the board. I mean, we’ve negotiated  the Bali Framework, Kevin Rudd and I, through the Bali Process, had the Bali  Framework, which people said would never happen, but it is a regional  agreement as to how to tackle these issues and for countries to work

together. We had an agreement with Papua New Guinea which can’t proceed  because the legislation won’t proceed. There’s lot’s of things we do with other  countries around our region - Indonesia and Malaysia in particular - on  tackling people smugglers and we’ll continue that work -



KELLY: Its not working though is it? The Bali Framework isn’t working, I  mean, just witness the number of boats that have come even just this month  and we’re only five days in, four boats already, and you’ve got a minister in  Indonesia I think today talking about this. The pressure seems to have come  off in terms of the security arrangements on the ground in Indonesia.

BOWEN: No, we continue to work with Indonesia very closely and we do a  lot of anti-people smuggling activities together, but you’re only dealing with  the symptoms if you do that. Indonesia is a huge archipelago, people  smugglers have the advantage, they can, you know, move around Indonesia  and move people off different points to head to Christmas Island or Ashmore  Reef, so that is difficult.

The number of boat arrivals is less than it would be if we weren’t doing that

work, but nevertheless, you are only ever dealing with the symptoms, which  is why you’ve got to have the sorts of agreements in place which we  negotiated to actually break the people smugglers business model, otherwise  you’re only ever dealing with they symptoms and otherwise you are going to  see the sorts of tragedies that we have seen far too often. And we can’t shrug  our shoulders and say that’s okay.

KELLY: And just before we finish this issue, your vote - you won the vote in  terms of changing the Platform, support for offshore processing. The  sweetener for that was to expand the refugee intake. But what is the  connection between those two and how quickly would the numbers of the  refugee intake expand to 20,000 if you got this into law?

BOWEN: Well look, I thought it was important, again, the Labor Party  Conference only comes around every few years, that we take the opportunity  to say what we are aiming for, and I’ve said privately within the Government  for some time that I wanted to get to an intake of 20,000. But there’s two  reasons you have to, I think, get an orderly program in place before you can  increase the intake.

Firstly, it’s frankly fiscal. We spend a lot of money processing boat arrivals  and it doesn’t matter how you do it, whether it is in detention or in the  community, it is very expensive. And I think that money could be much better  spent in increasing our refugee intake and giving other people a chance,  who’ve been waiting for resettlement in Australia for a long time, for the  chance of a new life in Australia.

And secondly, frankly, you need to have public confidence in the migration  program, and the public, in my view, would support an increase in the  refugee intake but they’d say we need it to happen in an orderly way and a

safe way, and I agree with them.

KELLY: And Minister, just finally, on the whole issue of reforming the Party  which the post-election review of Labor’s elders said was absolutely central to  Labor surviving, really all the Conference did was postpone those decisions to  allow party members to directly elect delegates to future Party Conferences at  the very least. Some pretty bleak assessments from Steve Bracks and John

Faulkner who did that review: ‘If we go away from this Conference with no  party reform, we can expect hundreds more branches to fold and be lost  across Australia’ - Steve Bracks says that; and John Faulkner says, ‘The  situation is now dire, our party’s support has plumbed new depths, we’re a

small party getting smaller’, and yet still you didn’t take the hard decision.

BOWEN: Well look, I’d be a little bit more positive about it. I think that was a  good start at the National Conference, to -

KELLY: Slow start.

BOWEN: I agree that there is much more to do Fran. I’ve said that I hope  this Conference is not the end, but the beginning, and I don’t think we have  years to sort this out. I do think we need serious party reform, I do think we

need to look at ways of enfranchising party members in some of the big  decisions about personnel, I said that previously. I don’t think that was ever  going to happen this weekend, but I do think it is very important that we  have that debate and we move towards that model.

Now, I think it is important that when you do that, that you don’t ram it  through and you have a wide debate amongst the party membership, but I do  think there’s a lot more to do. I think we should take the steps taken on the  weekend as only the start and we should all be participating in that debate. I  think each generation of party leaders owes it to our great party to leave the  party stronger than we inherited it, and at this point in world’s movements for  political parties and challenges to volunteerism across the world, and the rise  of social media, that means tackling party reform and doing it seriously.

And by the way, I think the Liberal Party will eventually have to tackle this  issue as well, I just think the Labor Party is more advanced in working out  where we are and what the problems are. I think the Liberal Party is putting it  off as well, I think all political parties will need to be dealing with this.

KELLY: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

BOWEN: Good on you, cheers Fran.

ENDS





