



THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Sky News AM Agenda with Kieran Gilbert



22 March 2011

E&OE

Subjects: Newspoll, carbon tax, asylum-seekers.



KIERAN GILBERT: With me now, in the Canberra studio, I have Liberal

frontbencher Sophie Mirabella and Trade Minister  Craig Emerson.

Guys, thank you both for being here.

Craig, first to you on the poll - this has got to be good

for morale doesn't it, this Newspoll?

CRAIG EMERSON: We've consistently said we don't dwell on the polls. So  you had the expert, Martin O'Shaughnessy, talk  about…

GILBERT: You don't dwell on it, but the number's got to be

positive. You've got to be happy about it?

EMERSON: What I will say is that we determined that we would put

a price on carbon. We said, before the last election, we  would do that. We tried three times in the last term of  the Labor Government. We're pressing ahead with  that. Perhaps people understand that this is good for  the environment and, in the long term, good for the  economy, because if we are the only country hanging  out, not agreeing to move on climate change, then the  economy will be exposed as well.

GILBERT: Sophie Mirabella, the approval rating for Tony Abbott

down six points. That's got to be a bit of a concern,  doesn't it?

SOPHIE MIRABELLA: Well, there are various polls out this week, and they do  - over the last week - and they do vary significantly.  I've spent the last two weeks, in the break, travelling  from one end of the country to the other, speaking with  small businesses, large businesses, and I tell you what  the poll ... the Newspoll today doesn't reflect, in my  opinion, the concerns out there.

In a week where the biggest story, by far, were the

cataclysmic events in Japan, I think international  events really overshadowed and ...  domestic issues  and there wasn't really any detailed discussion of  domestic issues. But in the real world, in the real world,  people are concerned that Australian manufacturing  and jobs will go offshore.

The government has been incapable of explaining the

benefits of a carbon tax. They've been incapable of  explaining to people why putting an increased price on  electricity and petrol, putting more pressure on the  costs of living, is good for the planet when

manufacturing will go offshore to countries that have  worse environmental laws than we do and effectively

they'll produce more emissions to make the stuff that  we used to make.

GILBERT: Okay. Well let's get to this carbon tax debate now, the

nitty-gritty of it. I want to look, first of all - we'll get Craig  to respond to that - but also Joe Hockey, yesterday,  was in this studio with David Speers on the PM  Agenda programme. I want to play a little bit of what  Joe Hockey had to say about the compensation that  will be put forward by the government. We don't know  the detail yet, but regardless, he says, the Coalition will  roll it back.

[Start of excerpt of interview with Joe Jockey on PM

Agenda]

JOE HOCKEY: We will repeal the carbon tax …

DAVID SPEERS: So will you repeal …

HOCKEY: … and there will be no need for compensation, so we

will unwind the compensation.

SPEERS: Okay.

HOCKEY: Because you don't need to have compensation if you

have no carbon tax.

SPEERS: All right.

[End of excerpt]

GILBERT: That's Joe Hockey talking to David Speers yesterday.

Well Sophie, first to you and then I'll come to Craig.

The ... is that smart politics, to say you're going to wind  back tax cuts, for example?

MIRABELLA: Well, it's really more of a con when you have a big tax,

a carbon tax, and a huge increase on the cost of living,  and families are suffering right across the nation, as  are businesses working with very small margin and  increased costs of production.

GILBERT: So you want to wind back tax cuts do you?

MIRABELLA: Well, no. When you introduce a carbon tax, saying

you're going to introduce some sort of hypothetical tax  cut is really a con. You're robbing Peter to pay Paul,  that's the first thing. The second ...  So it's not really a  tax cut. It's trying to make up for the fact that you're  putting increased costs of living onto people.

Secondly, you really have to question whether the

Labor Party can deliver tax cuts. The only tax cuts  they've been able to deliver were the ones that had  been planned for and scheduled by the Howard  Government.

GILBERT: Okay, let's get Craig's response, because Craig there

is no detail just yet there, is there? It is hypothetical at  this point.

EMERSON: No, when we finalise the details of this, there will be a

generous compensation package. The live options are  reducing taxes and increasing pensions, including the  age pension.

Now, what Joe Hockey said yesterday is that if the

Coalition is elected, they will remove the carbon price,

but also cut age pensions and increase taxes. Now   that's what he's saying. And what they will be saying to  the Australian people is ‘trust us - when we take the  carbon price out, electricity prices will fall’. So Joe  Hockey's saying, when the Coalition takes the carbon  price out, electricity prices will fall and, therefore, the  Australian people deserve neither the tax cut nor a  pension rise - the two live options - and he will rip them  off them.

Now, do you reckon the Australian people will believe

Joe Hockey when he says ‘trust me’, and Tony Abbott  when he says ‘trust me, you don't need the tax cuts,  you don't need the pension rises, we're taking them off  you’?

The truth, the reason why they want to do that is that

they need the money. They need the money for their  very ineffective idea of giving subsidies to polluters that  will cost, ultimately, $30 billion in taxpayers' funds.  That's why, that's why they will not keep the tax cuts in  place. That's why they will cut the age pension and  other pensions, because they need the money to fund  subsidies to big polluters: $30 billion in taxpayers’  money.

MIRABELLA: That's silly talk.

GILBERT: Okay, this is a ...  well, what they've done and what

they, no doubt, are aiming to do here is turn the cost of  living debate…

MIRABELLA: Yes.

GILBERT: …around on its head here and saying ‘well you're the

one that's going to be cutting the…’

MIRABELLA: Look, what they're doing is…

GILBERT: …getting rid of the tax cuts.

MIRABELLA: …they know,  the Labor Party knows they're in deep

trouble. They even have their own unions now  conducting polling that says they're in deep trouble.  This is yet another political fix to detract from the very,  very critical concern about how the carbon tax will  increase the cost of living.

GILBERT: But you say it's hypothetical…

MIRABELLA: The government…

GILBERT: … what happens when it's introduced? If the

government does deliver?

EMERSON: Compensation will be legislated.

MIRABELLA: Craig, you've had your go sweetie, just let me finish.

EMERSON: All right, but you've been talking for about 90 per cent

of the time, actually.

GILBERT: So, when that's delivered, that's no longer hypothetical.

That's a tough response.

MIRABELLA: Well, let's wait and see what the carbon tax will

actually do and how it's supposed to be beneficial for  Australians. This government cannot tell the Australian  people why they will be better off. They are now trying  to find a political fix, a con, to say…

GILBERT: Okay, well let's…

MIRABELLA: … forget about the carbon tax. Think of the goodies

that we will give you.

GILBERT: … let's ask Craig about that, that debate about

essentially what Sophie's talking about is carbon  leakage. There are many industries that are at risk in  terms of that. And that's the argument, really, that  you've got to carry here.

EMERSON: And this argument was prosecuted right through the

previous three attempts, by Labor, to get an emissions  trading scheme through the Senate - blocked by the  Coalition, blocked by the Greens. And we said  emissions-intensive, trade-exposed industries - that is,  those industries that have to compete on international  markets, that emit a fair bit of carbon - would be  compensated in the form, or various possible forms:  one of those, for example, being the issuing of free  permits. Again, this is not new. This was in Ross  Garnaut's report of 2008. We sought to legislate it  three times and that's what we would do in dealing with  this so-called issue of carbon leakage.

But while we're talking about Australian jobs, think of

the future as other countries move to put a price on  carbon. If Tony Abbott is elected Prime Minister, he  would go completely against what other countries are  doing, including the Conservative Prime Minister of the  United Kingdom:  rip that carbon price out. Leave  Australian businesses exposed to retaliation from  overseas …

GILBERT: Okay. Let's look, quickly, just quickly - and only 30

seconds or less both of you on the immigration issue. I  know we're tight for time today, but Craig, boats are

being brought to the mainland, but still being treated as  offshore arrivals. How does that work?

EMERSON: Yeah, that's the journey that they took. It also applied

to a vessel earlier in the year that was subject to a lot  of bad weather; it went straight to Darwin. They will be  processed as offshore asylum-seekers.

GILBERT: But it doesn't make much sense does it, if they're being

brought to the mainland, the government really is  obviously under a fair bit of pressure here …

EMERSON: Well it makes sense …

GILBERT: … if they're being forced to tweak the definition of it.

EMERSON: It's not a matter of tweaking the definitions. There's no

tweaking as such. They will be processed under the  law as offshore arrivals. That's the law. We will use the  law.

GILBERT: Okay, Sophie Mirabella just quickly.

MIRABELLA: The law is very ambiguous and we wouldn't be having

this problem if the Government actually re-introduced  offshore processing at Nauru. The immigration border  protection policy is a mess.





Worldwide, when there's been a 13 per cent drop in

asylum applications, Australia has seen a 78 per  cent increase. That shows you that it's out of control  and they'll try and use whatever tricky, bodgy,  dodgy, legal interpretation until it's actually applied,  because they're desperate. And …

GILBERT:                                   Okay…

MIRABELLA:                               … they refuse to accept our policy.

GILBERT:                                 Sophie Mirabella, Craig Emerson,    appreciate   your

time both this morning

EMERSON: Thanks Kieran.

MIRABELLA: Thank you.



