





PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH STEVE MILLS  6PR  4 AUGUST 2011



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      President Obama; Polls; Carbon price; Clean energy future;  Malaysia agreement; Northam Detention Centre; Kevin Rudd; Mosman  bomb scare

HOST: Good morning Prime Minister.

PM: Good morning Steve.

HOST: Now let’s start with having a look at, I want to project into the future if  we can, to 29 September this year, what have you got planned?

PM: I’ve got my 50th birthday happening on that date. On that date I think I will  just be working away but in the weeks following maybe I’ll get an evening with  friends to just mark the moment.

HOST: Ok, so in your mind you’ll still be Prime Minister which is good news.  The reason why I ask is that the President of the United States is 50 today, as  the leader of our nation do you actually make contact with one of our chief  allies?

PM: I sent him a birthday card.

HOST: Did you, really?

PM: I did.

HOST: Did you send a humorous one or do you send one with a sincere  meaning behind it? And did you buy it from a card shop and did you buy it  personally? There you go, lots of questions.

PM: Lots of questions. It was bought from a card shop, I’d have to say it  wasn’t bought by me personally but I did hand write a note in there so I said  words to the effect of: your life has been remarkable to date but I’m sure the  best is yet to come.

HOST: Do you have nicknames for each other, like does he have a nickname  for you and a nickname for him?

PM: I think, you know, Barack, Julia.

HOST: Really?

PM: That’s enough.

HOST: So turning 50, a lot of people have kind of confronted that, no drama  as far as your concerned, no drama for the President of the United States?

PM: Well I can’t put myself in President Obama’s shoes so you’re going to  have to get him on the show to talk to you about that directly. No, I’m not  worried about it at all. I’d have to say the only birthday change that ever

worried me was when I went from my twenties into being thirty, I thought that  seemed like a really big shift, but since then turning 40 didn’t worry me, so I  don’t think turning 50 is going to worry me either.

HOST: Alright, now I’m trying to find us some good news OK, because the  poll this morning doesn’t look good for you. I mean, it says 12 per cent of an  Essential Poll favour you as the preferred Labor leader with Kevin Rudd at 37  per cent, but I have found some good news for you and that in the latest polls,  as far as the betting is concerned, Labor’s actually in from 290 into 280 to win  the next election, so maybe some of the messages that you’re trying to get  out are starting to break through. Do you think they are or not?

PM: For me it’s a question of being out there explaining what we need to do  for this country’s future so that’s what I’m going to be doing today and every  day. Of course we’ve been explaining carbon pricing to the Australian people  and I understand that there are many people anxious about what this will  mean for them and their family, so that’s why we’ve been keen to get all of the  messages to people about the assistance that will come, tax cuts, increased  pensions, increased family payments.

So we’ll just keep working our way through, but I’m absolutely determined that  this nation does face up to climate change but also sees the opportunity of a  clean energy future and in Western Australia there are some remarkable  things happening with renewable energy and I want to see those things  develop and bring jobs for the future to WA.

HOST: It must be hard though to break through and get your message across,  particularly where they keep replaying what you said, that there will be no  carbon tax and I know that you said well that was said in a different set of

circumstances, but it must be hard to break through to the general population  when you’ve already said that?

PM: Well, of course I’ve been asked about that from the last election  campaign and I understand I’ll continue to be asked about it. When I said  those words I absolutely meant them, but circumstances have changed and  as Prime Minister I needed to make a decision: do we just sit around doing  nothing or do we step up and see the clean energy future?

And I decided my responsibility was to do the right thing to get this country the  opportunities that will flow from cleaner energy. So people will judge it and  they’ll make up their own mind, I just want to make sure people have got all of  the information they need including details like people earning less than  $80,000 a year can expect a tax cut, the vast majority of them, around $300-

HOST: -But that’s only going to pay for the cost of the carbon tax though, isn’t  it really, to be fair? It’s not like they’re going to have that money in their  pocket?

PM: There will be millions of households who end up in front, they will receive  more in family assistance and tax cuts or pension increases than the  expected impact of carbon pricing on them. We’ve got to remember that this is

less than a cent in a dollar in its impact on costs and we’ve taken the  opportunity too to not only provide assistance but to reform the tax system so  the tax free threshold is going up from $6,000 to around $18,000, that means  a million people will come out of the tax system, be able to see the full  benefits of working in their pay packet every week and not have to worry  about filling out a tax return.

HOST: Alright, maybe fatigue will set in as far as, you know, opposition from  the general population in regards to the carbon tax, that’s probably you’d have  to hope for. Can we talk asylum seekers and particularly Malaysia, but more  importantly closer to home, what’s happening with Northam?

PM: Well, work continues-

HOST: What kind of work? What work is actually happening up in Northam?

PM: Well, there’s been an extensive process of community consultation and  the Minister for Immigration has been managing all of this and can provide  you with all of the direct detail.

HOST: Any idea when it will be open for business? I mean the people of  Northam will get an economic benefit from the opening of Northam.

PM: Well as I understand it some benefits have already flown in the  preparation phase and community consultation did help make sure that  people understood what opportunities would be available for people to work  there and also what opportunities would be available for local contractors.

HOST: So when will we see someone in the facility? Which doesn’t exist by  the way.

PM: Right, well our focus right now of course is on delivering on the new and  innovative arrangement with Malaysia. You’d be well aware and your listeners  would be well aware that there’s a boat on its way to Christmas Island which  will be the first boat subject to the new arrangements. So our focus right now  is on sending the strongest possible message we can to people smugglers  and to the people that they prey on that if you jump on a boat, what you  should expect is that you’ll be taken to Christmas Island, put on a plane and  taken to Malaysia.

HOST: So what about Northam, will it ever get opened?

PM: Yes, our intention is to continue-

HOST: -So what date will it be open? Yeah but what date will that be open,  because people want to know.

PM: I can’t give you a date right now, I’m happy to get-

HOST: -We’ve had dates in the past and they started off as earlier in this year  and then they were forced out to July and August and we’re now getting very  close to being towards the spring, will you see it happening before the end of  the year?

PM: My understanding is that there were some issues with construction and  other things there, they’ve been worked through, it’s certainly our intention to  deliver the facility. In terms of a precise date about opening, I will get the  Minister for Immigration to talk to you about that directly.



HOST: Alright, talking of cards as we did earlier, sending a card to the  President of the United States, how’s Kevin Rudd going and have you sent a  get well card to him?

PM: Kevin’s of course had the operation and all the indications are he’s going  well. I’ll be in touch with him at the appropriate point obviously at this stage,  it’s very close to when he’s had the operation and we’re just letting him rest  and recuperate which is what he needs to do.

HOST: So you won’t be paying him a personal visit?

PM: Look, it’s a question of Kevin spending some time resting and  recuperating. When I talked to him about going in for the operation he was  very chipper about it all, he’s been through it before so he was business-like, I  think is the best way of putting it. He knew what to expect, there wasn’t the  anxiety that often comes when people have medical procedures and they  really don’t know what to expect. He knew exactly what to expect, he knew  exactly what to expect in the recovery, he was very clear that the recovery  immediately after the operation is very intensive and he needs to focus on

himself and his family’s going to be focussing on him. And then after that  immediate intensive phase, obviously you get stronger and stronger and I  think we should expect at that stage Kevin will start engaging again with his  colleagues including me and also with issues as Foreign Affairs Minister, but  right now he’s got to do what he needs to do to focus on his health.

HOST: A lot of Australians would be waking up this morning, as you would  have Prime Minister, just scratching their head going, this has got to be a  movie, to wake up and hear news that a girl had a bomb collar around her  neck and to live in that kind of terror. What was your feeling about that?

PM: Well my words exactly, you’ve taken the words out of my mouth, when I  looked at it this morning the first thing I said was, it’s like a Hollywood script,  the kind of thing you expect to see at the cinema or on TV but you would  never expect to happen in real life in Australia.

So it’s truly shocking and obviously the poor girl at the centre of it and there’s  no place for violence of any nature in our country, I think people are going to  be absolutely appalled.

HOST: Shocking situation.

Thank you for joining us this morning. Have a good day.

PM: Thank you.

[ENDS]



