Julie Bishop

2GB, Money News with Ross Greenwood

Monday, 19 September 2011

Subjects: Migration Act amendments

E&OE…

ROSS GREENWOOD    …I am joined by the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade, many  thanks for your time Julie Bishop.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure Ross.

ROSS GREENWOOD    Now you’ve just come out of, I know, of the Chamber. The mood in the  Chamber quite clearly is fairly fierce at the moment because the Government is struggling to get this  through because it can’t get you across the line and it can’t get the Greens across the line. Politically  can you explain to us what happens if this Government legislation goes down?

JULIE BISHOP    Well if the Government’s legislation does not get up it means that the Migration Act  laws that we put in place under the Howard Government remain, and I point out that the High Court  didn’t strike down the migration laws that the Howard Government had put in place. What it found was  that Chris Bowen’s application of those laws, that is the Minister for Immigration’s application of those  laws, failed in relation to the Malaysia swap deal.

So this is a mess of the Government’s own making. Now the Government gave us its draft  amendments to the proposed laws last Friday and today the Government has given us a second draft  with substantial changes from the first…

ROSS GREENWOOD    What is the major change between the two?

JULIE BISHOP    Well what they are trying to do is they’ve stripped out all of the protections that we  put in place in our laws relating to asylum seekers that are sent offshore to another country for their  claims to be processed. They are taking away all the protections that we thought should be in place  for asylum seekers who are sent to another country.

ROSS GREENWOOD    Is this, in particular, in regards to the United Nations Refugee Convention?

JULIE BISHOP    It has stripped out any reference to human rights protections and protections  generally. Now we say the simple way to put those protections back in place is to say that any country  where we send asylum seekers to have their claims processed should be a party to the 1951 Refugee  Convention or Protocol.

So that is the point. The Government is refusing to put that basic protection in our migration laws that  we put in place when were in Government.

ROSS GREENWOOD    A second point to this also Julie is that clearly if you have Bob Brown saying  he will not sign up to the Government’s amendment proposal in regard to Malaysia, and of course  you’ve got your own side saying it won’t actually side with the Government unless substantial  changes might be made, where does that leave the relationships inside the parliament?

JULIE BISHOP    Well the Government has to get the numbers on the floor of the House and the  Government has a coalition partner, the Labor Party entered into a coalition with the Greens, so it is  up to Julia Gillard to get the numbers to pass her bill.

But I have got to point out Ross that the problem for the Government is that this Malaysia  arrangement won’t work because it expires after 800 asylum seekers are sent to Malaysia. And as we  know, already 1,000 people have turned up by boat since the policy was announced, 400 have turned  up since the arrangement was signed, so at this rate the Malaysia swap deal will be exhausted within  weeks and Julia Gillard will be back where she started from.

She has been asked repeatedly what happens when the 800 limit is reached and she refuses to  answer or can’t answer, so this is no solution at all. We have an alternative, we have a proven  solution, that is, offshore processing on Nauru plus temporary protection visas and working with  Indonesia to return boats if it is safe to do so.

ROSS GREENWOOD    And what do you believe it does to the relationship between the Labor Party  and the Greens? Because quite clearly the two need each other to remain in power and to pass a  range of other legislation that is important to the Government including the carbon tax and also the  mining resource rent tax. Do you believe that for pragmatic reasons they might disagree on this  matter but continue to agree on other matters which allows, if you like, their coalition to continue to  function?

JULIE BISHOP    Well it is interesting, we asked Julia Gillard in Question Time last week whether she  had sought to get the support of the Greens, had she spoken to Senator Bob Brown about her  proposed Malaysia swap deal and she indicated that she hadn’t even spoken to him about it.

Under their coalition arrangement she is meant to have a meeting with him once a week to talk about  Labor Party policies and she can’t even bring herself to sit down with Bob Brown to talk about it and  try and convince him.

Now if she is not going to convince her own coalition partner I don’t know what that says for the  relationship.  You’d have to ask the Greens and you’ll have to ask the Labor Party.

But I know this is a mess of the Government’s own making. The Howard Government had stopped  the boats, dismantled the people smuggling trade, virtually all people in the detention centres who had  arrived by boat had been cleared out, there were only a handful of asylum seekers, who had come on  boats, left in detention.

And Labor, on Julia Gillard’s advice for she was the architect of the policy, closed down Nauru for  offshore processing, abolished temporary protection visas and since then 240 boats have arrived,  12,000 people on board, there has been overcrowding in detention centres, the riots and damage to  property, the boats lost at sea, the tragic deaths, and the Government is still in utter confusion about  its policy on border protection.

ROSS GREENWOOD    Julie Bishop is the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister for  Trade and Foreign Affairs and we appreciate your time on the program Julie.

JULIE BISHOP    Thank you Ross.



