Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



High Court decision Wednesday, 31 August 2011

Press Conference, Canberra

Chris Bowen: Well, thanks for coming everybody.

Let’s make no bones about it: today’s decision by the High  Court is a profoundly disappointing one; disappointing to  the Government, disappointing to me. It is a significant blow  to our efforts to break the people smugglers’ business  model.

The High Court today has applied a new test to how  protections are to be demonstrated when it comes to third  country processing. What the High Court has decided today  is not what was previously considered as understood and  accepted law. This decision has potential ramifications, not  only for our arrangement with Malaysia, but for offshore  processing more generally.

Of course, we’ve commissioned urgent legal advice on the  implications of this decision for offshore processing  generally. Because of its significant potential ramifications,  it is appropriate, of course, that the Cabinet carefully and  methodically consider its position in relation to further  options. We’ll do so as quickly as is prudent, but we’ll make  sure we get it right.

While this is a blow, it does not undermine our resolve to  break the people smugglers’ business model through a  regional arrangement. We’ve made progress that people  didn’t think would be possible. We negotiated a regional  framework through the Bali Process, which many people  said would not be possible. We negotiated an arrangement  with Malaysia which many people said would not be  possible.

What’s clear is that since we’ve done those things, the  people smugglers have been in retreat. In the time since

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement, the  number of people arriving in Australia by boat has fallen.  We’ve had around half the number of arrivals, of people  arriving by boat, in the period since the announcement of  the Malaysia arrangement than the same period last year.

It’s also the case, despite the Opposition’s hypocrisy, that  we’ve seen many less arrivals by boat since the  announcement of the Malaysia arrangement than in the  same period following the previous Government’s  announcement of Nauru. And that, combined with other  changes this Government’s brought in to place over recent  months, means that we currently have around 2000 people  less in immigration detention facilities than we had just  three months ago - around 2000 people less. We’ve had  the people smugglers in retreat.

Now, today’s decision is a significant blow, but it does not  undermine my or the Government’s determination to break  the people smugglers’ business model.

Now, as I said just a few moments ago, the Cabinet will  need to take some time to consider its position carefully,  and therefore in terms of detailed questions I’ll be limited in  what I can say today. But within those constraints, I’m more  than happy to take some questions. Mr Coorey -Journalist: Mr Bowen, if offshore processing is still  allowable - paragraph 128 of the judgement seems to  suggest Nauru’s still okay - if that is the case, will Nauru  now be an option to be considered by the Cabinet?

Bowen: I’m not ruling anything in or out in terms of our  response.

Journalist: How can you claim virtue in the drop off in the  arrival of boat arrivals when that was on the basis of a  threat of removal, which now has been obliterated by the  High Court ruling?

Bowen: Well, I think, Andrew, it showed the potential of this  arrangement. Just the announcement of this arrangement  had an impact. I’ve said all along that to have full impact it  would need to be implemented and that asylum seekers  and people smugglers would need to see planes being  taken back to Malaysia to have the full impact. But I think  just the announcement of it made people smugglers and

Page 2 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

asylum seekers think twice and three times about the  decision to make that dangerous journey to Australia. And  so that’s what I mean when I say it already had an impact,  but to have its full impact then clearly it would need to be  fully implemented. Michelle -Journalist: Mr Bowen, you spoke to us very confidently a  couple of weeks ago that you were sure the legal advice  was solid, that you were sure you were on solid ground.  How did you and the Government get it so wrong?

Bowen: Well, the legal advice was very solid. The legal  advice was very clear that we were on solid ground. The  High Court, as I’ve said earlier, has today applied a new  test to how protections should be demonstrated. Clearly,  that is something which had not been understood before -Journalist: (inaudible)

Bowen: - I’m answering a question and then I’ll come to  you. Of course, we respect the decision but it is clearly a  new test which had not previously been read into the Act.  Dennis -Journalist: Mr Bowen, you say earlier that it was not  previously understood, the High Court’s interpretation, and  yet the High Court judgement cites DFAT advice which it  describes as making salient points which it adopts as its

basic argument for ruling out the Malaysian solution. Isn’t it  your responsibility as Minister to have considered that  DFAT advice along with the advice from Immigration, and

how could you have got it so wrong when DFAT had given  you precisely what the High Court has announced today?

Bowen: I don’t accept the characterisation of your question  that DFAT was not giving advice that Malaysia was an  appropriate country under the Act, because the advice to  me clearly was not that and I accepted that advice.

Journalist: You say ‘new test’, but the High Court found  that you misconstrued the current legislation and you didn’t  take into consideration any of Malaysia’s international or  domestic laws, so there is no new test. You just  misunderstood the current laws.

Bowen: Well, no, I don’t agree with that characterisation.

Page 3 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

Journalist: You don’t agree with the High Court?

Bowen: No, I don’t agree with your characterisation of the  High Court, with respect. Clearly, the High Court has today  said very clearly that for third country processing to be  appropriate, there must be obligations legally binding, either  under domestic law or international law. So take, for  example, previous arrangements: that wasn’t always the  case. So I think the advice to me, clearly, and to the  Government was clearly that that was not a necessary test.  The High Court has found differently today, which we  respect. Just here -Journalist: What will happen to the 330 people in limbo?

Bowen: Well, the Cabinet will consider our overall policy  settings, and of course that will have implications for those  330 people. And I will make further statements about that in  due course. Marcus -Journalist: Minister, paragraph 134 relates to the DFAT  advice. It says that the observation of the judges was that  the DFAT advice demonstrated that none of the first three  criteria stated in the Act was or could be met in the  circumstances of these matters. How can you say the  DFAT advice supports you when 134 clearly says it  doesn’t?

Bowen: I don’t agree with your characterization. I think no,  the DFAT advice should be taken as a whole, and in  context with the DIAC advice made it clear that it was open  to me to make that declaration. Phil -Journalist: Minister, have you or anybody from the  Government or your department today spoken to any  representatives from Nauru and do you plan to speak to  anybody from Nauru? And on a second point, if the  Malaysia deal is completely sunk, will the Government still  take the 4000 people?

Bowen: There’s been no communication with Nauru today.  In relation to the 4000 people: clearly, this was an  arrangement negotiated in good faith with Malaysia and we  will deal with that accordingly. In terms of the overall  humanitarian intake, which was clearly linked to breaking  the people smugglers’ business model through this  arrangement, increasing the humanitarian intake as we

Page 4 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

broke the people smugglers’ business model, again the  Government would consider that and we will make further  statements about that in due course.

Journalist: I don’t understand that answer. Is that a yes,  you’ll take the 4000, or is there now some doubt?

Bowen: My position is that the arrangement with Malaysia  was entered into in good faith by Australia and Malaysia.  We said we’d take those 4000, Malaysia has had no impact  on today’s decision, therefore I would be inclined to  continue to take the 4000 and the Government would  consider the intake because, very clearly, we wanted to  increase the intake. We wanted to take more refugees, but  we wanted to do so as we broke the people smugglers’  business model through this arrangement. The Government  is entitled now to consider its position. Alison -Journalist: Minister Bowen, with regards to your comments  that the very announcement of the Malaysia agreement saw  a drop off in the number of boats arriving. Is the inevitable  conclusion of today’s judgment that you are expecting a  pick up in boat arrivals?

Bowen: Well, I think you can expect people smugglers to  be capitalising on this arrangement and to say that, ‘You  can come to Australia now because the Malaysia  agreement has been ruled invalid by the High Court.’ Just  here -Journalist: What do you understand the financial cost to  the Government being of this legal challenge at this stage?

Bowen: I don’t have a figure in terms of the legal bill at this  stage. Mr Coorey -Journalist: When you say Cabinet is going to discuss  where to from here, when is it? Is it going to be Monday  next week or are you going to have an earlier one?

Bowen: We don’t comment on when Cabinet meets.

Journalist: Minister Bowen, have you given any  consideration to resigning your post?

Bowen: I have a responsibility to see this job through. It’s a  difficult job. It’s perhaps, it would be fair to say, the hardest

Page 5 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

job I’ve ever done, but it is not a job I intend to run away  from. I have obligations to the Government and to the  nation to see this issue through.

Journalist: Minister how much money has been spent  setting up infrastructure and so on in Malaysia already to -

Bowen: Well, it is well known that we have been very  advanced in our preparations; we have transit centres  arranged, etcetera. As to the detailed cost, that’s not  something that’s currently been assessed.

Journalist: Minister, the Migration Act which you relied on  says that the third country has to meet relevant human  rights standards in providing protection. I don’t understand  how could you have got it so wrong?

Bowen: Well, Malaysia is a signatory to some United  Nations conventions, not the Convention on Refugees but  to some others. Nauru, at the time it signed the  arrangement with Australia, was not a signatory and did not  have a functioning and effective Migration Act. So I believe,  on the basis of the advice given to me and the Government,

the declaration at the time I made it was an appropriate one  to make.

Journalist: Would you consider changing the Migration Act  to circumvent today’s -

Bowen: I’m not ruling any options in or out today. Dennis -Journalist: Mr Bowen what’s the ramifications for Manus  Island and is this decision a Cabinet decision and not yours  personally?

Bowen: When you say, which decision?

Journalist: The carriage of this policy, has it been yours or  has it been directed as a joint Cabinet decision?

Bowen: Well, very clearly it’s been a policy that I have  implemented in my role as Minister, but of course it’s  received Cabinet endorsement at every step along the way,  as is appropriate in a well functioning Cabinet Government  that we are.

The other question was Manus - look, as I said earlier,  there are potential ramifications for offshore processing

Page 6 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

generally. We’ve sought advice on that, there have been  readings made into the Migration Act today which we’ll  need to consider in relation to Manus Island and offshore  processing more generally.

Journalist: Has the decision, do you think, potentially  damaged our relationship with Malaysia, given that the High  Court’s found -

Bowen: Well, I would hope not. I think this has been an  arrangement negotiated with Malaysia in good faith. I note  that the High Court stressed in its findings that it was not  finding that Malaysia did not provide those protections, but  simply it was not demonstrable in law, and I think we would  make that clear to Malaysia, that that was not the High  Court’s finding that those protections did not exist.

The relationship between Australia and Malaysia is first  class, it’s as good as it ever has been. It’s first class in  terms of the personal links between ministers and prime  ministers; Prime Minister Gillard and Najib, myself and  Minister Hishammuddin and all the colleagues. It’s first  class and I would hope will continue to be.

Journalist: Have you spoken to anybody in the Malaysian  Government today? Have they given any indication of a  willingness to maybe change their laws domestically?

Bowen: Of course we’ve communicated today those results  to the Malaysian Government, as you would expect. We are  not going to be requesting Malaysia change its domestic  laws, we don’t lecture other countries as to how their laws  should be constructed.

Journalist: You mention that the people smugglers will  capitalise on this ruling from the High Court. With that in  mind, has the Government, or will the Government, seek  measures to increase capacity of detention facilities in  Australia?

Bowen: Well, my intention is to continue in the work to  break the people smugglers’ business model, which has  seen, together with the other initiatives I’ve implemented,  2000 less people in detention facilities in Australia; more  than 6000 three months ago, just around 4000 now. That’s  a considerable achievement which means that, in time, we

Page 7 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

can continue to close detention facilities rather than open  them if we continue to have that success. Andrew -Journalist: Just on the 4000: given that you’ve said you’re  inclined to accept 4000 from Malaysia and yet you’re  leaving open the question as to whether you’d reduce the  overall intake, could it be that we take fewer people from  places from Africa?

Bowen: Well, that’s the natural conclusion that you would  reach: if we are leaving open the option of reducing the  humanitarian intake, then yes, that would mean less people  are received in Australia as refugees.

Journalist: How long can you leave these people in limbo,  that have come that were part of the Malaysia solution?

Bowen: Well, we’ll deal with it as quickly as is prudent.

Journalist: What’s the significance of the decision on  unaccompanied minors? What does it mean now?

Bowen: Again, we’d need to consider that. That’s a  significant decision. It has potentially significant  ramifications, but obviously our focus has been on the  broader question over the last few hours.

Journalist: On that point: do you accept that you have a  conflict of interest in potentially sending unaccompanied  minors overseas?

Bowen: Look, we’ll be responding in detail to all the points  of the High Court case.

Journalist: A few weeks ago Andrew Metcalfe made some  very serious points about mandatory detention. Is it now  time to rethink that policy, given that you are expecting  more boats to arrive?

Bowen: The first answer is no, the Government’s position  is very clear. Secondly, I think there’s been considerable  misconstruing of Mr Metcalfe’s comments. Mr Metcalfe  reflected back to the committee its terms of reference. The  terms of reference of the committee are to consider the  effectiveness of mandatory detention. Mr Metcalfe pointed  that out to the committee.

Page 8 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

Mr Morrison and I actually agree on that; one of the few  things, perhaps, we agree on. Mr Morrison has said he  thought Mr Metcalfe was simply reflecting the terms of  reference of the Committee. Nobody asked - no member or  senator asked - Mr Metcalfe about his comments, because  they found them to be particularly unexceptional, because  he was reflecting back to the committee its own terms of  reference; the terms of reference the Liberal Party signed  off on in the motion that they introduced into the House of  Representatives to set up the inquiry.

Journalist: How can you credibly claim that a new test has  been created today when you haven’t read the decision?

Bowen: With respect, I have read the decision.

Journalist: Well then, in that case you will know they  expressly cite the offshore processing decision last year,  which was a unanimous decision. They base their decision  very, very clearly on the express wording of the Act. What  advice do you have which is contrary to the decision of six  of the seven judges and will you release it?

Bowen: The legal advice to me was very clear: that the  declaration I made was allowed to be and enabled to be  made by me under the Migration Act. The legal advice was  very clear. There is a longstanding Commonwealth  precedent that Commonwealth Governments do not release  their legal advice, which I will be continuing. Dennis?

Journalist: What are the ramifications for the regional  framework that, as you said, part of the Bali framework, that  this was going to be a forerunner to regional agreements;  does this make a problem for the region?

Bowen: Well, it has ramifications for offshore processing  more generally, as I’ve said repeatedly. I don’t believe -  and I certainly hope it does not make offshore processing  impossible - and I certainly don’t believe it makes regional  engagement impossible, because that is the only solution  sustainable in the long term for breaking the people  smuggler’s business model: working with nations in our  region, as we’ve done. Phil -Journalist: Mr Bowen, I know you’re not ruling anything in  or out, but what about Temporary Protection Visas? Are  they still off?

Page 9 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

Bowen: I’m not going to pre-empt Cabinet’s decisions. I’m  not ruling anything in or out.

Journalist: Refugee groups have called on you to begin  processing for people who are in limbo. Will you start doing  that?

Bowen: I’ve already answered that question Phil.

Journalist: Minister Bowen, how damaging is this for the  Government? I mean, the Opposition’s already been out  describing it as an incompetent farce.

Bowen: Well, asylum seeker policy is always a  controversial area. What counts is not whether it’s  controversial but whether the Government is making  progress in terms of implementing its policy of regional  engagement, which we’ve been doing.

Journalist: Minister, how much responsibility are you  taking personally for this policy failure?

Bowen: I’m the Minister, I’m responsible. I don’t accept the  premise that the policy is a bad one. I’m proud of the policy.  The policy is a good one. The policy is one which was  designed to let us increase our humanitarian intake, stop  people making that dangerous journey by boat to Australia.

That is the Government’s intention and objective and  remains so, and I’m proud of the policy. I’m proud of the  fact that we were able to achieve a regional agreement  which many people said we wouldn’t be able to do.

I’m proud of the fact that this Government is determined to  break the people smugglers’ business model. I’m proud of  the fact that those 4000 people in Malaysia, who would  never have the money or the inclination to risk their life on a  boat, will no longer need to do so. I’m proud of that. I think  it’s an elegant policy, which achieved those objectives.

Now, I respect the High Court’s decision but it doesn’t mean  I walk away from the fundamental points of the policy,  which is one the Government can continue to be proud of.

Journalist: You said that you haven’t spoken to Nauru  today. In recent weeks, in recent months, have you spoken  to Nauru about the possible reopening of a centre there?

Page 10 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

Bowen: No.

Journalist: [inaudible] when’s Cabinet meeting?

Bowen: I’ve already said we don’t comment on Cabinet  meeting times.

Journalist: Without saying when, will you schedule it  ahead of time?

Bowen: We will deal with the matter as prudently as is  possible and as quickly as is prudent. But I’m not going to, I  don’t announce Cabinet meeting times, and as you know, I  don’t talk about Cabinet meetings before or after they’ve  happened.

Journalist: Can I ask this then? Will you be convening a  special Cabinet meeting to deal with this?

Bowen: I don’t convene Cabinet meetings Phil, the Prime  Minister does.

Journalist: But why the secrecy? It’s ridiculous.

Bowen: Because Cabinet meetings are a matter for the  Cabinet, and I don’t reveal and I don’t comment on the  timing of Cabinet meetings.

Journalist: But they’re not usually secret, surely, the actual  fact of the meeting?

Bowen: I don’t comment on the timing of Cabinet meetings,  Michelle.

Thank you very much. Cheers.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 31 August 2011 at 19:42 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 11 of 11 High Court decision

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171159.htm

