CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT, SKY NEWS

THURSDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2011

SUBJECTS: Asylum seeker boat arrivals, Malaysia Arrangement,  Tony Abbott.

KIERAN GILBERT: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure Kieran.

GILBERT: Today marks the fourth anniversary of the election of the  Labor Government. The reality is there is still not a workable policy in  place to discourage the people smuggling trade. We’ve seen that over the  last couple of days - four boats in three days.



BOWEN: Well this is exactly what we said would happen Kieran - when  Mr Abbott announced that he would be opposing our legislation, the Prime  Minister and I said we could expect more boats. This is now 680 boat  arrivals this month, close to our highest; compared to say the month after  we announced the Malaysia Arrangement - 183 boat arrivals - the lowest  month in a long, long time. I think the contrast is stark and obvious.

I said at the time that the very announcement of the Malaysia  Arrangement was having an impact on people making that dangerous  boat journey to Australia. It stands to reason if people know the  Australian Parliament has not been able to reach a resolution for offshore  processing they know that they can come to Australia by boat and be  processed and resettled in Australia. There is no other lawful alternative.  It stands to reason that more people will therefore make that choice to  make that dangerous boat journey.

GILBERT: But do you have any other contingency plans, any other  options under consideration other than blaming - just blaming Tony  Abbott?

BOWEN: Its not about just blaming Tony Abbott. We have a policy,  negotiated in a painstaking manner, with Malaysia, with the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, under the Bali Process. This isn’t  a theoretical construct, it’s a policy that is ready to go, could be

implemented this afternoon - could be implemented this afternoon.

Malaysia has indicated that they remain ready and willing and able to take  the people we would transfer to Malaysia and deal with them and treat  them appropriately and accordingly. All that has got to happen is for Mr  Abbott to pick up the phone to the Prime Minister and say, ‘Julia, I’ve  decided - you agree, I agree that offshore processing is appropriate so  lets vote for it’.

GILBERT: You say it’s not a theoretical construct, but it’s a hypothetical  because it’s not going to go through Parliament.

BOWEN: Well not with the current approach of the Opposition -

GILBERT: Do you have any other contingencies?

BOWEN: We can continue to work with countries in our region on all  sorts of measures for deterrence and for - arrangements with the UNHCR  as part of the Bali Framework. We would be doing that regardless, but of  course -

GILBERT: But nothing is going to come of that.

BOWEN: That work is important, but I am not going to pretend to you  that it provides a significant circuit breaker or disincentive to make the  boat journey.

GILBERT: So without Malaysia we can expect the boats to come, there’s  no other option in the short term that you can see that might provide a  deterrent?

BOWEN: Well that’s right Kieran, that’s correct. Unless you have a  properly negotiated regional approach then you do not have an effective  deterrent to make the boat journey to Australia. Now we have one,  negotiated through the Bali Framework with Malaysia and the UNHCR.

As I say, this is not a hypothetical: we have an agreement signed in  writing with another country. Now let’s not let that opportunity go. Who  would have thought - many people said this wouldn’t happen, that you  could get another major country in our region to work with us to provide  more consistent and better protection outcomes across the region and  provide a significant disincentive.

Now we’ve seen the tragic consequences of boat arrivals, we’ve seen it far  too often Kieran. I don’t want to get those phone calls. Australia doesn’t

want to go through watching these tragedies at sea.

GILBERT: Well I can’t get - things can’t get much worse than they are in  terms of the boat arrivals: we’ve seen the influx of the last few days, its  more than 700 in this month. Why not accept the Coalition amendment -

BOWEN: Well because -

GILBERT: - argue that you wanted another option but say, ‘Okay, we’ll  try your option on this and if …’ - it can’t be worse than the current  strategy surely?

BOWEN: Well you know what would happen Kieran? I’d be up here doing  an interview with you and you’d say, ‘Mr Bowen, why are you spending $1  billion on a detention centre at Nauru which won’t work?’, and I would not  have a cogent answer for you, because the operational costs for Nauru  over four years would be $1 billion and it would not provide a disincentive  to make the boat journey to Australia -

GILBERT: But what is there to say that it won’t work because it has  worked before?

BOWEN: Well I don’t accept that Kieran. Now here’s a challenge for Mr  Abbott and Mr Morrison: if they believe Nauru would provide an effective  deterrent then they can come out today, they can come on your show,  they can do it in Parliament, and explain to the Australian people where  people would be resettled from Nauru - if somebody is regarded as a  refugee on Nauru, where would they go? What countries have they  negotiated with, or would they negotiate with to resettle people from  Nauru?

If they can’t answer that question then there is only one answer and that  is Australia. Over 90 per cent of the people regarded as refugees on  Nauru last time were resettled in Australia or New Zealand. Now the  people smugglers know that, the asylum seekers know that. So if you are  making the decision about whether to come to Australia by boat you’d  say, ‘Well, I’d have to spend some time in Nauru, I factor that in, but then  I’d be resettled in Australia which is exactly what I’m after’. That was  what the Malaysia Arrangement achieved, which Nauru does not -

GILBERT: We’ve got to an impasse. Obviously this stalemate is just  fodder for the people smugglers, surely this issue is important enough to  warrant you, Scott Morrison, getting around the table and coming up with  a compromise?

BOWEN: I couldn’t agree more.

GILBERT: So why haven’t you been able to -

BOWEN: Well we’ve offered that -

GILBERT: You’re the Government -

BOWEN: Well you’ve got to have two - if you want two people on the  table to discuss it, somebody else has got to turn up. The Prime Minister  made it clear to Mr Abbott that she was willing to make me available to Mr  Morrison to negotiate this through, to discuss it. I’m at my desk, in my  office, if Mr Morrison wants to discuss how to make offshore processing  work then I’m all ears, I’m happy to talk to him about it.

But his current position, and his leaders current position is, ‘You can have  any type of offshore processing you like, providing it’s our type of offshore  processing - providing it is Nauru’. That is not a discussion, this is just the  Coalition addicted to saying no for political purposes. They have made a  political calculation that boat arrivals suit them, they’ve put their political  interests in front of the national interest.

We saw Senator Cash, Mr Morrison’s right-hand, yesterday in the  Parliament say, ‘… this is the gift that keeps on giving’. That just belies  their approach to this - they see this through a political prism, they are  not acting on the expert advice of the national security experts. The  national security experts told them that if you don’t have the Malaysia  Arrangement in place you’d see high number of boat arrivals. The national  security experts are right and Mr Abbott should listen to them.

GILBERT: The people smugglers are obviously trying to rush boatloads to  Australia before the monsoon season - obviously this is always a  dangerous journey but as the monsoon season nears its even more  perilous isn’t it, and do you expect the boat numbers to subside at any  point?

BOWEN: Boat numbers do go up and down -

GILBERT: But nearing the monsoon season?

BOWEN: - because of a range of factors, including the weather, and  there’s a pattern to that, but that’s not a hard and fast pattern.  Remember this: people smugglers will put people on a boat knowing that  it’s dangerous. They don’t care about the seaworthiness - there’s no  certificate of seaworthiness. They don’t care about the weather - we saw

this just a few weeks ago with just the terrible consequences that we see,  people smugglers against all warnings are sending people out in  dangerous weather on leaky boats.

So this is the inevitable consequence of high numbers of boat arrivals  when you’ve got somebody who is determined to make money out of  risking other people’s lives. That’s why when people ask me why we’re so  critical of people smugglers all the time, because they are making money  out of risking other people’s lives, have links to very serious organised

crime and we’re not prepared to let them call the shots, but without the  Opposition supporting our legislation this will continue.

GILBERT: Volunteers had to intercept a vessel off Christmas Island just  the other day. Are you satisfied with the provisions in place at Christmas  Island to respond to emergencies to prevent the sorts of tragedy that we

saw about this time last year?

BOWEN: Well certainly there are measures in place with Customs and  Border Protection, and my ministerial colleague, Brendan O’Connor, has  been obviously very assiduous in making sure that we’ve responded to the  various recommendations, that things are in place. When you’ve got a  large sea and, you know, the great space between Indonesia and  Australia - a very large archipelago from Indonesia - we’ve said  repeatedly that this is very dangerous and we cannot always be in a  position where we can be there in time, but of course we do have  measures in place: Customs, Border Protection, the Navy, our personnel  out there do a first-class job in very difficult circumstances.

GILBERT: Just finally, do you accept that it’s the Government that is  going to cop all the flak, that you can point the finger at Tony Abbott but  when people make judgement on this, that the Government has got - the  Government is in power and the Government will have the accountability  for these failures?

BOWEN: It’s incumbent on all political leaders to act in the national  interest. I think the Australian people would say, ‘Hang on a second, this  doesn’t make sense: the Labor Party agrees with offshore processing, the  Liberal Party agrees with offshore processing; but they can’t work it out?’.

Now we are prepared to vote for offshore processing - the Prime Minister  made it clear to Mr Abbott that if he wants to have a sensible,  constructive discussion that she’d make me available to Mr Morrison. He  didn’t take that offer up, he went out and held a press conference and  said, ‘No, we’re not going to vote for this’. He put unacceptable conditions  on it that he knew would wreck the Governments policy. So this is just the

Coalition, true to form, saying no because they believe it’s in their political  interest, above the national interest. If Tony Abbott won’t do the right  thing by Australia as Leader of the Opposition, how do we know he’d ever  do the right thing by Australia if he were ever Prime Minister?



GILBERT: Mr Bowen, appreciate your time.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you Kieran.

ENDS



