



THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency

TRANSCRIPT

GC 164/11

9 June 2011

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW ON ABC 730 WITH LEIGH SALES  SUBJECT: PRODUCTIVITY COMMISSION REPORT; CARBON PRICE POLICY; MAYALSIA

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

7.35PM

LEIGH SALES: A short time ago I was joined from Newcastle by the Climate Change Minister  Greg Combet.

Minister, the Productivity Commission report finds that carbon pricing in Germany and the  UK boosted electricity prices by 12 per cent and 17 per cent respectively. Is that what  Australians have to look forward to?

GREG COMBET: Well, no. What - the two key things out of the report are that there is a lot  of action going on in the economies of seven of our major trading partners to reduce  pollution. That's the first point. In fact, over a thousand different policies were identified.  But the second important point that relates to your question is that of course the cost of  those policies can vary very significantly, and in particular, the Productivity Commission has  made absolutely clear that the cheapest way in an economy to cut your carbon pollution so  that it has the least impact on electricity prices, for example, is through a market  mechanism like an emissions trading scheme. Now that's a very important finding from this  report today.

LEIGH SALES: So does that mean that under your scheme you can rule out that we would  see electricity price rises of that magnitude?

GREG COMBET: Well when we produce the final modelling and the whole of the package,  the electricity price impacts will be there for everyone to see, as well as what the  Government plans to assist households meet any price impacts. And we've been very clear  that at least half of the revenue from the carbon price will be used to assist households and  particularly pensioners and low and middle income households.

LEIGH SALES: The report examined only eight countries. What point is there in using the  actions of those eight countries to justify action in Australia when their economies are so  different to ours?

GREG COMBET: Well our economy is certainly different and we've got to design a carbon

price mechanism of course that suits our particular circumstances. But, nonetheless, I think  you'd agree that it's important in the public policy debate that we're having that we've got  some more facts on the table. And here we have the Productivity Commission, an  independent body, has had a look over the last six or seven months at the economies of  seven of our major trading partners to identify what policies they have embraced to reduce  carbon pollution as part of their efforts to tackle climate change. And of course they've  identified ...

LEIGH SALES: But I just wonder, Minister, if ...

GREG COMBET: But it's very important, this point: including Australia's policies, there's a  thousand policies that have been identified in the economies of our major trading partners,  and this is in an environment where of course other people, such as Tony Abbott, are  running around saying nothing's going on. In fact a lot is going on.

LEIGH SALES: But I just wonder, Minister, if people - I just wonder if people are sitting  around their dinner tables tonight going, "Oh, sweetheart, oh my goodness, we're falling  behind Germany. Guess we'd better get behind this carbon price."

GREG COMBET: I think that's rather silly, actually. I mean, I think it's valid ...

LEIGH SALES: Well, but, what I'm saying is do you think it's really a persuasive argument  that's going to change Australians' minds about whether or not they support a carbon price?

GREG COMBET: Well that's one of the issues that's been in debate and now we've got some  facts on the table. I think that should be respected. The Productivity Commission's an  independent body. It was asked to go and have a look at what carbon pricing methods there  are in the economies of our trading partners. It's gone and done that, it's catalogued a  thousand different policies. Many of them are more effective and less effective than others.  Also more are costly and less costly than others.

LEIGH SALES: Australia is heavily dependent on coal production. The Australian Coal  Association released research yesterday showing that none of our competitors in coal  production are applying carbon taxes or emissions reduction schemes. So, is a carbon price  going to put Australia at a competitive disadvantage?

GREG COMBET: No, it will not. And you just made the point to me a moment ago that of  course you've got to take into account our particular circumstances in Australia. And one of  our circumstances in Australia is that the coal industry and the LNG industry are contributing  the fastest growing category of greenhouse gases in our economy. And it is not credible for  us not to include those important sectors within a carbon pricing scheme. If you didn't, what  you'd be doing is asking other sectors of the economy like the manufacturing industry to  bear the cost of the pollution reductions, and to achieve it at least cost we need to include  the major sectors of our economy.

On the coal industry specifically, at an example of a $20-per-tonne carbon price, the average  liability for each tonne of coal mined in our economy for its methane emissions would be  about $1.60 per tonne, and that's in a context where steaming coal's selling for more than  $120 a tonne and coking coal in particular's selling for more than $320 a tonne.

You know, people like Tony Abbott are running round saying it's going to be the end of the

coal industry, the sky is going to fall in. I mean, he's the best Chicken Little you've ever seen.  But in fact this is a manageable economic and environmental reform and we predict that the  costs will be modest.

LEIGH SALES: Minister, on another matter, as a member of the Labor left, how comfortable  are you with children being put in detention in Malaysia?

GREG COMBET: Well I support the Government's policy and I'm looking forward to the  conclusion of the agreement with Malaysia because I think it'll be an important step in us  dealing with what is a very complex and difficult problem. And I know that my colleague, the  Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen, is working extremely hard on that and it shouldn't be  assumed that Chris Bowen doesn't have the same concerns as other members of the  community on this issue. He does.

LEIGH SALES: Do you have concerns about children being in detention in Malaysia?

GREG COMBET: I've got complete confidence in what the Prime Minister and Chris Bowen  are doing in negotiating with Malaysia and I think we should wait to see the outcome of  those discussions.

LEIGH SALES: You gave a speech last year in which you said Labor needed to return to its  core values of social justice, compassion and equity. In what way is sending asylum seeker  children to an uncertain future in Malaysia compatible with those core values?

GREG COMBET: Oh well Labor is doing its best to represent those values by trying to avoid  people getting on a boat and coming across the ocean, and we've seen what tragic  consequences can result. So I've got complete confidence in our policy position and as I said,  in the Prime Minister and the Minister for Immigration in pursuing this policy. And on the  broader point that you're making, I think Labor is doing a lot to demonstrate its  commitment to social justice and equity. And in my own portfolio area, one of the most  important issues of equity for future generations is that we tackle this problem. People  running around saying we don't have to tackle climate change, there's nothing we have to  do, are leaving a huge risk for future generations. And what we've got to be attending to is  our responsibility to play a part internationally to tackle climate change by reducing  pollution and exercise our responsibility for future generations in our own country.

Australia's got a lot to lose if we don't tackle climate change. We're talking about  intergenerational equity here, and it's why I think that Labor should be proud of what is  endeavouring to achieve.

LEIGH SALES: Greg Combet, thank you very much for making time to speak to us tonight.

GREG COMBET: Pleasure, Leigh.

ENDS

