

THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE



Transcript

SKY NEWS’ AM AGENDA WITH KIERAN GILBERT  22 FEBRUARY 2011

E&OE

Subjects: Libya, Newspoll, party rifts, asylum seekers, bank fees.



KIERAN GILBERT:    The Prime Minister has had a bounce in  the latest Newspoll after a productive  few weeks in the Parliament and  outside it. The Prime Minister's

approval rating is up, as is the primary  vote for the Labor Government.

Internal tensions within Coalition ranks

seem to have dented support for the  Opposition. With me this morning to  look at this and the other matters of the  day, the Trade Minister, Craig Emerson,  the Deputy Opposition Leader in the  Senate, Senator George Brandis.  Gentlemen, good morning to you both.

CRAIG EMERSON:    Good morning, Kieran.

GILBERT:                    Before we get to the Newspoll I want to get  your thoughts on the developments in  Libya concerning reports of warplanes  bombing protesters, Craig. This is a  worry.

EMERSON:           Yes, I hadn't heard that but it's

deplorable what's happening in Libya.  There's always a place for peaceful  protest and obviously the people of  Libya, or a very large number of them,  have got a very strong point of view.  Obviously there's some sort of

contagion coming out of Egypt and  other countries. There are other  countries of the Middle East that are  also undergoing some upheaval but the  Australian government has consistently  said that protests should be peaceful  and that responses to those protests  should be peaceful. That's not

happening in Libya and that's

deplorable.

GILBERT: And, Senator Brandis, from afar, again,

it looks like a fragile regime trying to  cling to power through the most

concerning means.

GEORGE BRANDIS: Well, it does and I agree with what  Craig has said about this.  I think what it  also reminds us of is that

notwithstanding the longevity of some  of these regimes, President Mubarak in  Egypt had been in power for 30 years, I  think General Gaddafi in Libya has  been in power for 42 years, but it just  goes to show notwithstanding their  longevity they're nevertheless fragile  and they won't withstand popular  sentiment for more democratic forms of  governance.

EMERSON: It reminds me of Lech Walesa in

Gdansk, in the shipyards in Gdansk.  Here's a trade union official, they had a

point of view, I think they expressed it,  from memory, peacefully and, to cut a  long story short that then spread to  other countries of the Eastern Bloc and  by 1989 the Berlin Wall had come  down.

BRANDIS: Yes, but I think there are very big

differences between the Polish  revolution and what's happening on the  southern shores of the Mediterranean.



GILBERT:                       I suppose across the region, a wave of

unrest that is engulfing that region like  that.

EMERSON:              Well, they're people's movements.

That's the point I'm making.



BRANDIS:                      Well, I think that's true, Craig, and I think

President Obama has got it broadly  right when he says that a movement  towards more democratic forms of  government across the region is  ultimately what it's going to take to  resolve this period of tension.

EMERSON:                   And a point I've made before, Kieran, is

that political freedom is vital - it should  be the right of any person - but if you  don't have economic freedom, if these  young people in particular don't have  economic prospects, don't have a future  for themselves and for their family, then  that itself is a cause of unrest. So if  political freedom comes, well, that's a

good thing but it needs to be associated  with some liberalisation and not just on  the political front but on the economic  front.

GILBERT: Well, that's a question and a doubt, I

suppose, over all of this, that when  there is change there's uncertainty  about what would fill the vacuum of  leadership and, as we saw in the Gaza  Strip. Senator Brandis, it's not always  what you like when or what the West  likes, when there is a democratic vote.

BRANDIS: That's right.  I mean, we expected that

Fatah would become the principal  power in the Gaza Strip and it turned  out that it was Hamas.

Equally, and I said this to you the other

week, the Iranian, the Iranian revolution  in the 1970s was originally expected to  be a . . . to foreshadow a movement to  more democratic forms of government  but what it did was it opened the door  for the most medieval extremist form of  government that I think the Middle East  knows. So. . .

GILBERT: Are there similar risks?

BRANDIS: . . . these are very unpredictable

consequences.

GILBERT: Yeah, indeed. There are risks that

remain obviously in all of those

countries.

Let's look at the Newspoll now. I want

to bring in Martin O'Shannessy if we  can. Martin O'Shannessy from

Newspoll is in our Sky News Centre.  Martin, Julia's had a jump in her

approval rating. What do you put that  down to?



O’SHANNESSY:           Well, she hasn't looked too bad in the last  couple of weeks and certainly Tony  Abbott has had a very tough month in  politics. I don't want to go through the  shopping list of things that went wrong  for the Coalition in the last three weeks,  but clearly there's a bit of lose from  Tony Abbott and a bit of win from Julia  Gillard.

GILBERT: And let's look at the parties, though. It's

not just the leaders, it's translating into  a jump in the primary vote as well.

O’SHANNESSY: Yes, we're seeing a jump in the primary  vote for Labor of four points, to 36.  That's still well behind the 41 enjoyed  by the Coalition and ultimately 50-50  which is where we were at the election  and, of course, really, when you look at  it, the Coalition has had the lead three  times since that, since the election. So  it is not a, you know, terrific leap

forward for Labor. Certainly, though,  when it comes down to the personal  ratings, the Prime Minister is ahead on  who would make the better Prime  Minister, doubling her lead almost to 22  points in the last two weeks.

Tony Abbott has suffered his worst

approval rating in seven months, down  at 38 per cent approving of him

whereas Julia Gillard is up to 50, which  is the best that she's done. So high  water and low water for both players.



GILBERT:                You didn't look at the Queensland poll -

you didn't poll Queensland extensively  last time because of the ongoing natural  disasters. Do you think that the Prime  Minister's had a bit of a jump in the  approval because of the Queensland  factor?

O’SHANNESSY: I think the Queensland factor has

played into both polls and what we're  seeing is some uncertainty about really  where the Coalition's position was.  Initially, of course, Julia Gillard looked  wooden and all of those other things  compared to Anna Bligh, and wasn't  making any ground there. I think,  however, you characterise the

economic sense or otherwise of the  Coalition's position on the, on the flood  levy. The fact is that they've been a  voice that seems to be against the flow  and I don't think that played for them.

I think that helped significantly.

We've polled in similar ways to the way

we did two weeks ago, getting, you  know, about 70 per cent of

Queenslanders into the poll so I don't  think this is going to be hurting the  actual shape of the poll; the shape of  the polling is going to hurt but certainly

the way it's played out in the last two  weeks it would be pretty hard for the  Coalition to sell their position on the  flood levy as a positive for

Queenslanders.

GILBERT:                      Martin O'Shannessy, thanks a lot for that.  We've got a Queenslander here and a  member of, a senior member of the  Coalition. What do you make of that?

BRANDIS: Well, what I always say about polls,

Kieran, as you might expect, is that they  bounce around and I neither get  euphoric when they're high or dejected  when they're low because they do  bounce around. Opinion polls taken this  far away from a Federal election have  zero predictive ability or predictive  significance.

Now, having said that, I would make

just this one point. Even though, with  the result at 50-50 in the two-party  preferred vote, that is still surprisingly  low for a relatively recently re-elected  government.

GILBERT: What about the fact that there have

been those internal tensions, leaks out  of Shadow Cabinet? That obviously  hasn't helped.

BRANDIS: Well, I think it's obvious that there's

been a bit of untidiness on our side.  There's been a bit of untidiness on the  Government's side, too, so I think that  the Australian people looking at both  sides of politics in the last couple of

weeks and scoring it 50-50 has got it  about right.

GILBERT:                 Is that true? Because, you know, a pox

on both your houses because, you  know, the Prime Minister's not that far  in front and, indeed, it's 50-50 when it  comes to the two-party comparison.

EMERSON: I think to be consistent, Kieran, I have,

like George, consistently said that  there's no point commenting on  particular polls. I'm happy to talk about  the last fortnight. The policy issues that  have been debated - health policy, the  flood levy that you raised, Scott

Morrison's remarks dancing to the tune  of One Nation at the time of the funerals  . . .

BRANDIS: Rubbish, Craig.

EMERSON:                  . . .which was a terrible thing to do.

BRANDIS: That's a disgraceful thing to say.

EMERSON: And, well, Scott Morrison had some

very disgraceful things, totally

disgraceful things to say and he should  be removed from the front bench and I  think deep down, George, you'd  probably agree with that. I don't know  whether - what your relationship is with  Scott Morrison -  but I know you well  enough to know that you would never  embrace the policies of One Nation.

BRANDIS: Craig, Scott Morrison was decent

enough to concede publicly that he said

the wrong thing at the wrong time in  relation to . . .

EMERSON: No, no, he didn't. He said he said the

right thing at the wrong time.

BRANDIS:                    In, In . . .

EMERSON: The right thing at the wrong time and

he's wrong about that.

BRANDIS:                In relation to the suggestion of dancing

to the tune of the One Nation Party, that  is a disgraceful thing to say.  It is

something that was put out there by  your leader yesterday, but the One  Nation Party and the Coalition have  absolutely nothing in common.

EMERSON:                  Well, perhaps explain this . . .

BRANDIS: No, no let me finish, please.

We have put One Nation at the very

bottom of our voting ticket at every  election since the late 1990s and the  suggestion that there is any relationship  between the Coalition and One Nation,  that their views, which in my view are  loathsome and disgusting views, have  any bearing ...

EMERSON: On that we agree.

BRANDIS:                    . . . on Coalition thinking is absolutely false.



GILBERT:                     Senator Brandis, there are reports in The  Age…

EMERSON: Well, can I respond to that?

GILBERT: Yeah, in a moment. But Senator

Brandis, I want to ask you about a  report in The Age newspaper today,  and Michelle Grattan reports that you,  Malcolm Turnbull and Julie Bishop in  the Shadow Cabinet yesterday urged  Tony Abbott to restate the Coalition's  commitment to a non-discriminatory  immigration policy . . .

EMERSON: Good on you!

GILBERT:  . . . is that true?

BRANDIS: Well, I'm not going to disclose what is

discussed in the Shadow Cabinet. But  let me just make this point: Tony Abbott  needs no urging to commit the Coalition  to a non-discriminatory immigration  policy and a multicultural vision for  Australia because that is,  has always  been his very strong view and

continues to be.

GILBERT:                And is the Government then just trying

to whip this up? Because last night Judi  Moylan, a Liberal moderate of long  standing, said that it's not just her side.  She criticised Scott Morrison when he  stood up and argued there'd be a cap  on boat arrival refugee visas last night.  There were only two speakers when  Scott Morrison moved that motion -

Scott Morrison and Judi Moylan - and  one of them was critical of the motion.

She's also critical of your side of

politics, [Craig], saying that you're  politicising it. Now, you've been putting  the boot into the Governm. . .  to the  Coalition, as did the Prime Minister  yesterday. Aren't you politicising this  issue as well?

EMERSON: Look, there was a funeral, and relatives  of asylum seekers, including orphans,  were at the funeral. And yes, they had  been transported to the funeral at  taxpayers' expense. That is the truth of  the matter.

Scott Morrison did not say he said the

wrong thing at the wrong time. He said,  he said the right thing at the wrong  time. All he did in recanting was to say,  ‘I shouldn't have said it on the day of  the funeral’.

Who joined him in that? Tony Abbott

said he shouldn't have said it on the  day of the funeral. Dancing to the tune  of One Nation? Of course. Of course  the Coalition is. Not George Brandis,  not Judi Moylan . . .

BRANDIS:                    No, Craig, this is . . .

EMERSON:  . . . not Russell Broadbent, but when

you see the emails . . .

BRANDIS: . . . this is absolute nonsense.



EMERSON                      . . .when you see the emails about

Muslim schools - and I've had dozens  and dozens of emails about Muslim  schools in Indonesia and how we  shouldn't be funding them because this  is radical Islam - completely untrue, but  . . .

GILBERT: But aren't you politicising this as well?



EMERSON:                  . . . but repeated, but repeated . . .

GILBERT:                   Judi Moylan said last night that you're both  politicising . .

EMERSON: . . . but repeated by the Coalition.

GILBERT . . . both sides are politicising this and it

should come to an end.

EMERSON:                  We will take on, we will take on . . .

GILBERT:                     You're not politicising this at all?

EMERSON:             . . . any argument that supports a One Nation  philosophy.

BRANDIS: So will we.

EMERSON: Now, I was, I was . . .

BRANDIS:                    So will the Coalition and . . .

EMERSON: I believe you will. I will believe you but

the Coalition will not.

BRANDIS: No, the Coalition, Craig.

EMERSON: And I was proud enough in 1988 to be

sitting in the adviser's box when Bob  Hawke took into the Parliament, after  John Howard talked about too much  Asian immigration, a motion reaffirming  a commitment to a non-discriminatory  immigration policy. And Philip Ruddock,  in the good old days, actually crossed  the floor . . .

BRANDIS; Every, every. . .

EMERSON: . . . and we will fight this at every

instance whenever the Coalition or  members of the Coalition. . .

BRANDIS: Except, Craig. . .

EMERSON: . . . embrace One Nation. Yes, we will

fight it. And if you say that's

politicisation, that's true.

BRANDIS: Now, Craig, can I have my turn? My

turn. You're setting up a straw man  because there is, I believe, not one  member of the Labor Party and there is  not one member of the Coalition in the  Australian Parliament who believes in a  discriminatory immigration policy.  Those battles were fought and won  decades ago.

EMERSON:                  Well, why did Scott Morrison, in the

Shadow Cabinet, say that we should  take some advantage or make some  use or raise some issue about . . .

BRANDIS: Craig, Craig, I'm not. . .

EMERSON:                   . . . the level of Muslim. . .

BRANDIS: . . . I'm not going, I'm not going to

discuss . . .

EMERSON: . . . Muslim presence here in Australia?

BRANDIS: . . . on the public record. . .

EMERSON: Of course you're not.

BRANDIS: . . . what may be said at a Shadow

Cabinet. But let met point out to you  that Scott Morrison has said - and I  know this to be true - that what was  attributed to him does not represent his  views.

GILBERT; What about last night, Senator Brandis,

the comments of Scott Morrison moving  a motion to put a cap on the number of  refugee visas afforded those that arrive  by boat?

BRANDIS: Well, I think that was a very sensible

motion, because let's, let me explain to  you the structure of the motion.

At the moment we have 13,750

humanitarian refugee places in our

immigration program. The way it works  is that when a person arrives unlawfully  by boat - as 9,000 people have arrived  since the Labor Party weakened our  border protection policies in August  2008 - they displace a refugee applicant  who is waiting in the queue in some  refugee centre overseas doing the right  thing.

What Scott Morrison's motion said is

that we should reserve at least 10,000  of those 13,750 places for people who  are doing the right thing and waiting in  the queue.

Now, I think that's, I think that is just

and right.

GILBERT: You don't agree with that, obviously.

What about the argument that those  who are waiting in camps internationally  should be afforded the same right?

EMERSON: I think it is perfectly reasonable to have

such debates. I do not consider that to  be a breach of a non-discriminatory  immigration policy. My argument with  Scott Morrison is about his desire, as  expressed in Shadow Cabinet, about. . .

BRANDIS:                   Don't tell. . .

EMERSON:                    . . . raising. . . now look, Laurie Oakes is a

respected economic journalist, a  respected journalist. . .

BRANDIS: This is second-handed. . .

EMERSON: . . . he has said. . . yeah, so he spoke...

BRANDIS:                    Craig, don't tell me what was said at a

meeting which I. . .

EMERSON:                  So who's going to interrupt here, George?  Who's going to interrupt?

BRANDIS: Don't tell me what was said at a

meeting which I attended and you  didn't, and I've already told you is a  false report.

EMERSON: Yeah, well I actually respect Laurie

Oakes. He contacted . . .

BRANDIS: He wasn't there either.

EMERSON: No, but he did speak directly with other

Ministers, Shadow Ministers, and they  confirmed this is exactly what Scott  Morrison was on about.

BRANDIS: Well, Craig . . .

EMERSON: So we've got the raising of the Muslim

schools in Indonesia . . .

GILBERT: Okay, let's . . .

EMERSON . . . we've got the funeral, we've got . .

GILBERT: We've covered this, we've covered this,

Craig.

EMERSON: . . . him carrying on and on and on

about Muslims in Australia . . .

BRANDIS: None of these . . .

EMERSON: . . . and I think it is a total disgrace.

GILBERT: We have to . . .

EMERSON: Now, let me make it clear . . .

BRANDIS: Craig, Craig . . .

EMERSON: . . . I think it is a filthy total disgrace.

BRANDIS:  Craig, none of these journalists you're

talking of were in the Shadow Cabinet. I  was.

EMERSON: Yeah, and I was there . . .

BRANDIS: You're talking to me now and I am

telling you that those reports are false.

EMERSON: . . . and I was there, I was there when

Scott Morrison came out on the day of  the funeral and disgracefully,

disgustingly, said these people should  not be funded to go and bury their  relatives, including orphan kids.

GILBERT: Well, what about . . .

BRANDIS: I think the public . . .

EMERSON: And you should never have endorsed

that. It was an absolute disgrace.

GILBERT: Craig, let me ask you, though, what

about the fact . . . okay, the

Government's faced criticism for not  allowing the children, orphans of this  Christmas Island tragedy, one, to  remain in Sydney, and to take so long  to grant them approval to stay in  Australia. Why has it taken so long?

EMERSON: Well, Chris Bowen, I think - and I'll say

this clearly - has done a fantastic job.  He is a decent human being. There are  processing requirements that need to  be fulfilled, and he moved to complete  those processing requirements for the  nine-year-old boy - Seena I think his  name is - as quickly as he possibly  could.

GILBERT:              That doesn't show a lack of

compassion, to send an orphan back?

EMERSON: What has to happen is that everyone in

Australia would expect that the normal  identity and security and health checks  are done - everyone.

GILBERT: For a nine-year-old?

EMERSON: Bipartisan - everyone.

GILBERT: All right, let's . . .

EMERSON: That's what he did, but he moved very

quickly to make sure that that boy could  be . . .

GILBERT: Senator Brandis, quickly.

EMERSON . . . with his relatives in Sydney.

BRANDIS: Can we get this into a reasonable

amount of perspective? The real lack of  compassion here is in executing a  policy which encourages people-smugglers to put people at risk so that  lives are lost on the high seas.

GILBERT:                    Okay. Let's take a break. We'll be right

back. Stay with us on AM Agenda.

[Advertisement break]

GILBERT: Welcome back to AM Agenda. With me

this morning, the Trade Minister, Craig  Emerson, and the Deputy Opposition  Leader in the Senate, Senator George  Brandis.

Craig, you were the subject of some

fairly fierce criticism, described as a  dishonourable rat by the AWU boss, Bill  Ludwig.

Now, you haven't responded publicly.

Here's your chance.

EMERSON: Well, Bill's got a strong view about me,

and he's entitled to have a view about  me. In politics things can get pretty  robust. Bill Ludwig has expressed those

sorts of views in the past, may do so in  the future.

But I'll say this about Bill Ludwig. He

and I share the basic Labor values.   And while we don't agree on an

assessment of my personality and on a  number of other issues, at heart Bill  Ludwig is a very strong Labor person  who believes incidentally in a non-discriminatory immigration policy. And  I'll point this out:  [he] was absolutely  dedicated to getting rid of Pauline  Hanson . . .

BRANDIS: Yeah . . .

EMERSON: . . . in 1998. I know that because we

talked about who would run in the seat  of Oxley to get rid of Pauline Hanson.

GILBERT: Well, Paul Howes, Paul Howes also

had a go at you, one of the young up-and-comers in the Labor movement.

EMERSON: Yeah.

GILBERT: What do you put that down to? They

seem to have it in for you. What did you  say to rile them up so much last week?

EMERSON: Well, I think what I said was, I

responded to a question in a radio  interview about Paul's comments. I  basically said what was then

subsequently reported in The Australian  newspaper the next day, and that is that  my preference is to go down the

conciliatory path.

GILBERT: That's all you said and they put the boot

in like that?

EMERSON: That's what I said.

GILBERT: Okay. Well, the  . . . Kevin Rudd's

calling for an open review.

[To George Brandis]  I don't really need

to get your thoughts on that.

BRANDIS: Well, can I just make this observation

though?

EMERSON: [Laughs] He can't wait.

BRANDIS: I'm not going to say you're a

dishonourable rat, Craig, because I  don't think you are but I mean, you  know, to say that Bill Ludwig represents  the soul of the Labor movement . . .

EMERSON:                   I didn't say that.

BRANDIS:             Anybody who saw Bill Ludwig putting

the boot into you and putting the boot  into others, too, at the AWU conference  last week, would have seen nothing but  an unreconstructed factional thug. If  that's the heart and soul of the Labor  Party . . .

EMERSON: I didn't say that.

BRANDIS . . . you know, that's, that's very

alarming and, I might say, that even in  this great, much-vaunted review that

Senator Faulkner and Mr Carr and Mr  Bracks delivered last week to the Labor  Party, they would still give people like  that, trade union thugs like Bill Ludwig,  a 20 per cent share of pre-selection  votes to decide which people can  represent the Labor Party in the Federal  Parliament.

GILBERT: A lot of that, a lot of that review . . .

BRANDIS: Very concerning.

GILBERT: A lot of that review we don't know about

because it was kept secret . . .

BRANDIS: Most of it's been redacted.

GILBERT: And Kevin Rudd, the former Prime

Minister, wants it all open. What do you  make of his contribution, Craig? Is that  helpful or does it just show that he's  going to be an irritant for the

Government?

EMERSON: Look, Kevin's making a great

contribution as Foreign Minister of this  country. In terms of party reviews, as a  Cabinet Minister I have to tell you that  I'm not deeply involved in them. I think  obviously it's a worthwhile thing to do.  So is the Coalition. I think Peter Reith is  doing a review or has completed one  for the Coalition. This usually happens  after elections. There's nothing  particularly new in the idea of reviews  but my fundamental interest is in policy.



GILBERT:                      All right. Let's just have one last issue

before we go. We've got less than two  minutes but I want to get your thoughts  on this: the ban on exit fees. Treasury  released, through freedom of

information, some advice that says this  could actually be counter-productive,  Craig.

EMERSON:                  Well, we empowered ASIC late last year to  go after banks that seek to recoup, if  you like, the lost revenue from not being  able to apply exit fees, through other  means.

There is, in the Australian consumer

law, a capacity to pursue any business  that has unfair fees and I thank here, on  television, George Brandis for

somewhat improving that law when I  was the Minister for Competition Policy  and Consumer Affairs. We worked on  that and through George's leadership it  passed through the Senate.

GILBERT: Well, let's get, let's get Senator

Brandis's thoughts just quickly.

BRANDIS: Well, look, I'm a bit agnostic on the

question. I'm not a professional  economist, unlike Craig, but ordinarily  the mobility of capital is a good thing  which would be an argument against  exit fees. On the other hand, in the  Senate inquiry on which I've been  sitting we've heard some very

interesting economic evidence about  cautioning us against making the  liquidity too mobile because if liquidity  can shift between banks with no

barriers whatsoever, then that can  make the system less stable than it  should be. So I'm . . . it's a technical  question about which I am agnostic.

GILBERT: Okay.

EMERSON: Competition is good, more competition  is better.

GILBERT: All right.

EMERSON: That's what we want, competition.

GILBERT: Trade Minister, Craig Emerson, Senator  George Brandis, as always . . .

BRANDIS: Thank you.

EMERSON: Thanks, Kieran.

GILBERT: Thanks for a lively chat today.





