













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW

WITH VIRGINIA TRIOLI AND MICHAEL ROWLAND

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

17 JUNE 2011





Subjects: Winter Sleepout in Melbourne; domestic politics; live cattle  exports to Indonesia; regional processing of asylum seekers;  conviction of Abu Bakar Bashir





E & O E - PROOF ONLY

MICHAEL ROWLAND:  Now, as we've just mentioned, the federal government's plan to send  asylum seekers to Malaysia is going to be challenged in the High Court.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  For more, we're joined now by the Foreign Minister, Kevin Rudd, who's  been sleeping rough overnight on the streets of Melbourne, as part of the annual CEO  Winter Sleepout.

Kevin Rudd, good morning. Did you get any sleep?

KEVIN RUDD:  Oh, not much.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: [Laughs]



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

2



KEVIN RUDD:  But, then again, I don't think I'm Robinson Crusoe there. There’re about 170  chief executives from a whole bunch of companies here, and I think everyone's snoring kept  each other awake. So, there you go. But right across Australia…

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  I was just imagining…

KEVIN RUDD:  Right across Australia, good thing to do for homelessness.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Indeed. And something's happening right around the country. I imagine  you just sat up all night networking the lot of you, is that right?

KEVIN RUDD:  Oh yeah, right, yeah.

[Laughter]… a good effort around the country for Vinnies and raising some important cash  for homelessness. So, an excellent cause.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Now, I don't mean to be rude here, but you're actually not CEO anymore,  so it does strike me as a little odd that you became involved in the CEO Sleepout.

Do we intuit from this that you'd like to be CEO of the Australian Government again?

KEVIN RUDD:  Nice try. I'm here at a Vinnies sleepout for folks who get invited by Vinnies.

So, happy to do it. I've got a longstanding passion for homelessness. In fact, as Prime  Minister, it was the first white paper I commissioned.

And the Government continues to roll out an extra 20,000 units of social housing, large  investment in homeless services.

In fact, later this morning here in Melbourne I'm visiting Common Ground, which is newly  built. Accommodates a large number of people in inner Melbourne with support services,  psychological and otherwise, for people with mental illness.

So, we're making progress. There's still a long way to go and that's why I'm here.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  I do, nonetheless, want to ask you about that story that seems to have  really caught some currency in a lot of the papers today, what's been described as possibly  two screaming matches between you and Julia Gillard yesterday. Did they take place?

KEVIN RUDD:  Of course not. That's just - you know, that's just fabrication.

The bottom line is, as anyone around the House would know, we engage in conversations all  the time about what's going on in the policy debate and what the Prime Minister and I were  discussing yesterday, at some length, was the challenges we face with Indonesia over live  cattle and how we move that forward, and that's what the conversations were about.

So, I think people are just in a bit of frenetic overdrive at the moment, and I think they  should all just calm.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

3



We've got some real work to do and the challenges with our friends in Indonesia is one of  them on the question of live cattle, but there's a bunch of others in the foreign policy  domain which I'm engaged in as well and which I'm in regular contact with the Prime  Minister.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Are there people suggesting to you at the moment that you should not let  go of an ambition to return to the leadership to become Prime Minister again?

KEVIN RUDD:  Sorry, I missed the question because I've got a lot of background noise here.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  I understand. Are there people still suggesting to you in the parliamentary  party that you should not let go of the ambition of being Prime Minister, of being leader  again and being Prime Minister again?

KEVIN RUDD:  Look, I just think everyone needs to pop a Mogadon here.

The answer to your question is, no.

And on top of that, can I say I enjoy my work as Foreign Minister. It's important for the  country. There's a whole bunch of challenges we're engaged in right across the region, right  across the world. I'm into all that up to my armpits.

That's what I'm doing, that's what I'm enjoying doing. And I think it’s time everyone just  calm down and got behind the Prime Minister at a time when the country faces real  challenges. And that's what I think everyone should be in the business of doing.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Well, let me return then to one of those key conversations you would  have had yesterday, and you said it was about the relationship with Indonesia.

In your view, has that very important relationship with Indonesia been seriously  compromised by the way that the live cattle export issue has been handled?

It would seem - I mean, up until now, no senior member of the Australian Government has  even gone to Indonesia and spoken to them directly about this.

KEVIN RUDD:  Well, I think there's a real problem in the premise to your question, which is  that when we engage with our Indonesian counterparts it necessarily has to be on the  ground in Jakarta. First of all, I had long…

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Maybe for this one it does.

KEVIN RUDD:  No, hang on, hang on, let me answer your question.

When this decision was taken by the Cabinet, I was immediately engaged in discussions with  my Indonesian counterpart Minister, Marty Natalegawa, at a conference we were both  attending in Europe and we discussed this matter thoroughly.

Also, on top of that, other ministers of the government - the Trade Minister, the Agriculture  Minister - have been in direct contact with their counterparts.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

4





On top of that, our embassy in Jakarta, through our Ambassador, is directly engaged on the  issue as well.

So, I think the premise of your question about flying backwards and forwards to Jakarta is  not well placed.

We do business with each other all the time on the phone and that's as we've always done  it. And we'll manage this one through, although there'll be some challenges on the way.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Now, the premise of the question really was about whether this had been  well handled at the beginning.

If you'd been back in Australia during the time of that Caucus discussion about ceasing the  live export trade, would you have voted for it?

KEVIN RUDD:  Well, your question about Caucus or Cabinet, I'm not quite sure, but the  Caucus had a discussion about this a few weeks ago, and I was a participant in that  discussion.

When it comes to handling the decision on the suspension of the trade with Indonesia, my  job as Foreign Minister is to be out there into the business of working this through with my  Indonesian counterpart, and that formed a large slice of our conversations with the  Indonesians, as I said, which we, Australia, and the Indonesians were attending a conference  together in Europe and that's what we spent our time on. That's how foreign ministers  conduct business wherever we are in the world.

We'll find our way through this. It's hard. I'm acutely conscious, as a Queenslander, of the  challenges this represents for the cattle industry in Queensland, the Territory and the West.

I'm acutely conscious of some of the diplomatic challenges with our friends in Indonesia, I'm  acutely conscious of the impacts within Indonesia itself, within the meat industry, and I'm  acutely conscious of animal welfare standards. And our challenge is to bring these things  together and to get it right. It'll be a challenging process, but we'll come through in the end.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  You've got a number of bushfires yourself, it seems, as Foreign Minister  right now though, and I note that you said yesterday that your ambition was to be seen as  one of Australia's better foreign ministers.

But with the tensions now with Indonesia; you had them existing with East Timor with the  failed attempt to set up the regional processing centre there, how do you rate yourself so  far?

I mean, you have more bushfires than I would imagine you'd want to have right now as a  well-functioning foreign minister.

KEVIN RUDD:  Well [laughs], the business of foreign policy and the business of all foreign  ministers is to deal with the challenges of the day as they arise, as well as setting long term  foreign policy directions for the country. We're…



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

5





VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Yes, but some of these challenges are self-created, have been created by  the Australian Government itself.

KEVIN RUDD:  Well, I think - let's just step back a bit again from the premise of your  question. You talk about unauthorised people movements across our region, but the  assumption is that we're somehow Robinson Crusoe here.

There are 13 regions in the world at the moment conducting regional discussions and  negotiations about regional agreements for the proper processing of asylum seekers  worldwide.

We're the first region to have reached an agreement with our partners in the region,  through what's called the regional framework which we adopted in Bali about three months  ago.

The ongoing discussions which the Immigration Minister is having with his counterparts in  the region, they'll work their way through.

They're complex, they're hard. But let's not assume that the asylum seekers challenge is  unique to this challenge. Every foreign minister I meet in the world is dealing with these  challenges.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  All right, can I just very quickly because I've kept you for a long time and  your time is short. Your response to the High Court action being launched on behalf of one  refugee family. Does removing them to a third country breach Australian and international  law, as the lawyers will be arguing before the High Court?

KEVIN RUDD:  Well, if these matters go to the courts, I don't make comment on that,  because there are legal processes in this country which ensue. The thing about this country  is that we are…

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  You're perfectly entitled to make a comment on that. It's heard before  judges. You can't scandalise the judges, there's no jury. It's absolutely perfectly appropriate  for you to make a comment on that, Kevin Rudd.

KEVIN RUDD:  Your question was, what do I think of the matter going before the courts.

My answer to your question is, if it goes before the courts, it is a matter for the courts to  determine. The government, through the Immigration Minister, is confident of the  government's legal position.

If it's to be tested before the courts, it'll be tested by the judges as they work their way  through the law.

That is the way in which this country works because it is a country of laws. We've responded  to High Court determinations in the past in relation to a number of matters on asylum  seekers policy going back a decade. That will happen again.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

6



As I said, the Immigration Minister, advised by the Commonwealth legal officers, is  confident of the Government's position.

There's one other thing, which is actually why you asked me onto this program, which you  haven't asked me about, and that's about the conviction of Abu Bakar Bashir in Indonesia. I  don't know whether you want to talk about it or not.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Of course, if you want to make a comment on that, please, go ahead.

KEVIN RUDD:  Well, thank you, that is why I was asked to come on this program.

On the question of Abu Bakar Bashir, which is of deep interest to many, many Australians,  he has been sentenced to 15 years imprisonment.

I think this may bring some comfort and some relief to Australians who have suffered the  terrible loss of friends and loved ones to terrorism in Southeast Asia and in Indonesia.

The bottom line is that Abu Bakar Bashir at 72 years old, this represents a significant  sentence.

There'll be some controversy about the length of the sentence - I understand that - but we  respect Indonesia's legal system.

But the other thing I'd say is this, in our bilateral cooperation with the Indonesians on  counterterrorism since Bali, we've now had something like more than 600 arrests of terror  suspects in Indonesia, and something in excess of 550, I'm advised, convictions [inaudible]  progress on these questions and this is an important determination by the Indonesian  courts.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Good to talk to you this morning, Kevin Rudd; thanks for your time.

KEVIN RUDD:  Thanks very much.

MICHAEL ROWLAND:  Doing remarkably well for…

VIRGINIA TRIOLI:  Someone who got very little sleep.

MICHAEL ROWLAND:  Did very well.



END

