

THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE



Transcript  ABC News Radio

12 September 2011

E&OE

Subjects:  asylum-seekers, Nielsen poll, carbon price, leadership.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: A bit more noise expected in  Federal Cabinet in a meeting in  Canberra this morning, settling on  a new asylum-seeker policy  before Parliament resumes later  today.

The week's opened with another

disastrous opinion poll for Labor.  One of the Ministers at today's  Cabinet meeting will be the Trade  Minister, Craig Emerson. He's  speaking to Marius Benson.

MARIUS BENSON: Craig Emerson, Cabinet is

meeting this morning to settle on  an asylum-seeker policy - one  that backs offshore processing -  and then that deal will go to

Caucus at nine o'clock Canberra  time. Is there any chance that all  Labor MPs, when they gather at

that Caucus meeting, will reject  the deal put by the Prime Minister,  and Cabinet?

CRAIG EMERSON: Well, there's a compelling case for  offshore processing, and I'm not  going to in any way pre-empt the  deliberations of the Government,  including the party room. But the  argument here is that we need to  break the people-smugglers'  model, and onshore processing  doesn't do that.

BENSON: Is it a problem that offshore

detention, offshore processing, is  contrary to the Labor Party's  platform?

EMERSON: Well, let's see how the

deliberations go today. I simply  am not going to pre-empt them,  because we need to have a  genuine discussion about this.

BENSON: There is another poll out today, a

Nielsen poll, and it is again

disastrous for Labor. You're  getting nowhere from the very low  primary vote you've had for some  time in that poll; Julia Gillard  actually going backwards. Does  that surprise you?

EMERSON: Well, we're going through some

very challenging times. And I  reckon there'll be a poll - the way  we're going - every second day,  maybe every day; maybe twice a  day. And if we were to govern  ourselves, and govern the

country, on the basis of opinion  polls, we'd be doing nothing else  than rolling out of bed and

checking the polls.

The Australian people don't want

that.  What they want is a

determined Government, a party  that will govern in the national  interest, not for some sort of  political opportunism; and also  one that will make the decisions  that are necessary to secure the  country's future, whether it be on  asylum-seekers, whether it be on  sound economic policy instead of  Mr Abbott's economic Hansonism  - they expect governments to  make the tough decisions. That's  why we were elected; that's  what's expected of us; that's what  we'll deliver.

BENSON: But these tough decisions that

you say you're taking - and paying  a price in the poll - these are

actually contrary to Labor

principles, as declared. The

asylum seekers: offshore

detention contrary to the Labor  platform. The carbon tax, which  will be debated this week: that's  not a Labor policy that you're  suffering in fighting for; that's a  Greens policy. That was not the  Labor policy before the election.

EMERSON: Indeed, we have consistently said

that we wanted to put a price on  carbon. That's what we're doing,  and this particular arrangement  has a three-year fixed price  permit, followed by a floating  price...

BENSON: Yes, that fixed permit is the

carbon tax. That's the Greens’  policy, which was the price of  forming a minority Government  with their support; not a Labor  policy.

EMERSON: If I could just finish, this is a three-

year fixed price permit, followed  by a floating price.  Last time we  put up the Carbon Pollution  Reduction Scheme, which was a  one-year fixed priced permit  followed by a floating carbon  price. It's a difference of two  years.

Now, some people want to call

that a carbon tax. That's fine - we  understand that. Why wasn't it  called a carbon tax last time,  when it was a one-year fixed price  permit, compared with a three-year fixed price permit?  It is, in  fact, a market-based mechanism.  We have said consistently we  want to put a price on carbon, and  the best way of doing that is

through a market-based

mechanism.

BENSON: Kevin Rudd is preferred as ALP

Leader, by 44 per cent of voters,  according to the Nielsen poll; Julia  Gillard just 19 per cent. Why is  Kevin Rudd so popular?

EMERSON: My sole interest is in supporting

Julia Gillard as the Prime Minister  of Australia, and getting on with  the hard policy work. I think you  understand from my background,  Marius, that my interest is in  policy; doing the right thing by the  nation. That's what we're doing  with Julia Gillard as the leader,  and that's what we'll continue to  do.

BENSON: But you were one of those who

removed Kevin Rudd last year  and replaced him with Julia

Gillard. Is it time for you, and  particularly the Right faction of  which you are part, to say ‘we  made a mistake’?

EMERSON: I've always backed the leader.

And if you look at that, my record,  I've always backed the leader.  And the reason that I've backed  the leader is pretty simple.  One:  basic loyalty; two: leading a party  and leading a country if the party  is in Government, is a hard job,  and it's a challenging job. And it's  best to let people do that job  without talking about leadership  changes all the time. I'm not  interested in leadership changes;  the Caucus is not interested in  some sort of merry-go-round  here. What we are doing is

focusing on the important issues  for this country. So these are the  sorts of policy contrasts that are  available to the Australian people.  They're available now; they'll be  available at the next election  under the leadership of Julia  Gillard.

BENSON: Craig Emerson, thanks very

much.

EMERSON: Thank you, Marius.

BARTHOLOMEW: The Federal Trade Minister, Craig  Emerson, speaking with Marius  Benson there.





