



PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS UHLMANN  7:30  14 SEPTEMBER 2011



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Offshore processing

HOST: Julia Gillard, welcome.

PM: Thank you.

HOST: What will you do if Tony Abbott rejects your call to amend the law to  allow offshore processing?

PM: Well I’m going to keep speaking to Mr Abbott and providing briefings to  get him to work with the Government to amend the law. So Chris let’s take  this in order, the position is we will bring amendments to the Parliament next  week to the Migration Act, we’ll brief Mr Abbott on those amendments on  Friday, it’s our expectation he’ll be able to sit there and have a full briefing and  we are simply saying to Mr Abbott whatever is his preferred plan in relation to  refugees and asylum seekers, the Migration Act needs amending to give  government the power to have people processed offshore with legal certainty  and he should work with us to do that.

HOST: Surely, but what if he says no?

PM: Well I’m going to keep putting that position to the Leader of the  Opposition.

HOST: But it looks likely that he will say no and you must have a fallback  position?

PM: First things first, it’s a matter for the Leader of the Opposition and his  judgement.

HOST: Do you regret dismantling the Pacific Solution?

PM: This is not an easy policy area, it’s been vexed in our national debate for  a long period of time. When Chris Bowen came forward with this innovative

plan to work with a third country, to work with Malaysia for a transfer  agreement, I did think it was a new way forward, I do think it sends the  strongest possible message of deterrence and that’s why we’re working to  implement it including amending the Migration Act.

HOST: That’s all been patched up because you had a solution that did stop  the boats, 288 boats in five years before you came into government, after you  came into government - 288 people I should say, after you came to

government, 11,600. You had a solution, you dismantled it, surely that’s  where the problem started?

PM: Well Chris I think that’s a gross over-simplification of all of the things that  have happened, for example you’ve forgotten the civil war in Sri Lanka which  got people on the move, so there are a broad range of circumstances here,  global circumstances, that cause people to move. Regional-

HOST: So it was all push factors?

PM: Regional circumstances that cause people to move-

HOST: It had nothing to do with you?

PM: Chris, I don’t think you can pretend that there wasn’t unrest in Sri Lanka  that caused people to get on the move and cause us-

HOST: Can you pretend that the changes that you made had no effect?

PM: Chris, let’s be frank about this. There will always be global factors and  regional factors that cause people to get on the move, we’ve seen one in our  own region in the last few years in relation to Sri Lanka, we are still seeing  people from Afghanistan turn up on our shores in boats, we’re seeing  increasing numbers from Iran, so this is a problem that moves and changes  depending on global circumstances and what’s happening in different parts of  the world. So that is the circumstance that we deal with.

There will always be one big pull factor for Australia which is it’s a very  desirable place to live, we understand that. We’ve got to get our regional  settings right which is why we work through a regional process and we’ve got  to work for new innovations that send strong deterrence messages and that’s  what the Malaysia arrangement is.

HOST: At the heart of this, when people look at this externally and they see a  solution (inaudible) and they see the boats start to rise up with your  Government coming into power, then they hear about East Timor and now the  Malaysia solution, isn’t the question one of competence, that your  Government has not handled this competently?



PM: Well at the moment the question is one of law and that is the  circumstances we find ourselves in after the High Court decision and Chris we  are looking to put ourselves back in the position we believed we were legally  before the High Court decision and which the Howard Government believed  itself to be in and acted upon. So the High Court decision was unexpected

and I thought it was disappointing, now we do need to act to amend the  legislation so that we can implement this new and innovative arrangement  with Malaysia which will send a strong deterrence message.

And let’s be very clear about the advice to us about past policies and plans.  The advice to us is that boat turn arounds worked, the advice to us is that the  Pacific Solution obviously had a sort of shock factor when it was first put into  effect but now people smugglers know that you go and you get processed in

Nauru, well, you know you can get resettled in Australia.

HOST: Now on carbon tax, of course you said that you are on the right side of  history but again, isn’t the problem that you’ve got there not one of whether or  not you’ve got a good policy, it’s the problems you’ve got with your own  legitimacy on the question because before the last election you said there  wouldn’t be a carbon tax?

PM: Well Chris, once again let’s have a go at the facts, I know that they’re not  fashionable sitting here in Parliament House when we go to Question Time  everyday and listen to some of the nonsense spoken by the Opposition. At the  last election I spoke to the Australian people about action on climate change.  I’ve always believed that putting a price on carbon was the best way of doing  that. I’ve brought to the Parliament a package that has a fixed price for the  first three years, effectively a carbon tax, and then gets to the emissions  trading scheme that I spoke about during the election campaign.

HOST: During the election campaign you talked about community consensus  and a citizen’s assembly, that you need to build community consensus before  you’ve moved on.

PM: During the election campaign I talked about the need for action on  climate change and when I said the words during the election campaign about  not having a carbon tax I meant every word of it. Then in this Parliament,  which I didn’t expect, I had the opportunity to act and to achieve what this  nation has been striving for a long period of time now. When I had the  opportunity in the Parliament yesterday to introduce the legislation I spoke of  words of my predecessor Barry Jones more than 20 years ago taking about  action on climate change. So this is the time to get it done and we will  legislate through this Parliament.

I talked yesterday about the judgement of history but Chris I think we are  going to get to a situation very soon where Mr Abbott is in a position that is  not only on the wrong side of history but he’s going to be going to Australian  families and saying ‘I want your tax cut back, I want your family payment  increase back’.

HOST: The questions that have been put to you are perhaps questions of  competence and legitimacy that go beyond any policies that you might have.  How do you overcome those sorts of problems, that the questions are about

you and not your policies?

PM: Well, and how do you put that Chris? I mean let’s get real about  examples here. Of course the Opposition uses language about legitimacy, it is  still smarting -

HOST: You don’t think you have any questions for that?

PM: Well the Opposition is still smarting from not being the government and  so they use words of abuse and they speak about legitimacy. Our democracy  is one where government is formed in the House of Representatives and  government has been formed. And I serve as Prime Minister because I  command a majority in the House of Representatives, that’s how our  democracy works. And I really think it’s probably - people should think to  themselves when they hear these cat calls from the Opposition, well what’s  their actual answer to some of these policies? Mr Abbott came to the  Parliament today to give his speech on carbon pricing - 30 minutes, one  sentence about his alternate policy which was factually incorrect.

HOST: But you reject any suggestion of any notion that there is a problem  with your Government in convincing the people of the Australian electorate  that you have problems with competence and legitimacy?

PM: I’m well aware, Chris, that we are Government with a lot of hard work to  do, but we are a Government that is governing legitimately in accordance with  the rules of our democracy. Mr Abbott’s insults are about his political  advantage rather than bringing to the Australian people any alternate policies  and plans and so his insults should be seen as a thin veneer to cover up that  lack of policy alternate.

HOST: Is being Prime Minister what you’d imagined it would be?

PM: Look I had a very good insight into this job before I took it; I understood  what it would be and I understood the weight of the responsibility that would  come with it. And this job isn’t about wandering around doing what’s popular  and it’s not about worrying about next fortnight’s opinion polls, it’s about

working through the best thing for this nation for the long term and we are  doing that. And I understand how difficult the carbon pricing debate is, no one  would understand that more than me, but when I spoke those words

yesterday about being on the right side of history I was absolutely convinced  they were true, I am convinced they’re true, just the same way they were true  when Labor brought Medicare in and just the same way they were true when  we brought superannuation to this country, bitterly contested by the Liberals  every step of the way.

HOST: Julia Gillard thank you.

PM: Thank you.

[ENDS]

