Transcript of National Conference interview on ABC News 24

Simon Crean > Transcripts > 2011 > Transcript of National Conference interview on ABC News 24

Transcript of National Conference interview on ABC News 24

03 December 2011  SCT075/2011

Topics: National Conference issues

LYNDAL CURTIS: We're joined by the Regional Australia Minister Simon Crean. Simon Crean we just  heard from Joe de Bruyn, who believes that Labor will lose votes because of the position taken by the party  today. Do you think there will be an electoral backlash, there will be an electoral cost for the decision to  change the platform?

SIMON CREAN: No I don't. I think that what you saw in there was the Labor Party reflecting passionately,  strongly, different views. The Labor Party coming to a view, but saying that when it comes to the legislative  changes, when it comes to the parliament, that should be a conscience vote. So I think that all members  having the opportunity to vote according to their conscience was an important outcome in the debate.

LYNDAL CURTIS: There were passionate views on both sides reflected at the conference. There would  be passionate views on both sides reflected in the community as well. Is there a prospect that people who  would vote Labor will decide not to because of this?

SIMON CREAN: Look, I've made this point in the lead up to this conference. People will make decisions  about who they vote for at the next election on a whole range of issues. I do not believe this is going to be  the determining factor, quite frankly, in many people's minds.

It may be with some, maybe with some, and it can - it'll cut both ways in many senses.

But what they're more interested in is leadership on the question of how the economy is going to be  strengthened, and how the benefits of that economic growth are going to be shared in the broader  community.

That's the real question of equality and opportunity and tolerance and all of those values that people talked of  in there today. They used it to argue their case, but they believe in those principles because it applies to so  many other issues.

LYNDAL CURTIS: As is the nature of conferences of this type, the areas where there's not a lot of  disagreement, and areas, particularly on the way Labour is running the economy, on the things it's done on

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT075_2011.aspx (1 of 3) [26/03/2012 1:22:16 PM]

Transcript of National Conference interview on ABC News 24

health and education don't get a lot of debate. Do you think people do differentiate between looking at the  conference where there are divisions on issues like same sex marriage and on refugees, between that and  what the government is doing; they don't see this as a party divided?

SIMON CREAN: I think they look at the broader picture, they rate the government on a range of measures.  They rate the government on whether it's steering the economy in the right direction. They rate the  government on whether, having made that judgement, are the benefits being distributed fairly, they rate the  government on how it sees it coming at a whole manner of debates through a value set, because a lot of  people relate to political parties on the value, not necessarily the issue.

I think that anyone who suggests this is going to be the make or break of this government is kidding  themselves, quite frankly.

LYNDAL CURTIS: One of the things which really hasn't been debated on the floor of the conference is the  fact that Labor's stocks, if you look at the published opinion polls, are very low. And do you think the  conference should be looking, should be acknowledging that, looking at why that is happening and ways to  pick the vote up?

SIMON CREAN: It should, but what they shouldn't also do is confuse popularity with leadership. And  leadership, if you're really setting the country up for the future, requires some pretty tough decisions to be  taken in the first part of the term.

That's what we've done. We have taken many tough decisions, some of them unpopular, some of them  deeply unpopular, until of course the full explanation is made as to how it is going to benefit.

That's the climate change debate. I mean many people take the view that this was as narrowly focused as a  new tax. It's not. It's putting a price on carbon to ensure that we do a very simple thing: change people's  behaviour to improve the planet, but interestingly, to give us some important economic opportunities.

I was out the other day at a landfill site, where they're converting the methane from the landfill into energy.  They're also able to get credits to offset, and they can trade the credits, so this is an economic win as well as  an environmental win.

And until we get out and explain what those examples are, based on the legislation that we've passed, then  there will still be some of that confusion. So we're going to be rated on all of those things.

I think the interesting aspect that has happened over the last four weeks is where some people had a doubt  that we would last the full term. They don't share that doubt now.

They see us as a government that is well and truly embedded, will run its full distance, and has got a strategy  and a platform of reform. This conference is debating that reform.

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT075_2011.aspx (2 of 3) [26/03/2012 1:22:16 PM]

Transcript of National Conference interview on ABC News 24

This conference is not just endorsing and reminding people as to what we've done over the past four years,  it's talking about what we're going to do for the remainder of the term. And when you look at it, 760,000 jobs  created in four years, that is the largest four year block of job growth in the history of this country.

And it's 160,000 more than John Howard in his last four years, and we had to put up with a global recession.  And we're forecasting another 300,000 jobs. Now that is good news for all of those households that are  looking to security and ambition aspiration. That's what Labor's about: ensuring they have that opportunity.

LYNDAL CURTIS: You've been a former leader of the party. You were a member of the government and  saw the election that Paul Keating won, and the function held afterwards where Mr Keating acknowledged  that he'd been able to win that election because of the ones by the - he, elections won by the man he  deposed, Bob Hawke.

Yesterday in her speech, Julia Gillard talked about every post war Labor Prime Minister but didn't talk about  Kevin Rudd. Should she have? Should she acknowledge him and help heal the wounds that still exist?

SIMON CREAN: I think the conference, the party, the video presentation, all acknowledges the very  important contribution that Kevin has made. There was no acknowledgement of my role as leader too, but I  didn't get too offended by that [Laughs].

I think all of us play a role in this game. And what is important is for this conference to really be proud in its  history, proud in its culture, but to understand the opportunity through a strengthened re commitment to that  culture, to that set of values, but to modernise it in a way that reflects the aspirations of the current  generation.

That's our task, and I think that we've got a great legacy around which we should be proud. No one should  ever forget it. It's important for the conference to remind us of it. The most important thing about the  conference though is to talk about the future, not the past.

LYNDAL CURTIS: But you don't think Mr Rudd is being airbrushed from Labor Party history?

SIMON CREAN: No, of course he's not, of course he's not. And anyone who suggests that I think is being  mischievous, but there's been a lot of mischief around this issue in recent months.

ENDS



Print

Last Updated: 5 December, 2011

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT075_2011.aspx (3 of 3) [26/03/2012 1:22:16 PM]

