PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH JONESY AND AMANDA  WSFM  27 JUNE 2011



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Carbon price

HOST: The Prime Minister Julia Gillard is here. Is that true Prime Minister, do  you like car chases in a movie?

PM: I don’t mind a car chase, but sometimes they go on too long. There’s a  right length for a car chase.

HOST: What did you think of the one in the Blues Brothers?

PM: Blues Brothers I’m a fan of.

HOST: See?

PM: I’m sorry Amanda, I’ve let you down, but I am a fan of the Blues Brothers.

HOST: You’ve just ruined the sisterhood here Julia, forget climate change and  asylum seekers, this is where you’ve lost a vote.

HOST: Well, let’s talk, if we may, Prime Minister about climate change. I’m a  believer in the fact we do have to do something about this and I’m just so  disappointed in the way this is being handled, and the way Australians feel  that they have the right to dictate policy. I think a politician has to be like a  good parent and say ‘look I’m doing something for the future’.

75 percent of us though, this morning I’m seeing a poll, think that it’s been  badly handled. In your heart of hearts, where do you go from here, what can  you do?

PM: What you do Amanda is keep pushing through because it’s the right thing  to do, so it’s the equivalent of saying ‘eat your vegetables’, I suppose. We are  going to say that we have to price carbon, it’s the right thing to do to tackle  climate change and I understand people are anxious, I understand that people  are worried about cost of living pressures, but overwhelmingly Australians do  believe that climate change is real and the best way of dealing with it is by  pricing carbon, asking our big polluters to pay a price. They’re sensible  business people, if something that used to be for free now costs them money,  they’ll go ‘Gee, how can I reduce that expenditure? How can I reduce the  carbon pollution I’m putting in the atmosphere?’ and that’s what we want them  to do.



And whilst people are worried about cost of living pressures, we will be using  the money we get from polluters to assist families, so nine out of ten  households will get tax cuts, or an increase in payments, that means the vast  majority of them won’t lose a cent and for our lower income households  around three million of them, we will be providing a safety net, an extra 20 per  cent above the impact of the carbon price on them, because we know that  they’re the ones with the tightest budgets.

HOST: Do you ever thing to you yourself ‘we should have just snuck this  through’?

PM: I think having the national debate is a good thing and making sure people  understand what we’re trying to achieve is a good thing. We’re at a difficult  stage in this debate, we will have all of the details available for people soon,  we’re working on that very hard.

Now that is a few weeks away, but we will be able to explain to people exactly  what it means for them, for their family, for their household budget. Every  detail, so they will be able to sit around at the household table with the  calculator and work out what their tax cuts means, what their increase in  family payments means, what their pension increase means for them.

HOST: Do you wish you’d waited til then before announcing this? It’s given  everyone in the media a free kick at you, because you haven’t had the figures  at your fingertips?

PM: The best way of doing it was to announce the framework and then  consult, particularly with business, to make sure we get all of the details right  and protect Australian jobs as we do this. So, if you want to just put the  political lens on it and say ‘is this a really period for me, and for the  Government’, yes it’s a difficult period. But we’re doing the right thing and so  we will work through difficulties to deliver the right policy for this country’s

future.

HOST: Because I think about you, I think about you a lot Julia, I think-

PM:-Thank you.

HOST: Well I do. Remember the time you brought the cheesecake in here  and you are a nice lady. But then I think about you, you must have so much  pressure on you at work. I can imagine, like say when you see, Kev, Kevin  Rudd, have you spent time in a room alone with him, because that would be  awkward.

PM: Certainly we have and talked through foreign policy questions, we work  together professionally and well. Kevin Rudd is very focused on the work he is  doing as Foreign Minister. He’s incredibly good at it, it’s his life’s passion, that  diplomatic and foreign affairs work and he’s pursuing it in the interests of  Australia. Takes him around the world, very stressful, tiring work, but he

enjoys doing it, because he wants to see our country have a strong voice on  the world stage.

HOST: It’d be interesting the small chat though, how does it start when you’re  in the office then, you sort of say ‘Hey Kev, how are you?’, ‘Julia, what’s been  going on, how’s the Bulldogs going?’.

PM: We’re all adults and of course this is, I’m not going to underestimate the  hurt and difficulties that Kevin’s had to work through and they’ve been on  display, people have seen that in the press conference he gave, for example,  on the day I became Prime Minister. So, of course this was a big blow for  Kevin Rudd, but he’s also a very resilient person and very focused on doing  the right thing by the country, and that’s using his talents around the world, so  Australia - we’re a middle power, we always like to use the terminology ‘we  punch above our weight’ on the world stage.

Well, if we are going to punch above our weight it requires us to have the  power of the best advocacy and Kevin Rudd is well placed to do that for the  nation.

HOST: When you’re talking about hurt and disappointment, do you take it  personally that your personal ratings are so low?

PM: I don’t because I’m absolutely convinced that the decisions I’m making  are the right decisions for the nation. Now I could have taken another course,  I could have said “Gee, I can sit at the Prime Minister’s desk and I can make

the most popular decisions, the easy decisions, how can I work out a scheme  for free money for all, or something like that’. I could just do all the easy  popular stuff, it’s not who I am and not what I wanted to do in this job, what I  wanted to do in this job was make the right decisions for the nation’s future.

Now, they may be decisions that the community finds tough now, and that  may show in a whole series of ways, but if they’re the right decisions then I’m  determined to see them through.

HOST: Well said Julia and as an offer to you, if you do get married, Amanda  and I are happy to MCs at your wedding, free of charge and Amanda will not  read any inappropriate telegrams. I’m just saying there, so if you do get  married and really we would cost a fair bit for a wedding.

HOST: But for you, OK, for free.

PM: Well, I’m very chuffed by that very generous invitation. In the modern age  I’m not sure we really do telegrams at weddings, do we? Maybe we do  naughty emails as an alternative.

HOST: All right, I’ll read those.

HOST: Don’t give her any ammunition, Prime Minister.

PM: Any more ideas.

HOST: Please. Julia Gillard, thank you for joining us.

PM: Thank you very much.

HOST: Thank you, bye bye.

[ENDS]



