



Hon. Robert McClelland MP  Attorney-General



Attorney-General Transcript  Page 1 of 11

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW ON AUSTRALIAN AGENDA WITH PETER VAN ONSELEN

SKY NEWS

SUNDAY, 22nd MAY 2011

Subject: Pre-selection, Sharia Law, People Smuggling, Legal Aid, David Hicks, Mining  Royalties, CDDP and AFP Investigations, Indigenous Recognition in the Constitution.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

PETER   VAN ONSELEN: We're joined now by the Attorney-General, Robert McClelland.                                      Mr McClelland, thanks for your company.



ROBERT   McCLELLAND:     My pleasure.

VAN ONSELEN:  Can I just go to a story that's in today's Melbourne Age first just to ask  you about it and it says, "Labor is poised to lose a cabinet minister at  the next Federal election with Attorney-General Robert McClelland  failing to win the support of pre-selectors in his blue ribbon Sydney  electorate."  Is that true?



McCLELLAND:     No, not at all.   The story reported a purported conversation and that  just hasn't occurred and I'm confident that I have the support of pre-selectors in my party so that's…



VAN ONSELEN:  And you'll be running at the next election?

McCLELLAND:     And I'll be running at the next election.  That's a total beat up and  entirely false.

PAUL KELLY:               But it would still be your ambition to remain as Attorney-General in  the next Parliament?

McCLELLAND:    Yes, it is.  It's a very satisfying position, very broad of course but these  things are subject to a number of vagaries, elections and  appointments and so forth but I'm very enthusiastic about doing the  job.









Attorney-General Transcript  Page 2 of 11

PAUL KELLY:               We heard a submission this week from the Islamic Councils to  introduce Sharia law into Australia. What's your response to this as a  matter of principle?



McCLELLAND:     Look, as a matter of principle the reason people come to Australia is  because of our vibrant democracy underpinned by the rule of law  -  and in terms of multiculturalism, when it comes to the legal system  we have one culture and that's the Australian legal system.



So there is no way there will be any change to our legal system.  It's  based on eight hundred years of heritage and indeed it's why our  country is so desirable for others seeking to come here.

PAUL KELLY:                  So there will be no compromise on this?

McCLELLAND:     There will be no compromise on that.  That rule of law is so  fundamental to our democracy, to our tolerant society, to our  engagement and communication and regulation.  It is absolutely  fundamental.



CHRIS MERRITT:   Is it just a separate body of Sharia law that you're against or are you  against Sharia principles totally being incorporated in any manner  under the Australian legal system?



McCLELLAND:     The Sharia principles will not be incorporated into the Australian legal  system.  There are some groups who have their own informal dispute  resolution bodies that are based around their churches in Australia.   None of these can surpass or supplant Australian law.



They can't, through those bodies, contract out of Australian law.  Now  they can have some informal dispute resolution techniques regarding  commercial law matter, business law matters and so forth to try and  accommodate each other but at the end of the day if there is any  conflict at all the Australian law and the Australian legal system  prevails.

CHRIS MERRITT:           Are you worried that this submission doesn't accept or doesn't appear  to understand fundamental basic civics?

McCLELLAND:     I think more could be done in the area of civics education generally  and I certainly think more could be done in terms of those who are  new arrivals to Australia to inform them of our heritage and of the  value of the rule of law, the fundamental importance of the rule of  law and our legal system, how it operates.







Attorney-General Transcript  Page 3 of 11



I think there is a case for more resource and more effort to be put in  that area but it really - before people comment on these issues they  really should do it from a position of information.

PAUL KELLY:                But Attorney, there's a deep problem, isn't there, because all this goes  to multiculturalism?  I mean the submission here is about  multiculturalism.  There's confusion in the community about what  multiculturalism means and the argument here is that because we  subscribe to multiculturalism therefore we should be prepared to  accept elements of Sharia law.  Isn't that the real problem?



McCLELLAND:     We have a vibrant multicultural community.  When it comes to our  legal system however we have only one culture and that's what  people need to accept and that culture is at the heart of the operation  of our democracy, our thoughts and so forth.



PAUL KELLY:                Well does that mean that multiculturalism doesn't apply in the legal  system?

McCLELLAND:     Yes, it certainly means multiculturalism does not apply in the legal  system.  We have one legal system, it's based on the heritage we have  going back to the period…



PAUL KELLY:                   Well this is a new doctrine.  This is an important new doctrine surely.

McCLELLAND:     Our legal system is the legal system we've inherited.  We have applied  it in the broad through our constitutional principles that go back to  the Westminster system.  A bit from the United States, a bit from  Switzerland, modified and adopted and brought up to date over the  past 110 years through our courts.



VAN ONSELEN:  What about for indigenous Australians, is the Government more  tolerant of Aboriginals having elements of their own sentencing and  circle law and so forth than perhaps people coming from abroad that  might want to institute something like Sharia law?



McCLELLAND:     Again if there is any conflict between customs, even Aboriginal  customs and the Australian legal system, the Australian legal system  will prevail.  Now there…



VAN ONSELEN:  But is there a yardstick here where there's more tolerance perhaps  because they're indigenous Australians than from people coming from  overseas.







Attorney-General Transcript  Page 4 of 11



McCLELLAND:     Cultural - background issues of cultural heritage are specifically  recognised in legislation, very relevant of course to the whole native  title framework.  Not so much relevance in the criminal justice system  but in those broader issues of heritage and native title and so forth  then the legal system does recognise that.



PAUL KELLY:                 If we could just go to the Malaysian solution.  The Immigration  Minister, Chris Bowen, has made it clear that he thinks that this might  be challenged in the courts, that the legality of this action of the  Government might be challenged in the courts.



Now the Government's proposing to send boat arrivals to Malaysia.   Can this be done under existing statute?  Are you quite confident of  that or might new laws be required?

McCLELLAND:     No, we're confident that it can be done on the basis of existing  statute.  If you can recall after the Tampa incident the Federal  Parliament instituted legislation.  That legislation was tested in the  courts and confirms the legal powers to undertake this program.  So  we're confident of the legal process.



PAUL KELLY: So that's Howard Government legislation post Tampa?  So you're  relying upon John Howard's laws?

McCLELLAND:     Well those laws as have been adopted.  I'm not sure whether those  specific provisions have since been modified but certainly they're part  of the statute book from that period of time.



Ultimately supported, I might say - certainly the second version that is  part of our statute books - was ultimately supported as I recall by the  Labor Party in opposition.

PAUL KELLY:                Now a separate question.  Are you confident that this Malaysian  solution is consistent with our own obligations under the Refuge  Convention?



McCLELLAND:     Yes, we are and documentation that confirms the agreement will  reflect that.  In particular it will reflect that the people will be treated  with decency and it will certainly confirm that there will be no  refoulement of these people to a country where they could be placed  at risk.









Attorney-General Transcript  Page 5 of 11

PAUL KELLY:                But just what guarantees are we going to get about decency because  we know the appalling conditions under which asylum seekers and  refugees are held in Malaysia?  So what is the quality of decency  you're talking about?



McCLELLAND:     Well again this is a matter where Chris Bowen has been negotiating.   He has also spoken in terms of oversight, a taskforce, a mutual task  group from both Australia and Malaysia to look at these issues, to  ensure the system is operating fairly not only in terms of those who  are returned but in terms of those who are selected to come to  Australia.  That there is equity and fairness in principle in how they  are selected.  So they will all be the subject of discussion.



VAN ONSELEN:  Attorney-General, you say that it's consistent - the Malaysian solution  is consistent with our international obligations but it's not consistent  with what the former immigration minister, Chris Evans, first said  when he removed the so-called Pacific solution.



Now he's still the leader of the Government in the senate.  He said  that it was his proudest day in politics when he did that.  We're now  moving back to a system of not only offshore processing in Malaysia  but the solution being even broader than that with offshore  processing perhaps in Manus Island and so forth as well.

Which camp do you fall in?  Were you as proud as Chris Evans then  when that was the policy or are you as proud as Chris Bowen is now  as the policy moves in the other direction?

McCLELLAND:     It's - when you're dealing with - it's not something that you can  necessarily be proud of when you're dealing with issues that apply to  acute human distress.



The reality is that people seeking asylum to Australia are in desperate  situations however, they are seeking to come here.  So it's not  something that as a politician or a political leader you gloat about but  the reality is this regional solution to which you've referred has arisen  from the recent Bali discussions and the region is saying well, what's  the draw card?

The draw card is in fact the lifestyle we have in Australia and it's  recognised if they are not going to become countries of transit that  we need to have this cooperative framework.







Attorney-General Transcript  Page 6 of 11

VAN ONSELEN:  Is it a fair characterisation to say that the Government tried to be  compassionate at first but then realised over time that this issue was  more vexing than it perhaps thought it was and has to toughen things  up as a consequence?



McCLELLAND:     As the situation became more acute it's self-evident that stronger  measures had to be taken.  Now that has applied in respect to  penalties, our legal framework but also the region as a whole has  come to that realisation I think in particular through the recent Bali  accord that this is certainly a developing regional problem, affecting  all countries.  We therefore need a regional solution and hence these  options.



Essentially it is about breaking the market so that the people  smugglers don't have a product to sell and we're trying to cooperate  to achieve that.

CHRIS MERRITT:        If I could just take you to legal aid for a moment.  After every budget,  state and Federal, the legal profession always complains there's not  enough funding for legal aid.



We've had a look at the accounts of one of the funds in Victoria that  tops up legal aid and found three groups, asylum seeker lobby groups,  getting half a million dollars.

Do you think that's appropriate?  Do you think that the states need to  address their own funding for legal aid before turning to the  Commonwealth?

McCLELLAND:     Certainly they shouldn't be applying any Federal funds for that  purpose.  Our Federal legal aid funds are tied to those areas of work  that we identify.



It's our view that the legal aid commissions should prioritise work on  behalf of Australians - now that can be from family law matters, child  protection matters, domestic violence matters, indeed in the criminal  legal system.

So I think legal aid commissions and the legal services need to have  services as their primary focus.

CHRIS MERRITT:         Would you like to see the restrictions on those state grants brought  more into line with the restrictions that apply to Commonwealth  grants?







Attorney-General Transcript  Page 7 of 11



McCLELLAND:     Well certainly we have - and last year we gave an additional $154  million to the legal sector generally that - for community services. We  gave that with a view to furthering representation of Australians in  the litigation - in the court and litigation process.    We would like that to be prioritised most certainly by state bodies  who, after all, are always at the Commonwealth for more funds.  So if  they are going to do that they need to be completely transparent as  to how these funds are being applied.

PAUL KELLY:                 In relation to David Hicks' attorney, he was under an obligation not to  benefit from book writing.  What is the Labor Government doing in  relation to this matter?



McCLELLAND:     The Australian Federal Police have investigated the [Hicks] matter and  a brief has been provided to the Director of Public Prosecutions.  The  Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions is the body that will  decide whether action is taken under the proceeds of crime  legislation.



CHRIS MERRITT:          What's your view on it though?

McCLELLAND:     Well, as an attorney it would be unhelpful to his case and any  potential action if I expressed that.  It is the Director of Public  Prosecutions call and I wouldn't think it would be too long before a  decision would be made in that area.



PAUL KELLY:                 If I can just ask you again about David Hicks.  There's a new group  formed to support him.  He's made submissions to the United  Nations.  As far as the Labor Government is concerned is there any  need for a review into the David Hicks matter into how he was treated  and does he have any case for monetary compensation at all?



McCLELLAND:     No, there is no proposal to undertake any review.  We will be  responding to the international application he's made to the  international human rights body.  We will be responding on behalf of  the Government but there's no proposal to have any inquiry and  certainly no proposal to offer any compensation.



VAN ONSELEN:  I'd like to ask you about something that I mentioned in the  introduction to the program about the WA royalties issue.  There is a  constitutional and a legal issue here, given that states have the rights  to royalties, yet you've got a Commonwealth Government that's  looking to bring in a super profits tax for the mining industry.







Attorney-General Transcript  Page 8 of 11



I just want to show some words from Julia Gillard during the week and  then come back and get your reaction on this.

McCLELLAND:     Sure.



PM:             This has undermined the Liberal Party's campaign against the mineral  resource rent tax.  The Liberal Party went to the last Federal election  saying to everybody in this nation, but most particularly the people in  Western Australia, that mining companies couldn't pay more tax and  here they are, the Liberal Party, imposing more tax on mining  companies.



What a hollow campaign.  This is an own goal by Premier Barnett.  He  knows how GST works and he knows under the current system that  this means that GST money will be moved away from Western  Australia as a result of the work that an independent body does, the  Commonwealth grants commission.

We will be adjusting infrastructure expenditure for Western Australia  to protect the Federal budget.  The budget is coming back to surplus  exactly as promised.

VAN ONSELEN:  Attorney-General, the Prime Minister didn't look too impressed with  the moves by the WA Premier and the state treasurer there of course  is your counterpart as Attorney-General as well.  Is it understandable  though?  I mean, at the end of the day the Federal Labor Party wrote  a blank cheque for states that wanted to increase royalties at one  level when it said that it would rebate to mining companies any  increases in royalties.



All that's happened here from what I can see of it is that the West  Australian Government have called that because they want the  money in their budget.

McCLELLAND:     We ultimately like all governments to act cooperatively here.  I mean,  what's the purpose of the resources tax?  It is to ensure that the  benefits that we currently obtain from mining are available for a  future generation.



You mentioned a constitutional issue.  There's - there is a  constitutional issue about benefits or compensation being paid to the  states occurring on an equitable basis.







Attorney-General Transcript  Page 9 of 11

Now how it's structured, whether it goes to the companies or  whether it goes to the states is all a part of that but in the context  where all states and the Federal Government know that there are  these principles of equity around I would have liked to have thought  that the West Australian Government would have engaged more  cooperatively.

I obviously don't know any precise conversations but - before  embarking on that particular measure or taking that particular  measure but again these are the things I think the Australian people  would like all governments to sit down and work through.

CHRIS MERRITT:          Attorney, I'd just like to ask you about the prosecution policy of the  Commonwealth.  A document that's leaked out of the AFP makes it  very clear that the prosecution of whistleblower Allan Kessing there's  some questions about it.



The evidence that could have supported the defence and undermined  the prosecution case was never revealed by the AFP.

Are you worried about that?



McCLELLAND:     Certainly any litigation on behalf of the Commonwealth needs to be  undertaken in accordance with the model litigant principle and that  includes an obligation to disclose to all parties all relevant facts that  are in possession. So I'm not sure of the full details of it but I  understand it’s something that is being examined.  I don't know the  relevance of it, what judgment was made as to why it wasn't or the  extent to which it was disclosed but…



CHRIS MERRITT:          Neither do I.  I've asked the AFP and they refuse to explain  themselves.  Does someone need to get on top of this?

McCLELLAND:     [I’ve explained] the basic principle is that all agencies need to be  aware.  Certainly not only Government lawyers but all agencies need  to be aware of that model litigant principle that applies across the  Commonwealth.



PAUL KELLY:                 The Government is committed to a constitutional change in relation  to the indigenous people and there's a debate and consultation  proceeding about this.



As attorney, given the history of constitutional change in this country,  given that one of the critical issues will be how ride ranging might this







Attorney-General Transcript  Page 10 of 11

constitutional change be, what is your view on the most prudent way  to proceed in terms of either widening the lens or keeping it fairly  narrow?

McCLELLAND:     In this case the perfect can be the enemy of the good.  I think those  who are striving to achieve a perfect outcome should be wary of  defeating a good outcome.



It's my view that this has got real prospects of getting up.  I think it  needs to be of substance but not over done is my gut feel.  Having  said that obviously we'll wait to receive the report of the advisory  body.

PAUL KELLY:                 But just a quick follow up question, how important will be  bipartisanship on the question…

McCLELLAND:     Absolutely.  It would be really unfortunate in this issue if there was  any substantial opposition and I've had - in fairness I've had some  preliminary discussions with my counterpart, George Brandis, nothing  but goodwill and cooperation and I think this has got real prospects.



VAN ONSELEN:  Attorney-General, we'll let you go though I just want to ask one last  final question.

McCLELLAND:     Sure.



VAN ONSELEN:  Last night the Prime Minister had a go at humour and she made some  observations about Tony Abbott.  I just want to play it very quickly  and then get your reaction.



PM:           The truth is he is acting more like the love child of Sarah Palin and  Donald Trump.

VAN ONSELEN:  Tony Abbott I think described himself once as the love child of  Bronwyn Bishop and John Howard, I'm not sure which is a worst  image but a Prime Minister doing that is that all just good fun or  should she be trying to look more Prime Ministerial than that at the  moment when she's under a bit of pressure in the polls?



McCLELLAND:     That's obviously her call.  She is taking on big issues and she's driving  those big issues irrespective of the controversy and the offset of those  but I think that always needs to be the focus.









Attorney-General Transcript  Page 11 of 11

VAN ONSELEN:  All right.  We'll let you go.  Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, I  appreciate your company on Australian Agenda.  Thank you.

McCLELLAND:     My pleasure.





