Julie Bishop

ABC Radio National, Breakfast with Fran Kelly

Tuesday, 13 September 2011

Subjects: Labor’s failed Malaysia people swap deal; offshore processing; Nauru; carbon tax

E&OE…

FRAN KELLY    Well the Opposition says it will not decide its position on the planned changes to the  Migration Act until it sees the legislation and a full briefing from the Government. Julie Bishop is  Deputy Opposition Leader, she joins us now in Canberra. Julie Bishop welcome to Breakfast.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning Fran.

FRAN KELLY    The Prime Minister says the question for Tony Abbott is crystal clear, does he  believe the executive government should have the power to implement its policy on asylum seekers  and refugees, full stop, yes or no? What is it, yes or no?

JULIE BISHOP    The Government’s policy won’t work. The Government’s Malaysia swap deal is only  temporary, it is a one-off arrangement, it is no solution. It expires after 800 asylum seekers are sent  there then its over, and Labor will be back where it started.

About 1,000 people have come by boat since Julia Gillard announced her policy. About 400 have  arrived since her agreement with Malaysia was signed. At this rate the deal will be exhausted and  Labor will be back with no policy at all.

FRAN KELLY    So that is the basis on which the Coalition does not support the Malaysia solution,  that it won’t work?

JULIE BISHOP    Well there is more than that. Julia Gillard has absolutely no credibility on this issue.  She used to claim that offshore processing was wrong in principle then just prior to the last election  she embraced offshore processing with her East Timor solution.

She also emphatically ruled out sending asylum seekers to any country that was not a signatory to the  UN Convention on Refugees, Malaysia is not a signatory.

So the question is, is there any principle that Julia Gillard once claimed to believe in that she won’t  now trash?

FRAN KELLY    Well isn’t there also the question over the Opposition’s credibility on this? I mean the  Opposition has always supported offshore processing not onshore, why wouldn’t you back changes to  the Migration Act to ensure the legality of offshore processing?

JULIE BISHOP    Our policy has been in place for a decade and it has been proven to work. We had  offshore processing on Nauru, we had temporary protection visas, we worked quietly and respectfully  behind the scenes with Indonesia, we turned back the boats when we were able to do so, and it was  the whole range of policies that worked.

Now Nauru is a signatory to the UN Convention on Refugees…

FRAN KELLY    It’s about to be. It is not a signatory yet is it?

JULIE BISHOP    It’s signed up, it comes into effect on the 26th September, it is a signatory. Australia  can enter into a binding agreement with Nauru, we can guarantee the protections for asylum seekers

on Nauru. It has worked in the past as a deterrent. Julia Gillard can’t provide any of those guarantees  in relation to Malaysia.

FRAN KELLY    Could you though? The advice from the Immigration Department, from the Head of  the Department to Tony Abbott and others in the Coalition, was that given the High Court ruling you  can’t guarantee that Nauru would be legal. In fact their advice was that it almost certainly is not legal.

JULIE BISHOP    Well it is interesting that you raise advice. Labor received advice in 2008 from the  Immigration Department that closing down the detention centre on Nauru would lead to an increase in  people smuggling and the Government ignored that advice. They were warned that the Howard  Government policies were working to stop people smuggling and yet Labor went ahead and  dismantled those policies that were working.

FRAN KELLY    So you don’t accept the Department’s advice on the legal interpretation of the High  Court ruling in terms of Nauru, you just don’t accept that?

JULIE BISHOP    We believe that the Nauru solution that we had in place worked, it was proven to  work. Now the Government also received advice from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  regarding conditions in Malaysia and the Government ignored that advice and went ahead with a non-binding agreement where they couldn’t possibly provide guarantees as to the protection available to  asylum seekers in Malaysia. So it is a bit rich for the Government to be lecturing us on advice from its  own Departments.

FRAN KELLY    Well I am less interested in who is lecturing who, than what the Coalition is going to  do in terms of changes to the Migration Act. In principle is it right to say you want the Migration Act  changed to allow offshore processing, is that correct?

JULIE BISHOP    We will have a look at what they propose. The problem with this Government is  there is a vast difference between what they say they are going to do and what they end up doing. So  we will have a very close look at the proposals that they make.

But our point is this, we have a policy that has been in place for 10 years and has been proven to  work. And it is not just offshore processing on Nauru it also includes temporary protection visa and  working with Indonesia in relation to the turning back of boats where it is safe to do so.

FRAN KELLY    Can I just ask you though, in principle does the Coalition support a change, or want a  change to the Migration Act to make sure offshore processing, even if it is just Nauru, is legal?

JULIE BISHOP    Well we believe that there is nothing in the High Court decision that would prevent  us re-establishing the detention centre on Nauru…

FRAN KELLY    But that is not the advice from the Department.

JULIE BISHOP    Well the fact that Nauru - if you read the High Court decision, and I am sure you  have, the High Court spelt out that Nauru was different, and now that Nauru is a signatory to the UN  Convention on Refugees, and Malaysia is not, the Minister would be able to satisfy himself or herself  of those provisions under the Migration Act where the Minister has to be satisfied. You can do that in  relation to Nauru, you can’t do it in relation to Malaysia.

And we believe that the fact that Nauru is now a signatory to the UN Convention on Refugees is an  important factor.

I don’t believe that we need an amendment to the Migration Act for us to reopen the detention centre  on Nauru and for it to continue to work as it has in the past.

FRAN KELLY    You’re also then not persuaded by the argument from the Department of Immigration  that Nauru would not work as a deterrent now because people know that the majority of people

granted refugee status, were granted refugee status, and were resettled in Australia and New  Zealand therefore it won’t be a deterrent?

JULIE BISHOP    Julia Gillard is desperately talking down Nauru as an option. It would be the final  humiliating admission for her that she’d been wrong on every aspect of her border protection policies.  She’s even resorted to misleading statements in parliament about the success of Nauru as a  deterrent.

Yesterday she said that 95 per cent of those on Nauru were resettled in Australia. That is blatantly not  true. About 30 per cent were sent home, that is a deterrent. About 30 per cent were resettled  elsewhere, that is a deterrent. Only 40 per cent…

FRAN KELLY    What is the proportion? Let’s get this, there is always argument around the  proportion of asylum seekers processed on Nauru and found to be genuine refugees, what was the  proportion that ended up settling in Australia?

JULIE BISHOP    40 per cent came to Australia, that is a far cry from the 95 per cent…

FRAN KELLY    Not 40 per cent of the genuine refugees…

JULIE BISHOP    …Julia Gillard claimed in parliament yesterday. But you have to look at all of the  people that were sent to Nauru, 30 per cent were sent home. Now that sends a message of  deterrence. And for the Government to continue to talk down Nauru in the way that they are shows  they are terrified that in fact Nauru will work again as it did in the past.

FRAN KELLY    Just to try and get some clarity into this. The Government will in a week or so move  to change the Migration Act, will the Opposition support a change to the Migration Act and add some  kind of rider, for instance they’d only allow the Minister to send to countries that are signatories to the  UN Convention?

JULIE BISHOP    Fran we’ve not yet seen the draft legislation, we’ve not yet seen what the  Government proposes. Sure there has been a lot of talk about what might be in the draft legislation  but until we’ve seen it we’re not going to state what our position will be and I think that is a very valid  position to be in.

FRAN KELLY    You have a position though?

JULIE BISHOP    We have to see what they are proposing.

FRAN KELLY    Alright on another issue Julie Bishop, the Government will introduce its clean energy  legislation today, 18 bills in total and it wants to get the debate going tomorrow. The Coalition has said  not enough time has been set aside for this debate. How long does it take to say no?

JULIE BISHOP    Well this is the formalisation of Julia Gillard’s broken promise to the Australian  people that there would be carbon tax under the government she led.

There is a lot of information we are yet to see. We haven’t seen the modelling the government  promised, we haven’t seen the bills, we are told this is going to be the most transforming aspect of the  Australian economy in decades and yet the Government’s trying to ram this legislation through.

It will have a dramatic impact on businesses, on industry, on workers, on households…

FRAN KELLY    But you’re going to oppose it.

JULIE BISHOP    …and we believe that it deserves to have sufficient attention applied to it.

Now just ramming these bills through is bad public policy making and I think the Australian people  deserve better than that.

The bills should be scrutinised, we should be given sufficient time to do it. The Government has a  political agenda but we should be given the time to look at these bills very carefully.

FRAN KELLY    Is this a political tactic on the part of Coalition though to try and drag this out and  hope you might win Government, the Government might come early, some kind of collapse in the  numbers?

JULIE BISHOP    The Government hasn’t even provided the modelling that they said this carbon tax  was based upon, they haven’t produced the legislation that is meant to contain the compensation.

Now there are proper procedures and processes and this should not be rushed through the  parliament.

FRAN KELLY    Julie Bishop, thank you very much for joining us.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.

FRAN KELLY    Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop joining us from Canberra.



