Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



MTR 1377, Mornings with Steve Vizard

Monday, 02 May 2011

Subjects: Osama bin Laden; Libya contact group; East Timor

E&OE…

STEVE VIZARD    We are getting breaking news at 15 minutes to 1 o’clock; Sky News is  reporting that Osama bin Laden is dead, the US has his body, President Obama we  understand is about to make a statement at any moment in relation to that.

Now it is breaking news, it hasn’t been confirmed, but we do understand, Sky is reporting,  that Osama bin Laden is dead and the US is in possession of his body. We do understand that  President Obama will be making a statement in a few moments about that.

On the line, Julie Bishop, Deputy Opposition Leader joins us. Julie, thanks for your time.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure Steve.

STEVE VIZARD    This is very important news particularly given what Osama bin Laden,  both as a leader and as a symbol, has meant to the commitments by the West in terms of  intervention in the Middle East and in their so-called war against terrorism.

JULIE BISHOP    Indeed, if the reports are correct let us hope that this helps dismantle the  terrorist organisation that Osama bin Laden inspired. You will recall of course he claimed  responsibility for a number of brutal terrorist attacks, including the carnage of September 11  when civilian planes were hijacked by his Al-Qaeda operatives and flown into the World  Trade Centre and the Pentagon causing a massive loss of life. So if this report is true we can  only hope that this is beginning of the dismantling of his terrorist organisation.

STEVE VIZARD    And of course his presence, his leadership, his activities have meant so  much in terms of the way world events have gone over the last decade. Huge commitments of  resources by the West, by the US and also by Australia following the US to places like  Afghanistan in many ways consequential of Osama bin Laden’s activities. So it will be  interesting to see what President Obama has to say when he makes his statement in just a few  moments.

JULIE BISHOP    Osama bin Laden is responsible for the war on terror as a result of the  attacks that he and his organisation made on civilian populations. The West - countries like  the United States, Britain, Australia - have dedicated enormous amounts of time and effort to

ensure that our countries are safe from these kind of terrorist attacks. Afghanistan began  because the Taliban was giving safe haven to bin Laden and his Al-Qaeda operatives and we  were determined to ensure that Afghanistan never again became a haven for terrorists such as  Osama bin Laden.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop at the time I recall US President George W Bush, this is at  the time of 9/11, said it was absolutely important and I think it was largely symbolic to kill or  capture bin Laden and that was echoed very recently by General McChrystal who said we do  need to capture or kill bin Laden really as a symbol of making progress in the war against  terrorism. How important is his capture, both alive or dead, in terms of progressing this so-called war against terrorism?

JULIE BISHOP    Symbolically I think it is extremely important, it was the main focus of  the Afghanistan intervention, it was to find and track down Osama bin Laden so that he could  no longer organise, direct, inspire others to carry out the kind of terrorist attacks that he  masterminded.

And you will note recently in one of the WikiLeaks cables, one of the US cables brought to  us courtesy of WikiLeaks, there were reports that Osama bin Laden had access to nuclear  weapons. That is a terrifying prospect that a terrorist organisation or a terrorist such as Osama  bin Laden could have access to nuclear weapons. So if this report is correct then hopefully  we’ll see an end to that kind of speculation as well.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop I would like to turn if I may - and we’ll wait to see what  happens in terms of confirmation of the death of Osama bin Laden and any remarks made by  President Obama. We’ll keep bringing people that as it comes to hand. I want to turn if I may  to other breaking news, we understand that Kevin Rudd has “won” a place on the panel to  guide the conflict in Libya. I am after your response to this particularly in light of the fact that  Kevin Rudd as our Foreign Minister was unable to procure the East Timorese Foreign  Minister to attend the Bali Process, a matter immediately affecting Australia’s future. One,  his capacity to play any role in Libya, and two, should he not be attending to matters closer to  home?

JULIE BISHOP    Indeed there are a number of concerns. What has the Government  promised in return for an upgrade of Australia’s position on this Libya contact group? The  Australian Government has now immersed itself into the very heart of the NATO/United  States intervention in Libya. I have called on the Prime Minister to spell out precisely what  obligations Australia has now assumed.

Today Kevin Rudd was defending the attack on the Gaddafi regime. Does the appointment of  Australia to this contact group mean that Australia shares responsibility for the military  strategy in Libya? And if there is an escalation in the military campaign is Australia now  committed or obligated in some way? What further responsibilities come our way as a result  of the Australian Government’s upgraded status?

So I think the Prime Minister has to be very clear about the commitments, the obligations, the  implications arising from the Australian Government’s upgrading of its role in relation to  Libya.

STEVE VIZARD    Indeed and particularly gratuitous remarks weighing into the debate  defending NATO’s mission in Libya particularly when there is reports about [inaudible] air  attacks including killing serval members of Gaddafi’s family who are - and these including  grandchildren - reportedly killed in NATO air strikes who are unrelated to the attack, and I  guess your point is why weigh into this debate and at what cost and for what implications to  Australia with seemly gratuitous remarks?

JULIE BISHOP    Well apparently Australian was admitted as an observer at the time of the  group’s formation last March, but the Prime Minister must reveal what commitments have  been made which have resulted in the upgrade of Australia’s status. Have we made any  military commitment? What are the implications that come from this change in status?

I am also concerned about the fact that Australia is the third largest donor of humanitarian aid  to Libya behind only the United States and the European Union. Now of course Australia has  to shoulder its fair share of the burden of international efforts but if Australia is providing  more because there is a reluctance to donate from nations closer to Libya and those with  greater strategic interests in the region then the Australian Government must explain why that  is so.

STEVE VIZARD    I also want to ask you about even if he can justify his attention and  involvement in Libya, given the matters that concern us at home particularly in respect to  asylum seekers, unresolved processing issues ought he not be better spending his time, or at  least a substantial amount of his time, focussing on Australia’s position in the Pacific?

JULIE BISHOP    I have expressed my deep concerns previously. The Government’s  attention has been diverted from what should be its foreign policy priority and that is our  region - Papua New Guinea, the Pacific Islands, the Solomons - there are some serious  challenges that require urgent attention.

You mentioned earlier East Timor, I know we spoke on Friday about this, I don’t know how  many times the President and Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign  Minister of East Timor and their Parliament have to tell Julia Gillard that they don’t want her  regional processing centre there, yet the Australian Government is still insisting that they are  still in discussions with East Timor.

Now we have to assume this East Timor idea will never happen and when Julia Gillard  replaced Kevin Rudd the Government has lost its way on asylum seekers. Well if East Timor  is off the table and Julia Gillard admits that she got it wrong, then she has to come up with a  plan B. And these are the sort of issues that I would hope Kevin Rudd would be focussing on.  He hasn’t been near the East Timor idea since it was floated so you have this deep conflict  between the Prime Minister and our Foreign Minister over the question of East Timor.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, Deputy Opposition Leader, really appreciate your time at  this seemingly quite important time with the breaking news that Osama bin Laden is reported  as having died and the US are in possession of his body. We are keeping you posted. We are  expecting that President Obama will be making some remarks about this breaking issue any  minute. Julie Bishop, very much appreciate your time.

JULIE BISHOP    Thanks Steve. We’ll watch and listen with great interest.

