Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia  Arrangement Wednesday, 02 November 2011

Interview with David Lipson, Sky News

David Lipson: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time. What's  the latest information you've had from Indonesia on the  number of fatalities here?

Chris Bowen: Well, look, we have six tragically confirmed  dead, including at least one child. There are around 20  missing and tragically I think we need to brace ourselves

that many, if not most or all of those people, will not be  rescued alive.

Lipson: Is Australia helping with the recovery effort at all?

Bowen: No, this is an accident well inside Indonesian water  and the Indonesian Navy has this situation, I'm advised,  well in hand and they haven't requested any assistance. It's  not in Australian waters or international waters; this is well  inside Indonesian waters.

Lipson: And is there any indication as to what caused the  boat to sink? Was it overloaded?

Bowen: Look, not yet. But I'd make this general point:  people smugglers will put people on any boat in any  conditions with any danger if there's a buck in it. And that's  why we've been working so hard to try and break this  business model and this is just yet again another tragedy at  the hand of people smugglers.

Lipson: Will Australia offer any additional assistance to any  of the survivors of this tragedy?

Bowen: Well, look, they're in Indonesia. We'll obviously  discuss this situation with the UNHCR and with the  Indonesian Government, but we have no particular plans.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 4 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179907.htm

But obviously, we deal with the UNHCR about matters  across the world on a case-by-case basis.

Lipson: So they won't be given any special treatment, the  people that have survived this?

Bowen: Well, look, we have no particular plans. Obviously,  our focus at the moment is talking to the Indonesian  Government about the rescue. They have it well in hand,  but obviously we have a keen interest given that these  people were very clearly heading towards Australia.

Lipson: Does the government have any new plans for a  new policy at all following this?

Bowen: Well, look, David, as you know, we spent the better  part of this year developing, arguing for a regional  arrangement involving Malaysia. All the expert advice to us  is that the Malaysia arrangement would break the people  smugglers' business model. It would work and we believe it  should be given a chance. This is a policy which has not  been given a chance to be implemented. We could pass the  legislation today and we could implement the Malaysia  arrangement tomorrow, and it stands ready to go.

Now, we've worked very hard based on all the expert  advice. We've achieved a regional framework, we've  reached this agreement with Malaysia which many people  said we wouldn't reach. We shouldn't let this opportunity go,  for a proper regional framework which governments have  been working towards for 20 years. We've actually  delivered one and yet it's blocked in the Parliament.

Lipson: So you're comfortable arguing that all the way up  until the election if need be?

Bowen: Well, I'm entirely uncomfortable with the situation  that Australia can't implement its policy for a regional  framework. I'm not comfortable with that at all and I do  believe that the government of the day should have the

power to implement its policies. We should be able to  implement the Malaysia arrangement; Mr Abbott, should he  ever become Prime Minister, should be able to implement  the Nauru policy.

Neither of us can do that at the moment. We've reached an  impasse and I do stress we could pass this legislation

Page 2 of 4 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179907.htm

today. Mr Abbott says you can have any offshore  processing you like, providing it's Nauru. That's not a  sustainable or acceptable position. The Prime Minister's  made it clear she's happy to make me available to Mr  Morrison to work through an arrangement. But the Liberal  Party just insists that they won't pass any legislation unless  it clearly only implements their policy.

Lipson: There was some cooperation yesterday with the  Opposition in changing the laws to ensure that people  smugglers are still guilty, even if their passengers are found  to be refugees. Why was that law changed?

Bowen: Well, look, we think it's important that the law be  crystal clear. There are some who would argue that people  smuggling should be legal. Well, we couldn't fundamentally  disagree more. And this is one instance where the  government and the Opposition have worked together. I  thank the Opposition for their support for this legislation  because it is appropriate that we make it very clear that  people smuggling into Australia is a crime, that the  Parliament very strongly has that view. I'd just like to see  that cooperation go to the next level and implement the  policy of both parties, which is offshore processing, through  the Parliament.

Lipson: If they're refugees, though, found to be refugees,  aren't people smugglers more like pilots carrying people  that desperately need our help?

Bowen: Let's not give any truck or any sympathy to people  smugglers. These are people who sit around, you know, at  nightclubs and places in Jakarta and elsewhere, don't risk  their own lives but order others to risk their lives, order poor  fishermen and peasants from Indonesia to crew boats and  make money off the misery of others. So I will not have for

one second any sympathy for these people. Let's not kid  ourselves that they are running some sort of humanitarian  operation. They are running a criminal syndicate for their  own profit.

Lipson: Chris Bowen, thank you.

Bowen: Thank you.

See: Index of Speeches

Page 3 of 4 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179907.htm

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179907.htm  Last update: Wednesday, 02 November 2011 at 15:21  AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 4 of 4 Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb179907.htm

