













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW

MEET THE PRESS

20 MARCH 2011

Subjects: Libya, Yemen and Bahrain; Japan earthquake; nuclear energy

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

HUGH RIMINTON:  First though, from Canberra, Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd, good morning  to you, Minister.

KEVIN RUDD: Good morning, Hugh. Thanks for having me on the programme.

HUGH RIMINTON: It’s good to have you here. Can you tell us what is the very latest that  you're hearing now on the situation in Libya?

KEVIN RUDD: Late last night, I spoke with the British Foreign Minister, William Hague, about  the current military situation on the ground and the likely commencement of coalition  operations. The Pentagon has confirmed this morning that those operations have  commenced. You would have seen the direct reports of the military assets that have been  deployed against the Libyan regime by coalition forces. The Australian Government fully  supports this military action against the Libyan regime because it is necessary to do  whatever is possible to protect the Libyan people and it is action which is entirely consistent  with the authorisation of the UN Security Council.

HUGH RIMINTON: Interestingly, there was a lot of talk of a no-fly zone in the lead-up to this.  But the very first actions of this conflict so far as the West is concerned did not relate to  Gaddafi's planes, but rather its assets on the grounds, armoured vehicles as we understand  it on the ground. Is this the template that we will see that is going to be not just against  aircraft, but against any military movements from Gaddafi on the ground?



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

2



KEVIN RUDD: As the Pentagon has stated this morning, this is the first phase in a multi-  phase operation which will be conducted by coalition forces. On the specific operational  characteristics of each phase, I do not intend to provide any comment whatsoever. I will,  however, refer to the powers which are entrusted to coalition forces through the UN  Security Council Resolution. There are two main parts of that Resolution. Paragraph four of  the Resolution provides a general authorisation for the use of all necessary measures by  participating states, to protect the Libyan people against the threat of attack from the  Libyan regime. That is a very strong head of power. Furthermore, in operational paragraph 8  of the Resolution, it deals with all necessary measures to enforce a no-fly zone. Of course,  heads of power enable the Coalition forces to engage widely in the support of the  protection and the Libyan people, which is the primary objective.

HUGH RIMINTON: What is the end game, Minister?

KEVIN RUDD: If you look very carefully at what the international community has agreed  through the UN Security Council, it is to protect the Libyan people.

HUGH RIMINTON: Is regime change necessary to protect the people? Is there any future in  Libya that you believe would be acceptable to the West that would see Muammar Qaddafi  retaining full or partial control of Libya?

KEVIN RUDD: Hugh, what I'm concerned about is moving step by step through what is a very  complex, dangerous and difficult military phase of the operation. Phase one of the  diplomatic work in getting the UN Security Council to embrace this course of action has  been hard fought, as you'll be aware. We are now into phase two which is the military  phase. It is dangerous. Spare a thought also for the Coalition airmen and other Coalition  military forces now putting their lives on the line to give effect to the will of the  international community. This is going to be a step by step operation. I think it is very  important not to get ahead of ourselves. We know how serious it got within the last 24  hours to 36 hours when we had Qaddafi's forces on the outskirts of Benghazi. And the real  threat of the butchery in Benghazi had the Coalition not acted.  It now has and Australia  supports that.

HUGH RIMINTON: Do you think that even with this action, is there any prospect at all that  Qaddafi using ground forces, may still be able to get into Benghazi which makes it very  much more difficult to operate from the air?

KEVIN RUDD: I am not going to comment on specific military scenarios. I do not think that is  productive and I do not think that is wise. But what I will say, and I reinforce what the  Pentagon spokesman said this morning, only about a half an hour ago, and that is Qaddafi is  in possession a significant military assets, significant air defence assets as well. This is no  walk in the park. This is a very difficult and complex military operation. I reiterate, it is a  military operation to protect the Libyan people which Australia fully supports for the  humanitarian principles which underpin it.

HUGH RIMINTON: What is your assessment of Qaddafi? He has been described as  deranged, as insane. I will just give you a little grab of how he was earlier this week just  before the no-fly zone.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

3





MUAMMAR GADDAFI, LIBYAN LEADER (WEDNESDAY) TRANSLATION: We will accept the  challengers. If it is from within, they will be crushed. If it’s from the outside, they will be  crushed. If it’s military, they will be crushed.

HUGH RIMINTON: There’s a sense that he is almost insane and yet he seems to have  conducted a hardline but quite rational defence of his own position there. How do you do  judge the man?

KEVIN RUDD: People can make whatever judgements they like concerning his mental state.  My responsibility as the Foreign Minister of Australia is to analyse the statements he makes  and the objective measures which he implements, all of which are of phenomenal brutality.  The threats he has made in relation to the civilian population, take your breath away.  Therefore, it has been absolutely imperative for the international community to act with its  combined military operation to stand in solidarity with the Libyan people who only three  weeks ago were all cheering on the road to Tripoli. This is a necessary and moral course of  action against an individual who is a brutal, bloody dictator, who has no qualms in bringing  about mass casualties in his own people, to cling on to political power.

It is obnoxious.

HUGH RIMINTON: I want to talk about Japan and Libya a little bit more with the panel but  just a quick question on domestic matters. The Prime Minister this week, in talking about  the mandate for a carbon tax, said she always supported the ETS, she did so in 2007 and she  did again in 2010. Is it your judgement that this Prime Minister always supported the ETS?

KEVIN RUDD: You will appreciate that all of my focus today and in recent days has been on a  combination of Libya, the Middle East and on Japan and the ongoing Consular operation  there. I do not intend to wade into domestic politics one bit other than to say this - the  government's position has been consistent, that we have supported the principle of a price  on carbon because it is necessary as part of global action to bring about a reduction in  global warming in order to deal with the real challenge of climate change. I'm prepared to  engage in more detailed debate at a later stage, but not today.

HUGH RIMINTON: We are going to take a break now. We will talk more on Japan and Libya  as well when we return with our panel, Peter Hartcher of The Sydney Morning Herald and  Stefanie Balogh of The Australian. And the St Patrick Day festivities this week prompted an  outbreak of Irish jokes about Julia Gillard and Tony Abbott and just how green are their  parties.

JULIA GILLARD, PRIME MINISTER (THURSDAY): There was a flurry this morning when his  staff tried to explain to him it was a Green event about a saint, and he had to be convinced  it was Patrick and not Bob.

TONY ABBOTT, OPPOSITION LEADER: It's good to see the Prime Minister wearing green,  without any prompting from Bob Brown.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

4



KEVIN RUDD, FOREIGN MINISTER: I know for a fact Tony, that my good friends Malcolm and  Joe are right behind you every step of the way.

HUGH RIMINTON: Welcome back. You're on Meet The Press with Foreign Minister, Kevin  Rudd. And welcome to the panel, Peter Hartcher of the Sydney Morning Herald and Stefanie  Balogh of The Australian.

STEFANIE BALOGH, THE AUSTRALIAN: Foreign Minister, good morning. How many  Australians remain unaccounted for in Japan and how many Australians are still hoping to  leave the country?

KEVIN RUDD: I spoke to our ambassador in Tokyo, Murray McLean, only about half an hour  ago before coming on air this morning. According to Murray and our analysis here in  Australia, we only have seven Australians unaccounted for. This is very good news given that  some days ago we started with a list in excess of 140. Our consular officials have been out  there working through each centre and we still have a team based at Sendai and we're still  working with our 220 plus consular team in Canberra to reduce these numbers right down  and that is what we are doing.

STEFANIE BALOGH: Are you satisfied that you have been receiving full and frank advice from  Japanese authorities about the state of the nuclear crisis there?

KEVIN RUDD: When the government adjusted the travel warning for Australia several days  ago, in relation to Japan, we put forward three reasons for doing so. The first was the fact  that so much of the infrastructure in Japan, in Tokyo and in northern Honshu, the main  island, has been damaged, affecting things such like power supply, water supply, food  distribution, schools opening and so forth. Secondly, we pointed to the continued possibility  of aftershocks. There was a significant one of those again last night, I’m advised. And thirdly,  continued uncertainty in relation to the Fukushima nuclear plant. It is for those reasons that  we put out those strong travel advisories for Australians and that is, if you were planning to  travel to Tokyo or to northern Honshu from Australia or anywhere else - don’t, unless your  presence there is essential. And furthermore, if you are in those parts of Japan, that is,  Tokyo and northern Honshu, you should leave, unless your presence there is essential. And  they're the reasons we put those advices forward.

PETER HARTCHER, THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD: Mr Rudd, does Japan have the nuclear  reactors under control?

KEVIN RUDD: I think this is still very much an evolving and dynamic situation. We in  Australia are deeply concerned about the current status of the reactors as is our  counterpart agencies in the United States, the International Atomic Energy Agency. That has  been our attitude basically from day one. We monitor this by the hour. The IAEA is  monitoring it by the hour. The Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Authority  is monitoring it by the hour. And we're doing everything that we can to practically support  our Japanese colleagues in a difficult situation.

But I'll be misrepresenting the situation if I said there was some certainty about this. It’s  because of the uncertainty that we have adjusted our travel advices.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

5





PETER HARTCHER: If one of the world's technologically advanced powers cannot safely  guarantee the management of nuclear reactors, is it time for the world to consider some  sort of international protocol or treaty on the use of civilian nuclear energy?

KEVIN RUDD: As I have said in other interviews on the question of nuclear energy, there is a  time and place for a full debate on that, given what has now happened in Japan. But I do not  think that time and place is right at this very moment as far as the Australian Government is  concerned.

The reason is, you know the position of the Australian Government, we don't support  nuclear energy in this country, but I have to say that all this has given the international  community some pause. But our focus now is on the crisis and dealing with the crisis.

PETER HARTCHER: OK. Well, let’s go back to the Middle East if we could. You have talked  about your strong support for the UN action to protect the people of Libya. Who will protect  the people of Bahrain and the people of Yemen who are being violently repressed by their  governments?

KEVIN RUDD: As far as Bahrain and Yemen are concerned, we're following those  developments particularly closely.

I mentioned before, in the middle of the night when I spoke with the British Foreign  Secretary William Hague, that we obviously discussed the timetable for operations against  Libya. We also discussed the situation on the ground in Bahrain and Yemen.

On the consular front, I draw people's attentions to the information contained in the  Australian consular advice for those two countries as we’ve got people in both of them.

In Bahrain, we have a very complex political situation unfolding because of the Shia-Sunni  split within that country. We have called for restraint on the part of all parties and we  monitor it particularly closely, as we are in Yemen. But this is a dynamic and unfolding  situation.

I have seen the reports last night, about 42 people being killed in Sana’a, the capital of  Yemen. But we are taking this one step at a time, Peter. That is the truth of it.

STEFANIE BALOGH: Mr Rudd, as you say, it is an unfolding situation. The UNHCR estimates  about 200,000 Libyans are looking to cross the border. Has Australia got any plans to take  any of them on a refugee status like we did after Kosovo?

KEVIN RUDD: Let me go to the High Commissioner for Refugees on the broader question of  Libya and our humanitarian obligations.

Again, late last night I spoke to the High Commissioner for Refugees, Antonio Gutteres and  Baroness Amos, the head of the United Nation’s Office for the Co-ordination of  Humanitarian Affairs and also the President of the International Council of the Red Cross.  The reason for those three is that they are right in the frontline of humanitarian assistance.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

6



Firstly, to get medical supplies into Libya itself and Benghazi and also to assist those in the  surrounding areas, that is, those excluding the Tunisian and Egyptian borders. We are  providing large-scale assistance, financially, for those institutions. Today, the government is  increasing its allocation to an overall allocation of $15 million to these agencies. That makes  us the third largest contributor worldwide to this humanitarian effort in relation to Libya,  after the United States and after the European Union.

Stefanie, on the other part of your question, Chris Bowen, the Immigration Minister has  already said that in terms of the Libyan crisis, that of course, requests made to Australia will  be considered through our normal processes and I would expect that to be the case.

HUGH RIMINTON: On Christmas Island, there was unrest there as you are aware in the last  week. The only policy that seems to be in view that’s going to be other than the one that  involves Christmas Island is the East Timor solution, as it’s called. What is progress there? Is  there anything that you can indicate to us that suggests that that is anywhere in sight to  take pressure off Christmas Island?

KEVIN RUDD: The Bali process meeting involving myself, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, as  well as other ministers, as well as regional foreign ministers right from around the region,  occurs in Bali later this month. We therefore will be obviously attending that. The  Indonesians and others have said that this is very much a matter for regional discussion at  the Bali process meeting and beyond. And that is where a full round of diplomatic  engagements will occur because the bottom line here is that we are dealing with a situation  as far as asylum seekers are concerned, which is not limited to Australia. It affects all the  countries of our region. It affects all the countries of the world.

We’ve just now been talking about Libya. If you are sitting in Italy, Spain and Greece at the  moment and looking at the massive instability in Libya, the prospect of large people  movements across the Mediterranean and through to the countries of Europe is large; that  is why global, regional and national responses are necessary.

HUGH RIMINTON: OK. You have a lot on your plate this week. Thank you very much for  starting your week with us, Kevin Rudd, Foreign Minister from Canberra.

KEVIN RUDD: Thanks for having us on your programme.

