Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



MTR 1377, Mornings with Steve Vizard

Friday, 13 May 2011

Subjects: Budget Reply speech

E&OE…

STEVE VIZARD    Well last night Opposition Leader Tony Abbott delivered his Budget  Reply speech blasting the Government, accusing them of hurting Australian families with its  economic management.

On the line now Deputy Opposition Leader, Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs Julie  Bishop joins me. Hi Julie, how are you?

JULIE BISHOP    Hi Steve, I am very well indeed.

STEVE VIZARD    There wasn’t a lot of mention of the details of the Coalition’s position,  figure wise, and there has been some criticism about that. Tony Abbott says it’s not my job to  put that up, it is my job to put out principles, to put out values and the like. Is that the case?

JULIE BISHOP    The speech set out a clear alternative to prove to people that they don’t  have to put up with a wasteful, incompetent, intrusive Labor Government. There is a credible  alternative.

We believe in efficient competent government, we don’t believe in punishing taxes, we  believe in showing respect for taxpayers‘ money and we appreciate the efforts of people who  work hard to get ahead in life and who are frustrated at seeing their taxes wasted on  government programs and then being taxed again.

But Tony Abbott did squarely confront the major issues arising from Wayne Swan’s Budget.  He addressed the massive blow out of nearly $2 billion in additional costs to handle the chaos  in border protection and detention centres and asylum seeker management, and the  Opposition has a detailed policy that would save that $2 billion.

He addressed the massive increase in the debt ceiling. Just after the Budget was handed down  on Tuesday night the Assistant Treasurer snuck in with legislation to lift the borrowing limit  to $250 billion. Now Steve you’ll recall the Howard Government inherited a $96 billion debt  from Labor. It took us 10 years to pay it off, in four years Wayne Swan has now increased the  debt to $107 billion and there is no end in sight. He has lifted the debt ceiling to $250 billion  for this debt binge.

We also pointed out that the Budget is based on heroic assumptions about China’s economy  and near continuation of the record prices we are currently getting for our exports. As Tony  Abbott pointed out, Labor’s claim it will return to the Budget to surplus isn’t based on  anything Labor will do to rein in its waste or introduce reforms, it is leaving it all up to the  Chinese economy to continue to grow.

But most importantly Tony pointed out that the biggest economic policy of the Government,  the carbon tax, isn’t even in the Budget. There is no mention of the rate of the tax, the  compensation the Government will have to pay to industries and households, the impact on  jobs. This is a multi-billion dollar initiative, a tax that cascades through every sector of the  economy, yet it is left out of the Budget.

STEVE VIZARD    And Julie Bishop, the way that Tony Abbott approached that was to say  that in any government that I have we would revoke that legislation. And he went further and  said it is the sort of thing we say should be put to the vote, as he said with the resources tax,  as he said with other government initiatives thus creating the suggestion that there ought to be  an earlier election. In respect of that proposition, should this Government run its full term?

Julia Gillard who is in Melbourne at the moment had this to say just a couple of seconds ago  to our own Matt Thompson.

JULIA GILLARD    This Parliament will go full term. I will decide when the election will  be and it will be in 2013.

STEVE VIZARD    Can I get your response to that?

JULIE BISHOP    I am surprised the Prime Minister is being so arrogant. This Government  lied its way into office. It wouldn’t be in Government if Julia Gillard had been honest about  introducing a carbon tax. So it is only there because Julia Gillard lied to the Australian  people, and if she is prepared to lie to get into Government she is prepared to lie to stay there  that is why no one has any reason to trust a word she says.

STEVE VIZARD    She had this to say, Julie, about last night’s speech by Tony Abbott. If I  can’t just play this to you.

JULIA GILLARD    First and foremost, Mr Abbott has to answer the question he absolutely  failed to answer last night. I mean he basically walked into the Parliament and said I don’t  want to talk about the Budget, I’m not going to talk about any Budget legislation, I am not  going to say anything about that, I am just going to complain and moan for 30 minutes. That  is what he did.

STEVE VIZARD    You partially answered that before, but what does it clearly come down  to? In just a couple of sentences, what is now the clear division between the Government that  we’ve got and what the Opposition is now putting up?

JULIE BISHOP    Well the Prime Minister spends a lot of time criticising Tony Abbott  because there is so little to sell in their Budget.

The Opposition has been setting the national agenda. We know there wouldn’t have been  funding for mental health in the Budget if Tony Abbott hadn’t put out our mental health

policy. We have extensive policies on welfare to work, water management, border protection,  mental health, economic independence for indigenous people, on the environment.

The Government’s even picking up our draft legation on victims of terrorism, on price  signalling, they are even adopting some of the savings we outlined in our list of $50 billion  worth of savings.

So, we are saying to the Australian people there is an alternative, we care about people who  work hard, who want to get ahead, we won’t impose punishing taxes.

And if the Government’s carbon tax is such a great policy, why doesn’t Julia Gillard give the  Australian people an opportunity to have their say on it? They’ve been denied that  opportunity, it is a fundamental restructuring of the Australian economy affecting jobs in  major industries, increasing household costs, affecting investment and the Australian people  have been denied their opportunity to have a say on it.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, appreciate your time. Don’t squeeze glasses too hard is my  advice to you.

JULIE BISHOP    No, I’ve got a steady hand.

STEVE VIZARD    [laughs] Julie Bishop, Deputy Opposition Leader and Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister, talking to us about Tony Abbott’s reply and Julia Gillard’s response.

