CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH PAUL BONGIORNO, JESSICA WRIGHT  AND MALCOLM FARR

MEET THE PRESS, CHANNEL TEN

SUNDAY, 7 AUGUST 2011

SUBJECTS: Malaysian transfer arrangement, carbon price, the  economy.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Welcome back to the program, Chris Bowen. Good  morning minister.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thank you Paul, good to be back.

BONGIORNO: Well, it does seem that the Australian public has no appetite  for the Malaysian solution. It seems they'd like you to be tough but now you  are too tough?

BOWEN: Well, this is a controversial area, Paul. Plenty of people will say one  particular policy is too soft or tough. We have the balance right. What this  does mean is that we take more refugees, refugees who have been waiting  for resettlement, who can't afford a people-smuggler or aren't inclined to risk  theirs or their family's lives.

We've seen the first of those refugees who'll arrive this week, publicised this  morning, the Taithoul family from Burma, who were forced into labour in  Burma, fled, and had been waiting in Malaysia for resettlement for almost  seven years. They are the forgotten side of this equation. There's lots of focus  of course, on the 800 people we send to Malaysia, that's perfectly  appropriate. But I think the Australian people do say that we should accept

refugees and I say - and I think many agree - that we can accept more. We  need an orderly process and this is what this arrangement delivers. A proper,  orderly process is part of a regional agreement.

BONGIORNO: Well, let's go to what's happening on Christmas Island as we  speak. It seems that there is a hunger strike going on?

BOWEN: Yeah look, as I said on May 7 when we first announced this, we  could expect protest, we could expect resistance and expect legal challenge.  And we do see these sorts of protests and it is perhaps unsurprising and we  had been prepared for this sort of protest. But the situation remains, we are  determined to implement this. We've been going through all the mechanisms  as outlined in the arrangement, as I've said publicly. And this sort of protest

does not change the outcome. People who come to Australia by boat can  work on the basis that they will be returned to Malaysia, regardless of any  protest activity that is undertaken.

BONGIORNO: Well, the Government set itself a time limit of 72 hours for  people off the boats, on to the planes up to Malaysia. 15 going tomorrow,  when are the rest going?

BOWEN: Well look, we're very advanced in our discussions with Malaysia, we  want to get it right. I've said from the beginning that 72 hours is the target  turnaround time from arrival at Christmas Island, but I've also said very  clearly from the beginning it would take some time to ramp up to that. We  want to make sure that the process goes as smoothly as possible. So it will be  done in tranches. We are going through that process and we are well  advanced in that process, as it is well-known.

BONGIORNO: Well, is the message that if you come by boat you'll all be  going to Malaysia?

BOWEN: Well, that's the very clear message: that you should work on the  basis you'll be returned to Malaysia. No blanket exemptions. And I know how  people smugglers work, Paul. And if there was a blanket exemption, they  would use that to further their trade. They would use that to say, 'Look,  you've got a blanket exemption, I can guarantee you're being processed and  resettled in Australia and then you can sponsor the rest of your family’. It is  not morally acceptable to me to provide that sort of loophole, to be able to  encourage more children or other vulnerable groups on the boats. We never  want to go through the sort of scenes we saw last year again, watching  children drown in our shores. And that's a very important message.

BONGIORNO: Well, we have a question from Twitter, from Belinda: "How  can Chris Bowen guarantee the Malaysian solution is going to stop the boats  when one arrived after the deal was announced?" And Minister, you have just  put out a statement saying that another boat has been intercepted. So, two  boats before the Malaysian solution starts working. Already you're being  sorely tested.

BOWEN: Well, I have said that we should expect people smugglers to test  this arrangement, of course we should. One signature does not provide that  sort of outcome. We have seen some effect, we've had about a thousand less  arrivals by boat than the same period last year. But I think for this  arrangement to be fully operational, have its full effect, then people  smugglers and asylum seekers need to see it in operation. And that's what  they will see in the very near future. It does take time. People talk about  Nauru solution working - 1,789 people arrived in the same time span after  the announcement of Nauru, compared to the 624 people who have arrived  before today's arrival. So, that's a big difference.

And as I say, people can expect to see this arrangement being implemented  across the region and people watching it being implemented. I think that then  means that asylum seekers and people smugglers will think twice and three  times and we will pull the rug out from under the people smugglers' trade and  business model.

BONGIORNO: The test of the success will be no more boats.

BOWEN: Well, I have made it very clear that we want to stop people making  that dangerous journey by boat. And I think that this has a huge impact on  the business model of people smugglers. Why would you spend $15,000 to  come to Australia by boat, risk your life, only to be returned to Malaysia,  where between 80 to 90 per cent of boat arrivals in Australia begin their boat

journey. You achieve nothing, and at the same time, we give those people  who have been waiting patiently for resettlement, who could not afford a  people smuggler in their wildest dreams, the chance of a better life in  Australia - that's something this Government's very proud of.

BONGIORNO: Time for a break. When we return with the panel, the  dilemma of sending children to Malaysia.

BREAK

BONGIORNO: You're on Meet the Press, with Immigration Minister Chris  Bowen, and welcome to the panel Jessica Wright from The Sun Herald and  Malcolm Farr from News.com.au. Well, the Federal Opposition have run a  relentless campaign on a tidal wave of boat people. They now accuse the  Government of going too far to stem the flow. Here's Scott Morrison on  Insiders this morning, talking about sending children to Malaysia.

RECORDING - Scott Morrison, Shadow Immigration Minister: They've driven  themselves into this cul-de-sac. Now they have to make a choice. Now, any  exception will be an exception, and that's the problem they now face. And  that will actually encourage kids to get on boats.

MALCOLM FARR: Now that's right, isn't it? An exception for one under-age  asylum seeker, one minor, is essentially encouragement for boatloads of  minors.

BOWEN: Well, I think that's why I've said that there will be no blanket  exemptions. People have criticised me for that. But that is the right decision,  to say, ‘no blanket exemptions’. It is appropriate that we consider each  vulnerable case on a case-by-case basis, which is what we have done and  what we'll continue to do.

FARR: That's an excuse, though isn't it?

BOWEN: No, it is not. It's a very clear message. Nobody will be able to doubt  this Government's resolve or people smugglers will not be able to sell the

product that they have sold, after they've seen this arrangement implemented  and very clearly implemented. It is appropriate that we say, ‘no blanket  exemptions’. That's why we negotiated it as part of this arrangement with  Malaysia in consultation with the UNHCR and IOM, appropriate support and  protection for children, access to basic education, the right to remain lawfully  in Malaysia. That is why we have negotiated those very important protections  in. It's very important, no blanket exemptions.

FARR: OK, they have no access to public education, and as I understand it,  no guaranteed access to health services.

BOWEN: They'll have guaranteed access to basic education, and basic health  services. And that's appropriate. We have done that to get the balance right.  We want the appropriate support, but it is basic support. Life in Malaysia is  not easy for asylum seekers. I'm not pretending that it is for a second. Of  course it is not. It will be a basic support and protection in place.

FARR: It is forecast to be so rough, you even have Joe Hockey, and the  Premier of WA, Colin Barnett, saying that you are being too harsh on them.

BOWEN: Well, talk about hypocrisy. Let's put aside Nauru for a moment;  their other policy is to turn around the boats, to tow boats out into the sea  and to drop people off in a jetty in Indonesia. No protections, no basic  guarantees, no rights to work, no human rights standards. If Mr Hockey is fair  dinkum and he says you should not take children and unaccompanied minors  to a third country, then he should come out today and distance himself and  repudiate Tony Abbott's policy of turning around the boats. Otherwise, this

should be called for what it is - absolutely hypocrisy on Mr Hockey's behalf.

JESSICA WRIGHT: The ink is barely dry on this deal, we've had two boats  arrive. It seems the people smugglers are out to test your resolve. Can you  be clear with us, what happens to the deal when and if the 800 is reached  and exceeded?

BOWEN: Well, let's be clear about a couple of things. Firstly, what we're  doing is really making a huge difference to the people smugglers’ business  model, putting a huge hole in it. So let's not assume that the people  smugglers will be able to find 800 volunteers.

WRIGHT: But you've got 624 since it was announced and they were going to  Malaysia before you...

BOWEN: Well no, that's not quite right, Jess. What we said was that they  could work on the basis that they could be taken to a third country...

WRIGHT: But they're not going to be now.

BOWEN: We have had to adjust our position, because other discussions with  other countries have taken longer and it,s well-known that we've been in

discussion with Papua New Guinea. But on the issue of the people smugglers'  business model and the 800, let's not assume that the people smugglers will  successfully sell to 800 people the product of being taken to Australia for  $15,000 or $20,00 and then returned to Malaysia, where they started - the  majority started their boat journey. That is a big assumption to make, that  they will find 800 volunteers to make that important decision at this great  cost.

WRIGHT: Well, that may well be, but surely you have to have a contingency  plan in place. If you don't have a contingency plan, why not? This is a very  big policy of yours.

BOWEN: Well, it is a very important policy. We have been in discussions with  Malaysia for months, as is well-known, I started that discussion with my  counterparts last December. This is an arrangement which in international  terms, has come around quite quickly; an arrangement of some complexity  and importance. But we have been focused on that.

It is well-known that we have been in discussions with Papua New Guinea,  that's public. It's well-known they've had some issues. The Government of  Papua New Guinea fell during the week The Abal administration fell, the  O'Neill administration has been sworn in. We will continue those discussions  and we'll continue other discussions under the regional framework which we  negotiated successfully - many people said that we would not be able to but  that we have - through the Bali process, which means a regional framework  for countries to enter into proper arrangements.

BONGIORNO: Well Minister, the Greens have flagged a private members’ bill  to tighten the time limits on people in detention. Here's Sarah Hanson-Young.

RECORDING - Sarah Hanson-Young, Greens spokesperson: Under my bill, we  would ensure that once people's health and security checks were done, there  would be assessment as to whether it was safe for them to move into the  community.

WRIGHT: Well, let's put 72 hours aside. Labor is not even abiding its own  rules, which states 90 days should be the limit on detention. Do the Greens  have a point here and are you going to look at this bill?

BOWEN: No. The Greens policy in many areas of immigration is frankly,  unworkable and naive. What we do need to do is speed up processing. That is  what we have done, sped up processing by a new protection determination,  and a much more streamlined but still very effective ASIO security clearance.  Now, what does that mean? Well, it's already been working. We now have  had 2,000 less people in detention facilities than we had three months ago.  We now have just under a 4,000 irregular maritime arrivals in detention  facilities compared to around 6,000 just two or three months ago. So this is  not just talk.

The Greens can talk about it; we have got on with the job and the policy that  this Government has implemented over the last period have had a real impact  in getting people processed more quickly and out into the community, where  they are genuine refugees. That is something is that is appropriate and will  continue to do so. There will be more complex cases where people don't meet  refugee status or have complex security issues. They will take longer, which is  why the Greens policy is unworkable.

FARR: Minister, in your electorate, there would be a lot of people coming to  you, you are the local member, a cabinet, a former finance spokesman. And  saying, "Look, I'm insecure about what is happening in Europe, the United  States, and now you blokes want to hilt us with carbon pricing - please, don't  do it." What do you say to them?

BOWEN: Well, I say, 'look at our economic management.' It's been very  important in the strength of the Australian economy, the way this  Government managed through the global financial crisis and avoided  recession means that we are in many senses, one of the strongest world  economies. Our debt is low. One-tenth of the average of advanced major  economies. And that is appropriate. But just because there's world instability  doesn't mean that you don't embrace the need for economic reform. The  carbon tax is an economic reform. Previous governments didn't put off hard  reforms and we have a very strong economy, and it is appropriate that while  maintaining that strong economy and excellent record of economic  management that the Treasurer has under its belt that we also continue to  tackle those very important economic reforms for the long-term future of the  Australian economy, so that that growth is not taken for granted but can  continue.

BONGIORNO: Well Minister, briefly, and finally, do you think we are in  danger of talking ourselves into a recession?

BOWEN: Well, look, I think it is important that we recognise the strength of  the Australian economy. That is important, that we have an economy that  many treasurers and finance ministers and prime ministers around the world

would die for. That we managed to get through the global financial crisis with  very strong growth, with very low debt, and we continue to have low  unemployment compared to the rest of the world. We do need to remind  ourselves of that. We need to remind ourselves of the fundamental strength  of the Australian economy. Our AAA rating is under no threat at all. It's  recently been reaffirmed due to the good economic management of the  Treasurer and this Government.

BONGIORNO: Thank you very much for being with us today, Chris Bowen.

ENDS





