Scott Morrison, MP

Shadow Minister for Productivity and Population  Shadow Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Member for Cook

Interview with

Sky News Australian Agenda program, 26 June 2011

(Mr Morrison in Malaysia)



Peter van Onselen: Can I just ask straight off the bat, what is it that you’re doing over there  that should make people anything other than cynical that this is just a stunt by the  opposition?



Scott Morrison: Well, I know that’s what the government has said, Peter, but I would  commend to anyone who has to make a decision about these arrangements to come and  see firsthand how things are on the ground here in Malaysia.  Now I’ve had good access and  am particularly looking forward to the meeting with government officials on Monday but to  see how people, refugees, asylum seekers, whether they’re Chin Burmese, Korean  Burmese, whether they’re from Middle Eastern background or Rahingan, you know the  experience they have here on the ground is not something I think many Australians would  have seen or understand about the implications for those who may be sent here by the  Australian government.



Paul Kelly:  I wonder if I could just clarify on that point, Mr Morrison.  Have you see any  detention centres yet in Malaysia? What are your plans in relation to detention centers and  what is your impression of the situation in detention centers?



Scott Morrison: Well, the first detention centre I will see will be on Monday afternoon which  the government has agreed to show me, which is out at the KL airport, KLIA center and so  I’ll see it there. I mean you hear plenty of reports when talking to people who have been  detained in the detention centres that they’re certainly not like what we run in Australia.  I did  have the opportunity yesterday to see from the outside a centre that is likely we’re told to be  one by sources here where people would be sent for a period of six weeks and that’s being  redeveloped as we speak.  But the issue here Paul, is people won’t spend very long in the  detention centres when they first come.  They’ll live in the community and in the community  you basically have to make your own way and that’s what over 94 000 refugees and asylum  seekers do here every day and they do so with the support of charitable groups and  basically relying on each other.



Simon Benson:  Mr Morrison, one of the concerns raised about this so-called Malaysian  solution was the treatment of asylum seekers once they leave detention in Malaysia and  particularly around the notion that this civilian quasi-civilian police force called the Rella  would be tracking them down and subjecting them to caning. Have you seen any evidence  whatsoever of this civilian police force and their activities and does it make you more or less  concerned about how asylum seekers sent from Australia to Malaysia will be treated?



Scott Morrison:  Well, we’ve heard just numerous first-hand accounts from people who have  UNHCR cards and have been you know arrested you know half a dozen times and not just  by Rella but also by police and I think this creates the challenge for this arrangement. It is  going to be very, very difficult to make things work on the ground regardless of what may be  agreed in a formal agreement, I mean the practical challenges of ensuring that those who we  send to Malaysia aren’t arrested or aren’t potentially taken to a police holding cell or a  detention center, to make it work on the ground is very difficult because the UNHCR card  system, which has been around for a very long time here now, and we’ve had numerous  cases reported to us where people would just be arrested, they’d be taken away and it’d be  a month and in the case of Middle Eastern refugees we were told yesterday up to two  months, by the time it all gets sorted out, and to add another layer of identification in addition  to the UNHCR card and how that can work on the ground, I think presents real challenges,  and I’ve been asking the question: “how can we make this work on the ground for those who  live there and those who work with those who live there?” And you know they’re the  questions they want answered because at the moment they really don’t know how that can  be made to work practically. I mean if you come here you’re going to spend five years, that’s  about the best time I’ve heard from someone coming, being registered, it can take you a  year to get registered with the UNHCR, several years then to get your RSD, your refugee  status determination, and then a number of years later the potential to get resettlement. So if  you’re in the front of the queue it’s about five years. I’ve met people who’ve been here for 28  years, waiting, so you know how long people are going to be supported, you know will they  go to school?  These are all the same questions I asked in the parliament.  They’re the same  questions I’m asking here and I appreciate the support I’m getting to look into these matters,  but if we’re going to make a decision on this we need to know what we’re going to be doing  and I think there’s some real questions that remain to be answered.



Peter van Onselen: All right, Scott Morrison, we appreciate you joining us on Australian  Agenda. Hopefully we get the chance in the weeks to come when you return to have a bit of  a longer discussion about this.  Thanks very much.



Scott Morrison: Thanks, Peter. Thanks Paul. Thanks, Simon.





