Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade

MTR 1377, Mornings with Steve Vizard

Monday, 20 June 2011

Subjects: Carbon tax plebiscite; Malaysian solution; foreign relations; Kevin Rudd and Julia  Gillard’s dysfunctional relationship

E&OE…

STEVE VIZARD    Well it is almost one year since Julia Gillard toppled Kevin Rudd and  the problems keep stacking up. They won’t get any easier when the Opposition puts forward  a bill today to force a plebiscite on the carbon tax. I guess this tactic will make both houses of  parliament vote for or against the public getting a say before the tax begins on the 1 July next  year. The Government was given an unprecedented slap last week by both houses over the  Malaysian solution, so this isn’t a pipedream it is a real live possibility. On the line Deputy  Opposition Leader, Shadow Foreign Minister Julie Bishop joins me. Julie thanks for your  time.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning Steve.

STEVE VIZARD    The carbon tax plebiscite act could force the Prime Minister to hold a  plebiscite, a referendum, on the controversial policy within 90 days. Would it be binding?

JULIE BISHOP    It is not binding but it would send a very clear message what the  Australian people want. A plebiscite would give the people the vote that Julia Gillard denied  them when she promised there would be no carbon tax at the last election then betrayed their  trust to introduce a carbon tax.

You see Steve this will be one of the biggest economic changes in our history. It is a tax on  energy designed to raise billions and billions of dollars - and this Government certainly can’t  be trusted not to waste money - but it is also designed to change people’s behaviour. The  carbon dioxide tax will go up and up, year on year, to make energy and petrol much more  expensive and many other goods much more expensive and that is its sole purpose.

It is not simply an economic reform, it is something that aims to change how people shop, the  goods and the food they buy, the houses they live in, the vehicles they drive. So it is a  fundamental shift in our way of life and people should be given the right to vote on it.

STEVE VIZARD    If it is not binding, what does it achieve?

JULIE BISHOP    Well the Government and the independents have ruled out an election on  the issue. The Government doesn’t have a mandate to introduce the tax and we believe that  this is a way of the Australian people having a vote without an election.

And people are rightly worried that the carbon tax will drive manufacturing and production  offshore, send jobs offshore to countries that have no carbon tax. And remember Steve, no  other country has an economy wide tax on carbon dioxide, no other country has an economy  wide emissions trading scheme, so the Australian people deserve the right to vote on the  issue. It was denied them at the last election.

STEVE VIZARD    This will put immense pressure on the independents particularly. Have  you had any discussions with them about their approach, their response to this, what do you  expect it to be?

JULIE BISHOP    I understand that the Senators are discussing it with the independent  Senators in the Senate and I understand that the Bill will be introduced into the Senate this  week, if not today. And it will be up to the independents to prove that they do listen to their  constituents. I can’t see why they would be afraid of going to a plebiscite. It is not asking  them to go to an election where their seats would be at risk. It is asking them to give the  Australian people the right to vote on a fundamental issue affecting their way of life, their  standard of living.

STEVE VIZARD    I wanted to whip through another couple of other topics if I can Julie.  The so-called Malaysian Solution, it seems that Julia Gillard’s Government is getting a lot of  internal friction over this. We’ve seen some of her own parliamentary colleagues saying that  unless it gets UNHC (High Commissioner) sanction, they won’t support it. This seems to be  disintegrating in front of our very eyes.

JULIE BISHOP    This is yet another example of the Prime Minister making an  announcement before the details have been worked through. But it is also the hypocrisy of  this so-called Malaysian Solution. It is absolutely galling.

After years of lecturing the Coalition for sending asylum seekers to Nauru because it wasn’t a  signatory to the UN Convention on Refugees, Julia Gillard announces she will send asylum  seekers to a country that is a not a signatory and which has a dubious human rights record  with regard to refugees.

But the Labor Party is in total disarray on this issue as it is on so many other issues. Not only  asylum seekers but the live cattle debate, the carbon tax, the mining tax. In fact the three  issues that Julia Gillard said she would fix, the three issues that she said were her reason for  knifing Kevin Rudd and taking his job, were the mining tax, the climate change issue and the  asylum seeker issues and all three issues have deteriorated under her watch.

STEVE VIZARD    Given what has happened with the sanctions by both the upper and  lower house last week, effectively a vote of no confidence in the so-called Malaysian  Solution, in your role as Shadow Foreign Minister how do you see the instrumentalities, the  agencies and indeed the Government’s who are negotiating with the Australian  representatives at the moment would perceive those negotiations in the face of effectively a  vote of no confidence by the very parliament that support sent those delegations?

JULIE BISHOP    Well this is what happens when the Prime Minister announces deals  before they are actually signed. You will recall she announced there was going to be a  processing centre on East Timor before she had got the approval of the East Timorese  Government and then for months and months she insisted that negotiations were continuing  with East Timor when in fact they were not. And it was a very embarrassing position to place  the East Timorese Government in, when they had to keep saying no they didn’t want it, they  weren’t going to negotiate, and Julia Gillard insisted that they had to. It was tantamount to  bullying.

Now in the case of Malaysia, Julia Gillard came out and announced that there was a deal with  Malaysia to send 800 asylum seekers to Malaysia in return for receiving 4,000 of the asylum  seekers in Malaysia yet the details haven’t been worked out. It is embarrassing but it is also  damaging to our foreign relations. And interestingly the one Minister who was responsible  for maintaining good relationships with our region, that is Kevin Rudd the Foreign Minister,  is missing in action. He is so far removed from all these foreign policy debacles one wonders  whether he is deliberately keeping away or Julia Gillard won’t allow him near it. Either way  it is dysfunctional and the tension between the Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister is  affecting Australia’s national interest.

STEVE VIZARD    Well just on that, we’ve got the Indonesian live exports, the cattle  exports, we’ve got asylum seekers whether it’s Manus Island, East Timor or Malaysia as it  now is, we’ve got what is happening in Afghanistan as well. There are a number of  contentious issues involving Australians, Australian livelihood, Australian economic  wellbeing abroad. Would it be the case, do you say, that the Foreign Minister should be  directly involved in these things?

JULIE BISHOP    Of course, the Foreign Minister must be personally involved in all  matters that go to Australia’s relationships with other countries. The fact that the Prime  Minister and the Foreign Minister cannot stand each other - I mean that is not surprising  given the way Julia Gillard betrayed her leader - but it is creating enormous dysfunction in  our foreign policy.

Kevin Rudd should be personally involved in fixing the damage done to our relationships  with Indonesia over the ban on live cattle, with Malaysia over the asylum seeker swap, with  Papua New Guinea over the Manus Island solution, with Nauru which has been demonised  by the Prime Minister.

Julia Gillard should swallow her pride, admit that she is out of her depth in foreign policy,  pick up the phone and ask Kevin Rudd to help her out.

STEVE VIZARD    Could you believe that Kevin Rudd was planning to hold a party to  celebrate his knifing one year ago? Just to hold a party at all let alone to hold it in a way that  was visible.

JULIE BISHOP    This just highlights the extraordinary dysfunction between the Prime  Minister and the Foreign Minister. They clearly cannot stand each other and both Kevin Rudd  and in fact a number of other Ministers are out parading their credentials for the Australian  people.

Kevin Rudd clearly is still very bitter about the way he was betrayed by his deputy, he clearly  has not got over it, there are now a number of other senior Ministers out there seeking  interviews, talking up to their colleagues and trying to suggest that, should there be a change  in leader, they ought be considered.

Now this is just appalling. This Government should be getting on with the business of  looking after the interests of the Australian people not worrying about each others jobs. They  should be worrying about the jobs of the Australian people who will be affected by their  disastrous carbon tax, not worrying about who is going to knife Julia Gillard to get her job.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, effectively one year on since Julia Gillard took over the  reins, what is your assessment, and I know this is a Dorothy Dixer, what’s your assessment of  the Government? How would you characterise what has happened in the one year, not policy  specific but just characterise what Julia Gillard has done with the country in her role as Prime  Minister during her tenure?

JULIE BISHOP    This week will bring into focus the character of the Prime Minister. It is  the anniversary of the first of the great betrayals when she knifed the leader to get his job,  then the betrayal of the Australian people with her promise not to introduce a carbon tax. It  will also highlight the fact that the three issues she said she had to fix because the  Government had lost its way have actually got worse under her leadership.

I think she has shown to be clearly out of her depth. The level of incompetence of this  Government is just breathtaking. And the one thing that Labor is meant to be good at, which  is manipulating the media cycle, they can’t even get that right. Fancy announcing a $12  million advertising campaign for a tax that hasn’t even had the details worked out.

So it seems that the Government just lurches from one disaster to another, one crisis to  another and there needs to be a circuit breaker somewhere because the country is suffering as  a result.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, really appreciate your time.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure Steve.

