Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



MTR1377, Mornings with Steve Vizard

Friday, 20 May 2011

Subjects: Malaysian solution; border protection; Bob Brown; carbon tax; Budget; Malcolm  Turnbull; ABC; Welcome to Country

E&OE…

STEVE VIZARD    On the line Deputy Opposition Leader, Shadow Foreign Affairs  Minister Julie Bishop joins me. Julie thanks for your time.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning Steve.

STEVE VIZARD    I want to start with the ‘Malaysia solution’. It appears Malaysia’s Home  Minister has said asylum seekers who’ve arrive by boat since that announcement will not be  processed in Malaysia because no deal is yet to be finalised. Deal or no deal?

JULIE BISHOP    There is no deal at present. It is obvious that the ‘Malaysian solution’ was  announced by our Prime Minister before any agreement had been finalised.

Julia Gillard appears to have learnt nothing from her East Timor fiasco. Her sheer panic over  the failure of her asylum seeker policies risks damaging our relationships in the region  because she is announcing things through the media before ensuring all the hard work is  completed and agreements are reached.

STEVE VIZARD    More than 1,300 asylum seekers have arrived by boat this year but in  Italy, for example, they’ve received almost 30,000 immigrants mainly from Tunisia. In  Australia, are we over emphasising the problem of asylum seeker when we comparatively  receive relatively few asylum seekers?

JULIE BISHOP    Australia is a generous country when it comes to humanitarian and  refugee resettlement and we also have a very high immigration rate.

The point is, people are concerned that the Government has lost control of the process and  that is why the ‘Malaysian solution’ - and you will recall the ‘East Timor solution’ when Julia  Gillard announced that she had a solution to asylum seekers yet she hadn’t consulted with the  Prime Minister of the country and that greatly offended the government of East Timor and  contributed to that debacle - is unravelling. And now she and Chris Bowen are at it again.

So, as long as there is integrity in our immigration system, as long as the Government appears  to have control of border protection and our detention system then our system works well,  and we managed to achieve that under the Howard Government.

But the Government’s reaction, its panic, its bungling of announcements to the media on so  called solutions before anything has been finalised, is just not showing basic respect to other  countries.

I see it is reported today that the PNG Government is saying that Ms Gillard and Mr Bowen  are not negotiating in good faith and showing them respect for their national sovereignty.

Steve, apart from anything else, losing control of border protection, losing control of the  detention system, now the Government is damaging our long term reputation, with the Prime  Minister blundering around in our region and failing the basic test of international diplomacy  and negotiations.

Now Australians are entitled to expect the Prime Minister to enhance relations in our region,  not damage them at every turn.

STEVE VIZARD    No problems though Julie, there is plenty more countries in the region to  go through. Thailand has been named as well. It almost seems like there is an atlas on the  table and we are flicking though it.

JULIE BISHOP    Well so much for Julia Gillard being the great negotiator. She showed her  hand with this extraordinary deal of a 5-1 asylum seeker swap with Malaysia, no wonder  other countries are lining up and saying, ‘We’ll have one of those too thank you.”

And for Australia to take five for every one asylum seeker we return to another country  means of course that Australia ends up with far more asylum seekers. No wonder countries  like Thailand and Indonesia are saying, well let’s have a look at that.

But that is not in Australia’s best interest. We need to be able to have control over our  borders, control over our detention system and currently the Government is out of control.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, you’ve mentioned the media and the problem of making  media announcements without having developed policy underpinning it. Yesterday Greens  Leader Bob Brown went on the front foot and he severely attacked the media saying it was  the media, and News Ltd in particular who he described as ‘hate media’, who were  responsible for public perceptions about important policies such as carbon tax. I want to play  you just a bit of what Bob Brown said.

GREENS LEADER, BOB BROWN    I am just wondering why the hate media, it has got a  negative front page from top to bottom today, can’t be more responsible? If I was to take on  the media every day…

JOURNALIST    But you virtually do. You come out here every day and you do take on the  media, the media that you don’t like.

BOB BROWN    Don’t get too upset. Don’t be so unhappy.

JOURNALIST    I’m not unhappy. You do. You just come out here every day and you just  bag out the Murdoch press or any media you don’t like and you call them the ‘hate press’.

BOB BROWN    But the Murdoch press comes out everyday and bags out the Greens.

JOURNALIST   Don’t you think we are just reflecting what our audience wants?

BOB BROWN    Well if you are, be proud and stand by it. Don’t be defensive.

JOURNALIST   I’m not being defensive.

BOB BROWN    It sounds to me like you are. Keep smiling, that is the important thing.  Fragile I’d say, very fragile.

STEVE VIZARD    Most extraordinary exchange from a senior politician, can I get your  response Julie Bishop?

JULIE BISHOP    The media is simply doing its job of asking Bob Brown difficult  questions about what his policies will do to the Australian economy and to jobs. It is clear  Bob Brown is under pressure and he is not coping with the scrutiny.

Now as a leader of a small protest party he was accustomed to saying almost anything he  liked because he couldn’t form government and could never implement his policies.

But now that he is in a formal coalition with Labor, a power sharing agreement, he is  effectively part of the Government and now the media are asking him what his policies will  do to the economy.

Now I’ve got no doubt that Senator Brown finds some of those questions uncomfortable but  he should produce the evidence to support his arguments and let the public decide.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, I want to quickly to turn now to the Budget. It was only  announced last week and already we are seeing a potential major hole in it that has been  blasted by WAs impost of an increase in royalties which will flow through to the Federal  Government which in return will leave, people are speculating, a $2 billion hole in Wayne  Swan’s recently announced Budget. So it’s your home state, can I get your response to this?

JULIE BISHOP    Well this backs up our claims at the time that the Federal Budget is a  house of cards, that it is so precarious that any change in any internal or external elements has  the whole Budget assumptions collapsing.

Wayne Swan and Julia Gillard did a deal with three big mining companies to the effect that  the Federal Government would refund any royalties that they paid. Royalties are the domain  of State Governments. State Government’s own the minerals in the ground and they are  entitled, under the constitution, to impose royalties. That is all the Barnett Government has  done, and if Wayne Swan couldn’t see this coming well then he is more incompetent than  people had assumed.

STEVE VIZARD    I want to turn to Malcolm Turnbull. At a time when the Coalition’s  polling extremely well, when the Government’s polling very badly, Malcolm Turnbull has

entered the fray seemingly unnecessarily both in respect of his policies on climate change and  also announcing that he’d put his hand up for leadership again. Why?

JULIE BISHOP    Well Malcolm’s views on climate change are well known, there was  nothing new in what he said on the Lateline interview. They were trawling over old ground.

STEVE VIZARD    But is it timely in anyway? Why should he respond? I know questions  are asked, but what is sensible for him to respond in such detail?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I will leave others to judge that, but the Coalition has a policy on  climate change, we are committed to opposing Julia Gillard’s carbon tax.

I think the focus should be on why Julia Gillard forced Kevin Rudd to drop his emissions  trading scheme and then promised the Australian people there would be no carbon tax before  the election; and now she is saying she was always committed to an emissions trading  scheme and there will be a carbon tax. I think that is the question that is going to impact on  people’s lives and that is what we should be asking.

And we should deeply concerned that the Greens now want a carbon price of $100 a tonne  which would absolutely devastate the Australian economy.

So they are the kind of issues I believe we should be focussed on.

STEVE VIZARD    Will Malcolm Turnbull ever be a leader of the Coalition, of the  Government?

JULIE BISHOP    Steve you know what it is like in political parties. The one certainty about  politics is the uncertainty of it all!

But we are extremely happy with the job that Tony Abbott is doing. He was elected leader of  the party about 15 months ago, he has had a remarkable run as the Opposition Leader and I  believe he will make a great Prime Minister.

STEVE VIZARD    A whole lot of people have been petitioning the ABC saying their  political coverage is now moving to the right. There was an interview done with Bob Brown  the other day where he was asked some tough questions and it was said to be evidence of a  lurch to the right. Is the ABC lurching to the right at the moment?

JULIE BISHOP    I wouldn’t have thought so; it is certainly not in its history to do so. I  think the ABC is picking up on the concerns that the Australian people have about the whole  climate change debate.

Our argument is that Australia is responsible for 1.5 per cent of global emissions. We should  take steps to reduce pollution but the Australian people don’t want its national Government to  destroy jobs and damage our economy with no environmental gain. And that is precisely  what is happening under this carbon tax initiative of Julia Gillard and Bob Brown. And the  ABC is quite rightly reporting on that deep concern and putting the Government, and Bob  Brown’s party, under the kind of scrutiny that it deserves.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, a slightly tangential issue, it is a Victorian state issue but  it’s got federal implications. The Baillieu Government down here has scraped the mandatory  acknowledgement of the traditional Aboriginal land overs at the start of public events.

It was mandated and now it is up to the discretion of individual Ministers at the start of each  event. Are you for a mandated response to that or do you think it is appropriate that each  Minister should choose to acknowledge the traditional land owners at their discretion?

JULIE BISHOP    I think is appropriate that Ministers choose to do it. It became rather  meaningless when it was done as a mandatory requirement and I have attended a number of  functions where Labor Ministers would just trot out some words, not give any meaning or  thought to it, it was just part of the speech that they’d been handed by their Departments and  it took away any meaning at all.

I think it is a most appropriate step by the Baillieu Government and it should be left to  individual Ministers to judge the appropriate time and circumstances to do it, if they choose.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, appreciate your time. Always good to talk to you.

JULIE BISHOP    Thanks Steve.

STEVE VIZARD    Julie Bishop, Deputy Opposition Leader, Shadow Foreign Minister  speaking about a variety of issues.

