Julie Bishop

Sky News, PM Agenda with David Speers

Thursday, 22 September 2011

Subjects: Labor leadership; Kevin Rudd; Palestine statehood; industrial relations

E&OE…

DAVID SPEERS    Well our guest this afternoon is the Deputy Opposition Leader, Julie Bishop, who  joins us now from Canberra. Julie Bishop, thanks for your time.

Let’s start with Kevin Rudd. What evidence does the Coalition have to back these claims that he is  counting the numbers, calling around colleagues to mount a challenge?

JULIE BISHOP    Well David the best evidence will be when Kevin Rudd returns from New York and  announces that he is more likely to fly to Mars than challenge Julia Gillard for the leadership.

You know how these things work, when there is talk of a leadership challenge the momentum can  change very, very quickly.

The polls are indicating that Julia Gillard’s position is untenable and if you stay in Parliament House  long enough you will know that Kevin Rudd has never given up his ambitions to come back as leader.

And the Australian people have also never really understood why it was that Julia Gillard took Kevin  Rudd’s job in the first place, particularly as Julia Gillard said at the time that it was because a good  government had lost its way. Well now we’ve got a bad government that has never found its way.

DAVID SPEERS    Well you’re someone who’s, I don’t know if ‘close’ is the right word but you’ve  been mates with Kevin Rudd despite having the Shadow portfolio. Has he ever talked about it with  you?

JULIE BISHOP    Oh David I’m not about to reveal the confidential discussions I have with the  Foreign Minister about a whole range of issues. I’ll leave it to Kevin to come back and tell Australia  that he is more likely to play for the Broncos than challenge Julia Gillard, and then we’ll really know  where the leadership stakes are at.

And I think Shayne Neumann’s response today was illuminating. I’d take that as a ‘yes’, he has had a  call from Kevin.

DAVID SPEERS    Alright, as I say that is not what I am hearing today. Let me ask you though about  the Coalition’s perspective on this. The polls show that Kevin Rudd is far more popular than Julia  Gillard, who would the Coalition rather be up against, Kevin Rudd or Julia Gillard?

JULIE BISHOP    Well that is ultimately going to be a matter for the Labor Party. Now they have  swapped leaders at a state level, like changing shoes, they could well do it at a federal level.

But the point we’ve always made is it doesn’t matter who leads the Labor Party, it is their policies that  count.

And whoever is the leader would have to deal with the chaos that they’ve caused in border protection  policies, the utter confusion over their treatment of asylum seekers.

Whoever leads the Labor Party will have to deal with this issue of a carbon tax, the job destroying  carbon tax.

So at the end of the day it doesn’t really matter who leads Labor, it is a question of their policies and  the damage their policies are doing to the Australian economy, to Australia’s reputation overseas,  they are the sort of things that matter.

DAVID SPEERS    Well in his role as Foreign Minister can I ask what you think about whether he is  travelling too much and spending too much while he is abroad, what do you think?

JULIE BISHOP    David, a Foreign Minister must travel and a Foreign Minister from Australia has a  long way to travel to a number of the important meetings and dialogues around the world.

But any person in public office who travels by virtue of taxpayer funding must be very careful to  ensure that taxpayers get value for their money.

We hear today that the Prime Minister’s office has admonished the Foreign Minister for some of his  excessive spending in travel. If the Prime Minister’s office is concerned then taxpayers have a right to  be concerned.

DAVID SPEERS    I don’t know if admonished is too strong, it is basically saying be prudent with  taxpayers’ dollars which you would expect the Prime Minister to say to all Ministers who travel abroad.

JULIE BISHOP    Oh we understand that it is the only time that this has appeared in a letter, a formal  letter, back to the Foreign Minister reminding him to be careful with taxpayers funding, particularly in  relation to accommodation. It has apparently not been in other approval letters and so it stands out  because it is the first time that it has been included in a letter, and there have been reports about the  cost of the Foreign Minister’s travels.

I don’t quibble with him travelling.  Of course he has a pair from Parliament to be in New York this  week and the Opposition granted that in recognition of the role that Australia plays at the United  Nations, for example.

DAVID SPEERS    But when it does come to the amount being spent while travelling where we do, as  you say, have to get value for taxpayers’ money, are you talking about some sort of limits on what can  be spent abroad if the Coalition is in office and you’re Foreign Minister?

JULIE BISHOP    I am suggesting we should always be prudent about expenditure. I am not aware of  the precise details of the expenditure that raised the Prime Minister’s office concern about the Foreign  Minister’s travel.

But it is taxpayers’ money; taxpayers should get value for money not only in terms of the actual cost  but also the outcomes of the travel. There should be outcomes in the national interest when the  Foreign Minister travels overseas.

DAVID SPEERS    Now one of the issues he is dealing with of course at the UN General Assembly is  this question of Palestinian statehood. What is the Coalition’s position on this? The Government, or  the Prime Minister, is saying that she’s waiting to see the text of any motion. What do you think,  should we be waiting for the text?

JULIE BISHOP    I don’t believe the Government has any excuse for delaying announcing a position  on this matter.

I asked the Prime Minister in Question Time today what Australia’s position was on the impending  vote on Palestinian statehood and she referred me to an opinion piece that appeared in The  Australian this week under her name, but it contains no opinion at all, and I believe that the  Government should make its position clear.

There is some confusion because it has been reported that the Foreign Minister has advised the  Prime Minister that Australia should abstain on the vote. The Prime Minister has not made her

position clear. Countries like the United States, Germany, France have all made their position quite  clear.

I believe that Australia should oppose this vote because it will be counterproductive to the overall  peace process in the Middle East and I fear that the two-state solution will be set back, not advanced,  as a result of this.

There are concerns that it will be used as a platform for greater conflict not less.

In fact the French Foreign Minister has said recently that we may expect an explosion of violence in  the Middle East if this goes ahead, and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has warned that the road to  Palestinian statehood is not through New York and she is urging the Palestinian leader to drop this  proposal, drop this move and return to negotiated peace talks and a negotiated settlement with Israel.

DAVID SPEERS    But as you know there are also fears that if this is put to a vote and is opposed  there will also be an explosion on violence in the Middle East. Either way there is the potential for an  angry backlash in the Middle East.

JULIE BISHOP    It depends where the vote is taken, where the motion is moved. If it goes to the  Security Council, and I believe that tomorrow the Palestinian leader President Abbas will put it to the  Security Council, then it is likely to be vetoed by the United States.

If it goes to a vote on the floor of the General Assembly the vote may well get up but then it is what  happens after that. How will Israel react? How will the Palestinian leadership use it as a method of  referring Israel to the International Criminal Court, for example, because non-memb er status at the  UN would give the Palestinian authority that right?

So it is a very vexed issue. We believe that Australia should take a leadership position, state its  opposition to the move and support the United States and other countries who have done it at this  stage.

The Prime Minister shouldn’t wait for the text, everybody knows what the issue is and Australia should  make its position plain now.

DAVID SPEERS    Can I turn finally to a domestic matter, industrial relations? There has been some  debate within Liberal ranks over this issue after Tony Abbott’s comments the other night that the  Coalition does not support individual contracts. Do you support individual statutory agreements?

JULIE BISHOP    What Tony said was that under the Fair Work legislation there are individual  flexibility agreements, there are clauses in agreements that can provide the kind of flexibility that  employees and employers want.

We understand from business that they are not currently working so if business is able to indicate to  us how changes could be made so that the flexibility agreements do operate as they are indented to  do then we’d obviously listen to them.

We will have an industrial relations policy for the next election that is based on coming up with  practical solutions, pragmatic solutions to problems that business and employees raise with us.

DAVID SPEERS    So if business say, as they are saying publicly, that the answer is individual  statutory contracts, is that something you are open to?

JULIE BISHOP    Well what business is telling me is that the individual flexibility agreements that  currently exist under Julia Gillard’s Fair Work legislation are not working and are causing problems.

Now we want to look at those issues, look at those problems and see if we can make those  agreements work.

And that is the policy Tony’s been talking about and we will certainty go into much greater detail  closer to the election.

DAVID SPEERS    But you’re not opposed to individual contracts?

JULIE BISHOP    I am not opposed to flexibility in agreements between employees and employers,  neither is Tony Abbott….

DAVID SPEERS    But the question is individual contracts, are you opposed to individual contracts?

JULIE BISHOP    But they exist now David, they exist now under the Government’s Fair Work  legislation. The complaint of business is that they are not operating in a way that they were intended  and we are happy to have a look at that.

DAVID SPEERS    Not individual statutory agreements though for ordinary workers? Are you opposed  to those or in favour of those?

JULIE BISHOP    I want to see flexibility in the arrangements between employees and employers.  Now that can be reached in a number of ways.

The Government has put in legislation, the Fair Work legislation, that has individual flexibility clauses  in agreements. If we can make that work then I think we will satisfy both business and employees.

DAVID SPEERS    But is seems quite clear you’re not saying that you’re opposed to individual  contracts.

JULIE BISHOP    No I am saying that I am in favour of flexibility in arrangements. There are  arrangements in place now, let’s make them work.

DAVID SPEERS    And do you want to debate in the party room on this?

JULIE BISHOP    Oh we debate policy all the time and we are going through the process now of a  policy review of all of our policies, from foreign affairs through to the environment to industrial  relations. There will be a debate at some point on every one of our policies that we take to the next  election.

DAVID SPEERS    Alright, Deputy Opposition Leader and Shadow Foreign Minister Julie Bishop,  good to talk to you. Thanks for that.

JULIE BISHOP    Thanks David.



