Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh





A A A

●     Media Releases

●     Speeches

●     Transcripts

●     Photos

●     Biography

●     Contacts

●     Australian Labor Party

●     Subscription Service

●     ALP-Independents

agreement

●     Northern Australia

Ministerial Forum

Home > Simon Crean > Transcripts > 2011 > Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

06 September 2011  SCT057/2011

TOPIC: Carbon Pricing, Lismore's Clean Energy Future, Support for the Prime Minister

PAM MACINTOSH: Now to the business of clean energy and to our regions. And we welcome the Minister  for Regional Australia, Simon Crean, to the program. Mr Crean, good morning.

SIMON CREAN: Hi Pam. How are you?

PAM MACINTOSH: Well. And you're on the north coast to talk about the - or talk with the community  about Labor's carbon plan. You've just addressed a forum in Lismore. How were you received and your  message received?

SIMON CREAN: Very well, positively. Still a number of questions of clarification and there's a number of  issues to resolve.

But, you know, the debate out here, Pam, is different than the debate that goes on in Canberra. Out here, the  regions get the fact that they need to move to a cleaner energy future.

They've already determined a strategy that helps move in that direction, including, as the Regional  Development Authority and like the Northern Rivers area, adopting their own targets for emission reduction.

So what they're very pleased to hear is a government that has programs that can help them achieve that  objective. They've determined the what. And we're about telling them, working with them on the how.

PAM MACINTOSH: And are they just business and industry and community leaders? Or are they people  at a grassroots level, who have very clear concerns about what this may mean in terms of their cost of living?

Jump  to  Content

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT057_2011.aspx (1 of 7) [27/10/2011 2:19:50 PM]

search

Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

SIMON CREAN: All of those levels. We had farmers there. We had people in the forest products industry,  people in the meatworks. All of those were present today, with about over 100 people at the forum. And very  widespread involvement.

Now, we had some very good questions, some tough questions. But I've never minded the tough questions.  What I want, though, is the circumstances in which people - if you like, we get the combination of their  agenda with our support.

And in many ways that's turning the argument back the other way, because at the moment the debate that's  going on in Canberra is that this is going to be a tax that's the ruination of a nation, when in fact they  understand they need to move in this direction and they want a strategy that's going to position them in a  sustainable way going forward.

And I believe our package can do that. And this is the fifteenth forum that I've done in the regions. And  everywhere in the regions I go I am getting the same response.

The community leadership, the community stakeholders get it. They want to know how they can do it.

PAM MACINTOSH: I also think it's fair to say that many Australians are unhappy with your government,  the Prime Minister in particular.

And we've got recent events surrounding asylum seekers, the BER, the home insulation scheme contributing  further to a loss of confidence. They're wondering how you can implement such a massive change and get it  right. How will you do this?

SIMON CREAN: By putting the proper context on it, Pam. I mean, the reason we are the only developed  economy in the world to have avoided the recession is because we faced up to the challenge of change in  the '80s and '90s and that positioned us in a way that we're now the envy of the rest of the world.

We're an economy that again is challenged by change, Pam. And it's not just carbon pricing. It's the high  dollar. It's the floods that you had in this area. It's the fluctuating commodity prices. That's why we are a  patchwork economy.

And the challenge that we're taking out to the regions is we want to engage you with what you are best at.  And that is determining your priorities, understanding your future and working with you to secure that future.  That's the message.

And if you come out to a region like this that says, we want to become a cleaner energy option, we're not  operating on the basis of the threat, we know there is some challenges, we know there's some difficulties, but  we see opportunity in it and we want to work towards that opportunity.

That's how we get the message up, Pam.

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT057_2011.aspx (2 of 7) [27/10/2011 2:19:50 PM]

Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

PAM MACINTOSH: How concerned, Mr Crean, are you about a GFC 3? We hear this morning that  Greece, Portugal and Ireland could leave the euro zone, causing a massive increase to debt costs. And is  this the climate to be introducing this change, such a big change?

SIMON CREAN: Well, two issues there. Certainly there are dark clouds on the international space. But  again, Australia is better placed than any developed economy to weather that storm. We've got flexibility  clearly on a number of fronts that other countries haven't got, including on monetary policy.

That's a judgment for the Reserve Bank to make. But we have the flexibility that they haven't got. As for the  question of the climate change, you say why are we doing this when no-one else is doing it? It is not true.  Other countries are doing it. All other countries have identified targets for reduction.

The way they're going about them differs. But all of them want to move to a market mechanism. What we've  got to have is a market mechanism that benefits us, a market mechanism that rewards our skills, our  innovation, our know how in terms of renewable, in terms of cleaner coal technologies, gas versus coal  options, the uranium options.

That's what we're good at. And it's our smarts that will enable us to extract competitive advantage. What you  need is a market that values that competitive advantage because the rest of the world needs it.

We've got it. We can sell it. And that's why, in terms of setting ourselves up for a more sustainable future, this  is the right mechanism to proceed with.

PAM MACINTOSH: And just to clarify, I wasn't suggesting that Australia was doing it and no other  countries were doing - weren't doing it. I was asking why you were looking at introducing this now when we  are in an international climate that is very difficult.

SIMON CREAN: Well but the international climate is difficult for us, whichever way we look at it. The  international climate, as much as we're getting huge investment in the mining sector, is very hard for our  manufacturing sector.

It's very hard for our education sector. It's very hard for our tourism sector. But what do we do for  manufacturing? We look to the cleaner manufacturing jobs.

PAM MACINTOSH: Okay.

SIMON CREAN: I was in Whyalla last week, where they're looking to build solar concentrators, 250  manufacturing jobs. It's new manufacturing, Pam, and it's coming off the new opportunities that the world  needs and we're best placed to supply.

PAM MACINTOSH: Well let's look at those clean opportunities. And the carbon price is going to be  http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT057_2011.aspx (3 of 7) [27/10/2011 2:19:50 PM]

Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

introduced to change our reliance on renewable energy, wind, solar power and natural gas, going forward.  Are you familiar with plans for coal seam gas mining in this area?

SIMON CREAN: Of course I am. And I'm going down to the Liverpool Plains later today to talk with  stakeholders about that very question.

PAM MACINTOSH: Well many people in the community are concerned about the implications for the  environment, for the aquifer in particular. What do you consider to be the main issues?

SIMON CREAN: Well, obviously with the environment and species et cetera, we have input through the  Environmental Protection Act. But the other issues that go to water and land management are all state  issues.

So I think it is the question of getting the factual base correct, the science. What is the impact on the  aquifers? Where - how do we ensure that we're not impacting on other land use?

But this is the challenge that we are in a happy position, quite frankly, to have to make.

Why? Because the world is calling out for both energy security and food security.

It's essential that Australia gets the balance right.

And I think we can. And all of my experience in public life tells me two things are important. You start with the  facts and then you get people of goodwill around the table, talking around those facts and finding the  common ground.

Now if we can get that approach, we can sort this out. But the reason I'm visiting the Liverpool Plains today -  and I've been to the Hunter, where the same sorts of issues are prevalent - I want to understand the issues.

I want to understand where the science is at, where people think that there are gaps in the science. And if  there are gaps, let's fill the gaps, build the capacity, build the factual base and get on with the task of trying to  find a sensible, commonsense solution.

PAM MACINTOSH: Mr Crean, I'm not sure if you've had time to listen to the news this morning. But the  New South Wales State Government is today announcing it's going to increase mining royalties to offset the  predicted effect of the Commonwealth's carbon tax. What do you think will be the effect of this?

SIMON CREAN: Well, I'd be very interested to see what the announcement is. And, if they do it, I'll be very  interested to see what the reaction of the mining companies is to state government's putting up royalties  when they were so feral about what we were trying to do with the mining resource rent tax.

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT057_2011.aspx (4 of 7) [27/10/2011 2:19:50 PM]

Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

I mean, royalties imposes a tax, an increased tax on an asset before it's even mined. The mining resource  tax, which we've introduced, only taxes when profits are made and the whole purpose of it is to say, we've  got to take the proceeds of this mining boom and lay the foundation for diversifying the ability for other  industries to make a go of it.

That's why the proceeds we get from the mining tax goes to cutting company taxes, so other companies can  actually be beneficiaries of the huge wealth that the nation is getting from the boom in mining.

That's sensible government.

The other one is just a revenue grab by the New South Wales Government. Ours is about making sure we  diversify the economic base, grow the nation and secure the benefits of the current boom, so that we sustain  ourselves going forward.

PAM MACINTOSH: So as you say, the devil is in the detail, which will be announced today. I'm just  wondering also Minister, what the Carbon Farming Initiative will provide for farmers and landholders in this  region?

SIMON CREAN: Very important opportunities. As you know, farmers don't pay the carbon tax.

Secondly, the Carbon Farming Initiative can benefit farmers in two ways. One, it can improve the productivity  of the soil base and that lifts productivity. Two, by improving the productivity of the soil base, you also draw  naturally more carbon into it.

If we can measure the carbon that's absorbed and it's lowering greenhouse gases, in other words, they can  trade those credits. So farmers can be big winners out of this and this is a huge component of what we've got  out there in the package.

We were talking about it this morning at the forum, this is an important work in progress and we want the  engagement of the farmers. The farm groups, the stakeholders, the land management groups, to make this  work.

Because this is how we're going to drive an agenda that again plays to our strengths and rewards people for  doing smart things and cleaner things.

PAM MACINTOSH: And are there significant financial incentives available for them to do that?

SIMON CREAN: Yes, the package itself is $1.7 billion that's available for initiatives associated with those  very things that I've talked about.

PAM MACINTOSH: Mr Crean, thank you very much for joining us this morning. I know that you are on  your way to Casino. http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT057_2011.aspx (5 of 7) [27/10/2011 2:19:50 PM]

Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

SIMON CREAN: Yeah, Casino, to open a Cultural Centre that I made a commitment to when I was  Shadow Minister for Regions back about three years ago. So it's good to see the end result of a great  community initiative.

PAM MACINTOSH: Before I let you go, the heat is on in Canberra, as you say. It's good for you to get out  into the region to hear what people are talking about at grass roots level. But discussions continue in  Canberra and I'm wondering, does the Prime Minister have your full support today?

SIMON CREAN: Absolutely and I've made that position consistently clear every time and in all my 21 years  in politics, I have always supported the leader.

And I have also made the point that those who think that the solution to our current problems is the revolving  door of leadership, have learnt nothing over the course of the last 10 years.

And so far as getting out to the regions are concerned, it's always a delight to come out here because here  you get common sense and constructive dialogue. In Canberra you just get slanging matches.

PAM MACINTOSH: And is the community in the regional areas talking to you about issues, such as  leadership, about the asylum seeker issue? How much is that hurting you?

SIMON CREAN: No, they're not raising those issues but of course they want us to resolve the asylum  seekers issue and they know that the High Court's decision has meant that they've effectively said that both  parties' policies are wrong on that front.

So they expect us to respond sensibly to that and we will. But no, they're not talking about leadership, they're  not talking about the fear of the carbon price. They're looking for the opportunities and that's what's  enlightening and uplifting about the regions.

I tell you this, Pam. When we had the big challenges in the eighties and nineties, that floated the dollar, that  cut the tariffs, that opened foreign banks, that did all of those things. It was the regions that responded best.

And the ones that responded best of all are the ones that have diversified their economic base and the ones  that have really got on with the task of securing their future. And I've been up to this region many times over  those 21 years.

Most of all with Janelle who I'm with here again today but Janelle Saffin has been a great champion for this  region, she understands it.

What she has done is to bring together a whole group of regional champions today and together we'll work it  through.

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT057_2011.aspx (6 of 7) [27/10/2011 2:19:50 PM]

Transcript of ABC North Coast interview with Pam Macintosh

But today it was a constructive dialogue, that's what I want to engage and I'm sure that the vast bulk of the  Australian people do as well.

PAM MACINTOSH: You've been very generous with your time, thank you very much and I hope the  opening goes well. Thank you.

SIMON CREAN: Okay, thanks Pam.

PAM MACINTOSH: Simon Crean, who is the Regional Australian Minister on his way to Casino and has  been discussing issues as we've discussed this morning. With a forum of industry, business and community  leaders in Lismore.

ENDS

http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2011/SCT057_2011.aspx (7 of 7) [27/10/2011 2:19:50 PM]

