CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT, SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

Friday, 14 October 2011

SUBJECTS: Offshore processing, onshore processing, Nauru,  Malaysia Arrangement, boat arrivals, bridging visas, community  detention.

KIERAN GILBERT: Good morning, thanks for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Kieran.

GILBERT: The Opposition is calling on you to quit. Have you considered  that?

BOWEN: No, I mean, that’s the sort of shrill hyperbole we’ve come to expect  from Mr Morrison. I mean, where is the logic here? He’s got advice that this is  in the national interest, he’s had access to all the national security advice that  the Government has had. He knows that this is the best thing for Australia  and yet he refuses to vote for it, and by his perverse logic he then thinks I  should resign because he won’t vote for a piece of legislation in the national  interest. I treat that with the disdain it deserves.

GILBERT: But your policy is now dysfunctional, isn’t it? You want a policy of  offshore processing, but you have to adopt onshore processing.

BOWEN: We have a policy of offshore processing which we cannot  implement. The Opposition has a policy of offshore processing which they  cannot lawfully implement. So there is a situation there where I think the  Australian people would expect Australia’s leaders, Australia’s politicians to be  able to sort this out. Now, we’ve made plenty of offers in good faith to the  Opposition to sort it out, they’ve decided to play politics on it and I think  that’s disappointing for the nation.

GILBERT: Some in the Cabinet apparently argued that the Government  should cut its losses and adopt the Nauru option. Do you rule that out down  the track?



BOWEN: Yes, I do because it won’t work. All the advice to us has been that  an offshore processing regime which just has an offshore detention centre by  itself - not part of a regional framework, not properly negotiated through, not  returning people to where they began the boat journey and seeing them  processed with every other asylum seeker in that country - simply will not  provide the deterrent to come to Australia. If you have just Nauru by itself, or  anywhere else for that matter, but just a detention centre in another country

by itself, where people who arrive in Australia by boat get taken there and  processed and if they’re refugees they come to Australia, that is not a  deterrent.

Now Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison, if they really believed this, should come out  and say, the people sent to Nauru, where would they go if they’re refugees?  What countries have they negotiated arrangements with? What processes -

GILBERT: Why can’t you do that? Why can’t you, if you want the regional  framework, if you want other countries as destinations beyond Nauru? Do you  have that as an option? Because this is obviously something that people in  your own party, in the Right faction particularly, think should be considered.

BOWEN: But in effect, Kieran, that’s what we did in a much more efficient  way with the Malaysia arrangement. We negotiated with Malaysia that people  who come to Australia by boat would be taken to Malaysia and -

GILBERT: But that’s not going to happen, so why not -

BOWEN: And neither is any other offshore detention regime without the  passage of the legislation, Kieran, and because, as I say, in the absence of a  regional -

GILBERT: But you could have Nauru; you could’ve had it yesterday.

BOWEN: Well, only if the Opposition passed the legislation and -

GILBERT: They would have if you removed Malaysia, they would have  passed it.

BOWEN: But why would you open another Christmas Island further away,  which is what Nauru would be, if it is not part of a properly constructed  regional framework, if you don’t have the situation where you remove the end  result, which is coming to Australia to live? That’s what the Malaysia  arrangement delivered, something the Pacific Solution never delivered, and it  is something the current Liberal Party policy does not deliver.

GILBERT: Many in your own party would be pleased with this outcome,  wouldn’t they? Members of the Left faction, they’d be happy with onshore  processing?

BOWEN: It’s well known that this is an emotive issue on both sides of politics  and the Liberal Party has members of its parliamentary team who have  different views to its leadership. It’s well known we’ve had debates internally  in the Caucus, that’s a matter of public record. But it is also the case that the  Caucus solidly backed the Government’s policy of offshore processing and  pursuing legislation to achieve it because the Caucus understands there is  nothing humanitarian about a regime which encourages people to risk their  lives coming to Australia, which means that other people who would never

dream of having the money to pay to a people smuggler miss out on the  opportunity of a new life in Australia. There is nothing humanitarian about  that.

GILBERT: But that’s what we are going to see, isn’t it, now, because the  Prime Minister said we can expect more boats last night and the Immigration  Department officials recently gave briefings in which they suggested upwards  of 600 arrivals per month can be expected. Is that the sort of number you’re  expecting?

BOWEN: Well, I’m not forecasting a particular number, but you’re quite right,  it has been the case in the past we’ve seen 600 arrivals for, you know, for a  period of time and you could work on the basis that that’s the sort of regime  you could expect, but we’re not predicting particular numbers.

Now yes, that is an issue which we have tried and continue to try to avoid.  Now let me be clear, our policy is offshore processing: we believe it is better,  we believe it is better when part of a proper regional framework, when it  breaks the people smugglers’ business model; we think that is the better  solution, but it has to be lawful.

GILBERT: You’re in a dead end.

BOWEN: Quite right, and that’s why yesterday we said and I said that  before, the legal reality is that any offshore processing regime would be  highly subject to legal challenge and no competent government would pursue  it in the life of the High Court’s decision without changing the legislation.

Now, Tony Abbott knows that offshore processing is in the national interest;  he’s been told that if you want to really do this properly the type of  arrangement like we’ve entered into with Malaysia is the way to go, but he  chooses to play politics. Now, if he won’t do the right thing by Australia when  he is Leader of the Opposition, what hope have we got that he would do the  right thing by Australia if he were ever Prime Minister?

GILBERT: With these bridging visas, are you worried that this could lead to a  bigger and large underclass where people of different rights are living in the  same region?

BOWEN: Well, we’d carefully manage this and of course there are plenty of  people in the community currently on bridging visas. If you arrive in Australia  by aeroplane with a valid visa and then claim protection, claim asylum and  your existing visa runs out, then there are plenty of people on bridging visas  at the moment in the community. Now, of course, what I flagged is that you  could expect that number to expand, as we would use the suite of measures  available to manage the detention network.

Yes, it is quite right that the benefits and entitlements for people on bridging  visas are very limited, that is true. They are not generous, but of course we

would continue to manage it carefully. We have bridging visas; we also have  what is known as community detention, which is not detention in any  meaningful sense, it is living in a house that we designate -

GILBERT: But when you say ‘managed carefully’, how do you manage it  when you do have an underclass?

BOWEN: Well, what we would do is make an appropriate arrangement.  There will be some people for whom community detention would be more  appropriate. There’s actually more care and support in what we call  community detention: unaccompanied minors for example, they have 24 hour  carers available to them. Families have different care arrangements. Housing  is sourced through the Red Cross who do a very good job in working with us  on it. Bridging visas are a different regime. Some people will be more  appropriate for community detention; other people will be more appropriate  for bridging visas.

GILBERT: Just finally, why did the Prime Minister push ahead with this when  defeat was inevitable and it has been a bad end to what otherwise would  have been a good week with the legislative win on the carbon tax?

BOWEN: Because we had the High Court decision, we believed the legislation  should change, so we introduced legislation, that’s the appropriate thing for a  government to do.

GILBERT: But you knew you were going to -

BOWEN: Of course it was always going to be difficult if Mr Abbott chose to  play politics. Now we thought, ‘Well it’s worth a go, maybe just this once Mr  Abbott will do what he says and not play politics and do the right thing by the  country’. Now it turned out he didn’t and that was probably the more likely  outcome, but it was worth pursuing just in case Mr Abbott chose to act in the  national interest.

And can I say, the offer is still there: if Mr Abbott wants offshore processing,  he’s just got to pick up the phone to the Prime Minister and then they can  walk into the Parliament and we’ll pass the legislation and offshore processing  will be implemented.

GILBERT: Minister, thanks for your time.

BOWEN: Thanks to you, Kieran.

Ends





