1













REMARKS AT HORN OF AFRICA DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR   INITIATIVE

TECOMA UNITING CHURCH

MELBOURNE, 5 OCTOBER 2011

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

We are all here today for a reason.

There are people dying in Africa and the need for assistance remains acute.

More than 13 million people require urgent humanitarian aid.

Of those 13 million, 750,000 people are at risk of death by starvation in the coming  four months without urgent assistance.

In Somalia, 1.3 million children are acutely malnourished.

Unprecedented numbers of people are fleeing their homes for neighbouring  countries.

The situation is being made worse by life-threatening cholera and measles outbreaks  in the region.

I visited the Horn of Africa in July. I saw babies in their mother’s arms, limp and  listless, silently suffering from hunger.

With three-quarters of a million people at risk of starvation, we must decisively act  now before it's too late and we witness a largely avoidable famine on a massive  scale.

Unlike the Ethiopian and Kenyan Governments who, with the help of international  donors including Australia, have invested in social safety nets and market chains,  allowing their people to be more resilient to food shortages, Somalia has proved to  be the most vulnerable to the severe drought.

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

2











What I saw in July was heartbreaking and numbing, but I know we are making a  difference through the contribution of money and resources, and by acting early.

Early intervention

When this crisis started to escalate in June I made a commitment.

I was going to do everything in my power to ensure at Christmas time the  Government was not going to look back on events in the Horn of Africa and wish we  had done more.

We were going to learn the lessons from the devastation of the Ethiopian famine in  1984.

I’m sure most people here today will remember the confronting images on our  television screens at that time.

The international community was very slow to act then.

We were nervous about sending aid into a country experiencing internal conflict and  for a long time thought that the best thing to do was to put pressure on the  Ethiopian Government to feed its people rather than feed its conflict.

And who lost? The millions of children, mothers and families who had no say and  weren’t responsible for the conflict any way.

That time we left it too late to respond: too late for more than a million people who  died as a result and the countless families and communities who were ripped apart.

The world will not stand by and witness a repeat of the mistakes of the 1984 famine.

Australians, along with other likeminded donors acted quickly to respond to the  crisis, within a month we had committed over $70 million dollars to provide an  immediate humanitarian response.

We also had resources prepositioned through core funding to World Food  Programme and other humanitarian agencies.

This allowed them to maintain the organisational capacity to respond effectively.

But none can do it alone.

3









Governments, international and multilateral agencies, non-government  organisations and the community need to work together—and work together now— to prevent this famine becoming the worst in history.



Community involvement

We in government deeply value the relationships we have with our non-government  organisations—a considerable portion of Australian aid is delivered through non-government partners.

In July this year, I released the Government’s response to the first independent  review of Australia’s aid program in 15 years.

The Review found that we already have a good aid program, however in the  Government’s response one of our key promises was that we are going to make it  even better.

One of the practical ways to make the program better that we committed to was a  greater involvement of the Australian community in the aid program.

We want to leverage the skills, generosity and expertise of Australians to help the  poorest of the poor.

We’re increasing the number of Australian Volunteers of all ages and experience  levels.

We’re introducing a small community grants scheme and we’re increasing the  amount of the aid program which we spend with non-government organisations.

Non-government organisations exist because the community supports them with  time, expertise and donations—it’s as simple as that.

They tap into Australian’s resources to make a global impact to help the neediest.   And it’s this support that tells us the community wants to help.

The Dollar for Dollar initiative

That’s why today I announce the introduction of the Australian Government’s Horn  of Africa Dollar for Dollar initiative.

Australia has 15 non-government organisations—accredited by AusAID, working  either themselves or through their partners on the ground in the Horn, and which  are currently running appeals for further donations.

4









Between today and 30 November the Australian Government will match every dollar  the community donates to these agencies under their Horn of Africa, or East Africa,  appeals.

If the community tells us that saving the lives of these starving people is the right  thing to do, and are prepared to donate themselves, then we will match their  donations.

Australians can look to one of the 15 accredited organisations we are partnering  with and decide for yourself which one you would like to donate to.

Remember, this is a dollar for dollar campaign.

Where $15 will usually feed three families: now it will feed six.

$20 will provide a clean water kit—soap, bucket, and water purification tablets—for  a family of five for one month: now that will be two families of five.

$50 can power a borehole pump to supply water to 500 people for 4 days: together  we can make that 1000 people.

$142 can provide 10 families with high-energy biscuits; now 20 families.

$450 can truck in enough water for 50 refugees for a month; together we can make  that 100 refugees.

Why do I believe in this? Let me tell you about the little 18 month old boy I met  when I visited Dolo refugee camp in southern Somalia.

When I encountered Sadak Hassan Abdi and his mother Hukun he was acutely  malnourished and his mother was afraid he would die.

The Abdi family were farmers that kept a herd of about 40 goats.

When the drought hit the family slaughtered a few to feed themselves, but the rest  perished, leaving the Abdi family with no food or livelihood.

In desperation the family left their lands in Somalia seeking food in Ethiopia.

After a 14 days’ journey of walking and donkey rides, they arrived at the border and  found a camp set up for internally displaced people.

This is when I met them.

Things improved for Sadak after reaching the camp.

5











A combination of hospital treatment and nutrition supplements restored Sadak to  health.

Just five weeks later a second picture was taken of Sadak, now a healthy and happy  boy again.

The nutrition he received was a ready-to-use peanut based supplementary food  called Plumpy’Sup.

I have some here today.

They cost approximately 50c per tube and a child needs three a day.

If you donate $1.50 it will feed a child for a day, the Government’s matching  contribution will mean two children will be fed.

It doesn’t seem like a lot of money when you compare it to the benefit.

Ultimately, we need to stop these crises happening.

We cannot avoid droughts, but we can avoid famines.

October threatens to be the critical month in the region.

The rains that are so desperately needed—and will help recovery in the long term— will bring disease to vulnerable people, weakened by hunger.

There is much still to do.

We recognise the responsibility we have in sharing our expertise with Africa, the  poorest continent on this earth.

Looking forward, we want to make Africa a new pillar of our work on food security.

Africa is the only continent on earth that does not grow enough food to feed all of its  people, and 30 per cent of people on the continent suffer from chronic hunger.

This is just plain wrong given that within its shores, Africa holds 60 per cent of the  world's uncultivated arable land.

Working together with the governments of Africa and the international community,  we will change all this.

6









The potential productivity gains from applying existing and improved agricultural  technologies and techniques are huge.

We are already working with our African partners to help improve agricultural  technologies and techniques, especially in helping introduce conservation  agriculture.

By working together, turning a crisis into an opportunity, we can build on lessons  learned, turn the page, and put famine where it belongs—in the history books.

With the help of the Australian people - I am determined to save lives.

ENDS

