CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS KENNY, SKY NEWS SATURDAY  AGENDA

Saturday, 26 November 2011



SUBJECTS: Speaker, bridging visas for boat arrivals, offshore  processing, Malaysia arrangement, Nauru.

CHRIS KENNY: Chris, thanks for joining us.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, Chris. Good morning.

KENNY: Good morning to you. Let’s firstly look at the drama of this week.  We’ve had that dramatic switch in Speaker. You’ve got an extra vote in the  House of Reps now; the Opposition has one fewer vote. A lot of people are  lauding this as a political masterstroke by Julia Gillard. Does this demonstrate  her superior political skills?

BOWEN: Well, look, this is a simple matter where the Speaker’s resigned. I  think the Liberal Party has been going on with a lot of bluff and bluster over  the last few days about Westminster principles, etcetera. The Westminster  principle is at the moment that we have a Speaker who’s a member of the  conservative party who was elected under a Labor Government.

So all this bluff and bluster about Speakers should only ever come from the  Government; of course, Tony Abbott and Christopher Pyne agreed originally  to an independent Speaker and that the Speaker’s vote wouldn’t count. Now,  they walked away from that for their own political purposes.

KENNY: We have seen lots of independent Speakers, I think you’re right,  that’s a furphy. But was this a clever political deal by the Prime Minister?

BOWEN: Well, I think it was appropriate, and of course in a tight Parliament  the Government’s going to consider its options to maximise its ability to get  legislation through, of course we are. It would be mad not to.



KENNY: So it was an arrangement to get that extra vote?

BOWEN: No, no, look, the Speaker resigned. There was a vacancy and of  course we then supported Mr Slipper. It’s been quite public for some time  that Mr Slipper’s been unhappy in the service in the Liberal Party and of  course it’s appropriate that we’d then support an independent Speaker.



KENNY: But I’m intrigued that a lot of people are trying to say this is a  political masterstroke by Julia Gillard. On the other hand, the public line, as  you’re saying now, it was just an accident. Surely this has been a political

deal to increase your vote in the House. Why not just say so?

BOWEN: Well, I’m agreeing with you that yes, of course we’ve had a view to  maximising our chance to getting legislation through, of course we have. And  we’ve been talking for some time about an independent Speaker. There was a

step earlier in the Parliament with Harry withdrawing from the Party Room;  that was a step towards an independent Speaker. So he no longer took a role  in the Labor Party caucus.

He’s indicated now that he wants to get back into the Labor Party caucus so  therefore he’s vacated the Speakership. Now, of course then we’d consider  our options, knowing that Mr Slipper was unhappy in the service of Mr Abbott,  of course we would consider that option and go for it.

KENNY: So the Prime Minister, though, of course has been trying to treat  this as just a happy accident: there was no one speaking to Peter Slipper  beforehand or Harry Jenkins, it was just a happy accident?

BOWEN: Yeah, well, as I say, the first we knew that Harry was going to  resign as Speaker was that morning. I was actually in a meeting with my  departmental executives and an adviser knocked on the door and said, ‘You’d  better put the TV on, the Speaker’s just resigned.’ So that’s the sort of wave it  sent through the Parliament. And of course then we acted very quickly. We  thought about the issue and the caucus unanimously decided to support an  independent Speaker.

KENNY: I do just want to go to a tweet now that was sent out by one of  your colleagues, Mike Kelly, who’s a Parliamentary Secretary. He sent out a  tweet today, during the week, sorry, saying that Harry Jenkins had taken one  for the team, he did want to come home to the caucus, but he’d taken one

for the team. Now, he could hardly have taken one for the team unless he  knew that there was an arrangement to replace him with an independent or  with someone from the other side, otherwise the team would not have  benefited.

BOWEN: Well, I think Mike was probably saying, ‘Look, clearly the Labor  Party has improved its position in the Parliament as a result of the Speaker’s  resignation.’ Now, that’s inarguable. Of course that’s the case.



But to suggest all this, you know, Tony Abbott just gets up, and says, ‘Oh,  this is a conspiracy.’ [inaudible] he thinks he can just bowl out allegations  about not only the Prime Minister, but about the former Speaker and suggest  that there’s some sort of deal, you just can’t do that. You’ve got to have some  basis for the suggestions and allegations that you make. He just makes it up

and really it doesn’t do very well for the political discourse when you’ve got  the Leader of the Opposition who just gets up and puts out all this bile and  abuse and negativity with no shred of evidence to suggest that there’s  anything untoward here.

KENNY: There must be concern, though, that it just looks like another sort of  grubby political deal. I think Julia Gillard - while I won’t overstate it because I  think she was always still facing terrible problems, her polling was very low -  but she had over the last month or so started to look quite prime ministerial.  She’d won a couple of political battles in the mining tax and the carbon tax,  she’d been on the world stage with world leaders, including President Barack  Obama, and yet on the last day of Parliament she’s got back down into this  horrible sort of political deal-making. Do you think she’s actually thrown away  some of the gains of the past month or so?

BOWEN: No, I don’t think so. I think people understand when there is a  vacancy political parties are going to look to increase their ability to get  legislation through the Parliament, particularly governments, of course. And  what’s so terrible about having an independent Speaker, a Speaker who’s not  a member of a political party?

I mean, this is something that political reformers have been calling for for  years and we’ve actually done it, and yet Mr Abbott suggests that this is some  sort of conspiracy and a sad day for democracy. I mean, give me a break. He  actually agreed to an independent Speaker, he agreed that the Speaker’s vote  shouldn’t be cancelled out when it was in his political advantage to do so,  when he thought it would help to get the independents on board.

When he lost the independents, he then went back to type, said, ‘No, no, no,  we’re not going to do that, the Speaker’s vote will have to be cancelled out’  because it was then in his political advantage to do so. There’s a change of  circumstances and now he’s screaming blue murder. I mean, he’s just being  very hypocritical about all this.

KENNY: Now, over the years, you would have caught a lot of taxis around  Canberra, a lot of Comcars. Have you ever totalled up a taxi bill in Canberra  of $300?

BOWEN: Not personally, but I’m sure there’s all sorts of reasons why that  would be the case. I don’t know.

KENNY: All sorts of reasons? The mind boggles. How are you and your  colleagues going to feel defending the actions of Peter Slipper: $300 taxi  fares, extravagant travel claims, we know he’s had to pay some back in the  past, there’s been public claims of drunkenness; he says himself a colourful  past. How are you going to feel defending him, probably every day?

BOWEN: As you say, Peter himself says he’s a colourful character. The

Liberal and National Party were perfectly happy to defend him for a long time.  Now they seem to have changed their position, I understand that.

KENNY: Well, I think they took their time. They did take their time; too much  time, I would agree. But in the end, they were getting rid of him. You’ve  welcomed into your fold someone they were getting rid of.

BOWEN: Well, we’ve welcomed an independent Speaker. I mean, he’s not a  member of the Labor Party and of course we’ll treat him with the deference  and respect due to the office of independent Speaker.

KENNY: Deference and respect due to the office, I notice you say.

BOWEN: Yeah, and we’ll defend him against any inappropriate attacks, as  we would any Speaker.

KENNY: And you’ll support thorough investigations into any of his travel  entitlement claims?

BOWEN: Well, of course, as would be the case with every Member of  Parliament. We’re all accountable. Just this week, all our travel expenses and  all our other expenses were up on the website for public consumption, open  and accountable. And of course, if there’s anybody who wants to trawl  through any of our expenses in any way [inaudible], they’re able to do so.

KENNY: Alright. Aside from whoever has to ride shotgun for Peter Slipper,  you probably have the toughest job in Parliament as Immigration Minister.  Now, while we were all focused on Canberra this week, how many more  boats and asylum seekers arrived?



BOWEN: Well, we’ve had a big month for arrivals; we’ve had 680 people  arrive by boat. Now, I said at the time that when Tony Abbott said he  wouldn’t support legislation for offshore processing, we could expect more  boat arrivals. Surprise, surprise; I mean, this is particularly unsurprising.

I think there’s an interesting parallel here. June was the lowest month for  boat arrivals we’ve had in a very long time: 183 people arriving by boat. That  was the month after I announced the arrangement with Malaysia, we had the  lowest arrivals, there was an announcement effect. The month after we  announced that the Malaysia arrangement wouldn’t be proceeding because  we couldn’t get the Liberal Party’s support in Parliament, we had the highest  month for arrivals. That just shows -

KENNY: Now you’re going to onshore processing. You’ve effectively given  up. There is no disincentive in the system. Now it’s an invitation. On your own  reasoning for offshore processing, what you’ve got in place now with these  new visas you’ve announced yesterday is really just an invitation.

BOWEN: Well, let’s take that step by step. Yes, onshore processing is now  the practical and legal reality. It’s the only lawful thing to do with the  legislation as the High Court has interpreted it, and we just acknowledge that  practical and legal reality.

It’s still our policy that we should have offshore processing. It’s still my  personal position, it’s still the Government’s policy we should have offshore  processing as part of a proper regional framework and that means the  arrangement with Malaysia. I believe that very, very strongly and I’ll defend  that as the right policy outcome to provide the disincentive from making the  dangerous journey by boat. We’ve seen -

KENNY: So you have no disincentive now.

BOWEN: Well, onshore processing does not provide that disincentive. That’s  why we believe in offshore processing if it’s part of a properly designed  framework and not offshore processing Nauru-style, which just means the  majority of people [inaudible] get resettled into Australia. I do not believe  that provides a deterrent. I think that breaks people, but not the people  smugglers’ business model. But proper offshore processing, negotiated as we  did through the UNHCR and Malaysia as part of the Bali Framework, should  and could be in place if the Liberal Party would support it.

KENNY: You say you expected to get more without offshore processing; we  are seeing that. I just want to go to the front page of the Daily  Telegraph today, which is based on the story that the New South Wales  Government is now preparing for an influx of asylum seekers and almost half  of them come to Sydney, so they’re worried about policing, education, health.  What sort of an influx are you expecting now over the next few months,  especially considering we’re coming into the monsoon season which is the  most dangerous period?

BOWEN: Well, I’ll deal with the matter of arrivals, but let me just say I think  we’re seeing some pretty unfortunate scare campaigning by the O’Farrell  Government this morning and I would have thought they were better than  that.

What we have here is a situation where we have already 9,000 people living  in the community on bridging visas. These are visa overstayers and people  who’ve arrived by air and claimed asylum. Many of those would be living in  Sydney. Yesterday, I said we’d issued 27 bridging visas and we could expect  at least 100 a month going forward. Because the Prime Minister and I  announced this over a month ago and said, ‘Look, now we’ve got onshore  processing, we’re not of the mind that we should keep expanding detention  centres, it’s not a good use of taxpayers’ money, there’s a better way of doing  this, we’ll use bridging visas as part of the mix of managing people.’ Not  everybody will be issued a bridging visa, it’ll be where they’ve had their  necessary security and health checks, etcetera, and there’ll be various

approaches used.

I think what we’re seeing this morning from the O’Farrell Government is  pretty unfortunate and pathetic, frankly. We’re talking about numbers which  really don’t justify that sort of scare campaign from Mr O’Farrell and I can  only predict and suggest it’s probably a distraction from his fight with the

police and his crackdown on police compensation, injured police, and he’s  trying to spin his way out of that.

KENNY: Okay. You say you still want offshore processing, you want the  Malaysia solution. You had the numbers in Parliament after the change of  Speaker on Thursday. You’ve said for the last couple of months you want to  get the legislation through. You could have got it through on Thursday. Why  didn’t you rush it through?

BOWEN: Well, firstly, two things. There’s the House of Representatives and  yes, the numbers changed in the House of Representatives. I think we would  have been criticised if we had tried to, you know, ram something through,  guillotined debate, etcetera. The Liberal Party would have been going beserk  about that and said it was an outrageous attempt to stifle democracy.

KENNY: You say they’re the ‘Noalition’. You want this legislation through,  you could have got it through.

BOWEN: The point is, no, there’s still the Senate to deal with.

KENNY: But that’s always been the case.

BOWEN: But the way to get this legislation through is for Tony Abbott to  say, ‘I support offshore processing and guess what, I’m going to vote for it.’  At the moment, he says, ‘I support offshore processing but I’m not going to  vote for it’ because he’s made the political calculation that boat arrivals are  good for him politically.

KENNY: Look, I do want to wrap up, we’re running out of time. But that is  the key point, isn’t it? You favour offshore processing, Tony Abbott favours  offshore processing. There is this argy bargy over Malaysia versus Nauru. Can  we expect you over summer to sit down with Tony Abbott and find a solution,  because the risks, as we’ve seen, are quite horrendous.

BOWEN: Absolutely, I’m happy to. We’ve made that clear.

KENNY: Will you make that compromise?

BOWEN: Well, look, the Prime Minister said to Tony Abbott months ago in  the middle of this debate, ‘If you want to make Mr Morrison available to  discuss and negotiate with Mr Bowen, Mr Bowen’s available.’ I’m there, I’m  sitting in my office. If they want to talk about a way forward, we’re happy to

do it.



We believe the government of the day should be able to implement its  policies. Our policy is Malaysia; their policy is Nauru. We won’t do Nauru, we  think it’s a ridiculous policy. But we believe if they come to office they should  have the right to implement their policy. And if they ever do come to office, I  think that they would have the same point of view. But -

KENNY: And they’ll also have to battle with the Greens.

BOWEN: They won’t be able to with the law as it’s been interpreted by the  High Court.

KENNY: Alright. Thanks very much for your time this morning, Chris Bowen.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you.

Ends



