PRIME MINISTER CHANGES TO THE MINISTRY

Today I announce changes to the Ministry and the Cabinet.

These changes will better equip the Government to focus on its priorities for  the coming year:

Keeping the economy strong and ensuring Australians have jobs as the  economy goes through a period of profound transformation.

Using our prosperity to spread benefits to all Australians.

The Australian economy and Australian businesses will face both challenges  and opportunities in coming years as our economy transforms.

The transition to a clean energy future, the emergence of new technologies  and the changes to existing industries to take advantage of new conditions  will bring enormous opportunities our nation must be ready to seize.

The changes to the Ministry will support a stronger focus on industry,  innovation, productivity and participation, to ensure Australia is in the best  possible position as we go through this transition.

At the same time, we must use our prosperity to spread benefits to all  Australians, giving people the chance to get ahead while we make sure  nobody is left behind.

The changes to the Ministry reflect the high priority the Government places on  the important social policy reforms we will pursue over the next year.

A newly expanded Department of Industry, Innovation, Science, Research  and Tertiary Education will be established and led by two Cabinet Ministers.

The Honourable Greg Combet MP will be appointed Minister for Industry and  Innovation.

Minister Combet will also retain his responsibilities for the Climate Change  and Energy Efficiency portfolio.

Senator the Honourable Chris Evans will be appointed Minister for Tertiary  Education, Skills, Science and Research, along with his existing role as  Leader of the Government in the Senate.

This new portfolio will mean better links between industry, innovation, science,  research and tertiary education.

This new portfolio will also be responsible for international education given the  importance of higher education and vocational education and training to this  sector.

The Education, Employment and Workplace Relations portfolio will be led by  two Cabinet Ministers.

The Honourable Bill Shorten MP will be appointed Minister for Employment  and Workplace Relations.  Minister Shorten will also retain his responsibilities  as Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation.

To support the strong focus in the new Ministry on Australian industry,  particularly the manufacturing sector, Senator the Honourable Kim Carr will be  appointed Minister for Manufacturing. Minister Carr will also be appointed  Minister for Defence Materiel.

The Government is also conscious of the challenge of housing affordability.   To ensure a stronger focus on this issue in the future, the Honourable Robert  McClelland MP will be appointed as Minister for Housing and Homelessness,  within Cabinet, responsible for all Commonwealth housing policies and  programs.

To support this new arrangement a number of machinery changes will be  made to consolidate programs and Minister McClelland will be sworn to both  FAHCSIA and the Treasury.

The Honourable Robert McClelland MP will also be appointed as the first ever  Minister for Emergency Management, which will remain within the Attorney-General’s portfolio.

Senator the Honourable Mark Arbib will be appointed as Assistant Treasurer,  Minister for Small Business, in addition to his existing role as Minister for  Sport.  Minister Arbib will also be the Manager of Government Business in the  Senate.

Disability reform and the creation of a National Disability Insurance Scheme  will be a key priority for the Government, as will reforms in aged care and the  implementation of the mental health package announced in the 2011 Budget.

Reflecting this, the Honourable Jenny Macklin MP will remain the Minister for  Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs but will also be sworn  as the Minister for Disability Reform, with a lead role in building the National  Disability Insurance Scheme.

The Honourable Julie Collins MP will be elevated to the Ministry and  appointed Minister for Community Services, Minister for Indigenous  Employment and Economic Development and Minister for the Status of  Women.

The Government will also be focussed on continuing to deliver in health,  through our new health reform agreement, as well as in aged care and the  implementation of our mental health package announced in the 2011 Budget.

Given the breadth of the Government’s agenda two newly appointed Cabinet  Ministers will be responsible for this work.

The Honourable Tanya Plibersek MP will be appointed as Minister for Health.

In addition, the Honourable Mark Butler MP will be appointed to Cabinet as  the Minister for Mental Health and Ageing, with additional responsibility as  Minister for Social Inclusion.

The Honourable Brendan O’Connor MP will be appointed as Minister for  Human Services and Minister Assisting for School Education.

This appointment of an additional Minister working on School Education also  reflects the depth of the Government’s reform agenda to improve the quality  and equity of school education.

The Honourable Nicola Roxon MP will be appointed as the nation’s first  female Attorney-General. The Attorney-General will take on additional  responsibility for Privacy and Freedom of Information.

The Honourable Jason Clare MP will be appointed as Minister for Home  Affairs and Minister for Justice.

The Department of Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local  Government will move from my portfolio to become a standalone  Department.

Responsibility for Arts and Sport will transfer to the new standalone portfolio,  which will be named Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and Sport.

These new arrangements will ensure there is an appropriate focus on the arts  in regional as well as non-regional Australia.

The Honourable Simon Crean MP will continue his important work as Minister  for Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government and  Minister for the Arts.

I am also announcing a number of changes to Parliamentary Secretary  responsibilities.

Senator the Honourable David Feeney will retain his existing responsibilities  as Parliamentary Secretary for Defence.

In addition, the Honourable Mike Kelly MP will be appointed a Parliamentary  Secretary in the Defence portfolio and will assist the Minister for Defence on  the Afghanistan transition.

The Honourable Mark Dreyfus MP will be appointed Parliamentary Secretary  for Industry and Innovation, supporting Minister Combet.

Mr Dreyfus, will continue to serve as Cabinet Secretary and Parliamentary  Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency.

Sid Sidebottom MP will be appointed Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture,  Fisheries and Forestry.

I want to thank all Ministers who have served the Government so well in their  current portfolios.

As a result of these changes the number of women in the Cabinet and  Ministry will increase.

I intend to make some further administrative changes to better align  responsibilities within portfolios.

Responsibility for the National Archives will move from my portfolio to the new  Department of Regional Australia, Local Government, Arts and Sport.

Responsibility for national security research and innovation will move from my  portfolio to Defence.

Responsibility for cyber security policy will move from the Attorney-General’s  portfolio to my portfolio.

All departmental changes will occur within existing resources and existing  Secretaries will remain in place.

I will recommend to her Excellency the Governor-General that the new  Ministry be sworn on Wednesday 14 December 2011.

CANBERRA  12 DECEMBER 2011

PRESS OFFICE (02) 6277 7744

COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT

SECOND GILLARD MINISTRY

Cabinet

Julia Gillard MP Prime Minister



Wayne Swan MP Deputy Prime Minister   Treasurer



Senator Chris Evans Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research   Leader of the Government in the Senate



Senator Stephen Conroy Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy   Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Digital Productivity

Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate



Simon Crean MP Minister for Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government   Minister for the Arts



Kevin Rudd MP Minister for Foreign Affairs



Stephen Smith MP Minister for Defence   Deputy Leader of the House



Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Anthony Albanese MP Minister for Infrastructure and Transport   Leader of the House



Nicola Roxon MP Attorney-General

Jenny Macklin MP Minister for Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs   Minister for Disability Reform



Tony Burke MP Minister for Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities

Senator Penny Wong Minister for Finance and Deregulation

Peter Garrett MP Minister for School Education, Early Childhood and Youth

Robert McClelland MP Minister for Housing   Minister for Homelessness

Minister for Emergency Management

Vice-President of the Executive Council



Senator Joe Ludwig Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry   Minister Assisting on Queensland Flood Recovery



Martin Ferguson MP Minister for Resources and Energy   Minister for Tourism



Dr Craig Emerson MP Minister for Trade

Greg Combet MP Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency   Minister for Industry and Innovation



Tanya Plibersek MP Minister for Health



Bill Shorten MP Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations   Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation



Mark Butler MP Minister for Mental Health and Ageing   Minister for Social Inclusion

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Mental Health Reform



Outer Ministry

Brendan O'Connor MP Minister for Human Services   Minister Assisting for School Education



Senator Kim Carr Minister for Manufacturing    Minister for Defence Materiel



Senator Mark Arbib Assistant Treasurer   Minister for Small Business

Minister for Sport

Manager of Government Business in the Senate



Kate Ellis MP Minister for Employment Participation   Minister for Early Childhood and Childcare



Warren Snowdon MP Minister for Veterans' Affairs    Minister for Defence Science and Personnel

Minister for Indigenous Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on the Centenary of ANZAC



Gary Gray MP Special Minister of State

Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



Jason Clare MP Minister for Home Affairs

Minister for Justice



Julie Collins MP Minister for Community Services   Minister for Indigenous Employment and Economic Development

Minister for the Status of Women



Parliamentary Secretaries

Justine Elliot MP Parliamentary Secretary for Trade

Mike Kelly MP Parliamentary Secretary for Defence

Richard Marles MP Parliamentary Secretary for Pacific Island Affairs

Senator Jan McLucas Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities and Carers

David Bradbury MP Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer

Senator Jacinta Collins Parliamentary Secretary for School Education and Workplace Relations

Mark Dreyfus MP  Cabinet Secretary

Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency

Parliamentary Secretary for Industry and Innovation



Senator Don Farrell Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and Urban Water

Senator David Feeney Parliamentary Secretary for Defence



Catherine King MP Parliamentary Secretary for Health and Ageing   Parliamentary Secretary for Infrastructure and Transport



Senator Kate Lundy  Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister   Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs



Sid Sidebottom MP Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry

