













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH JOANNA McCARTHY

CONNECT ASIA, RADIO AUSTRALIA

11 MAY 2011





Subjects: Australia’s aid program; Regional asylum-seeker processing  framework; Scott Rush; Australia’s engagement with Asia





E & O E - PROOF ONLY

KEVIN RUDD: I think the first thing to say is that Australia delivers international  development assistance to underpin Australia's national interests, which are about our  national security interest, particularly in our own region, in South East Asia and the south  west Pacific.

It's also in our national interest because if we have stronger economies in our region  through development assistance cooperation, it helps Australia's national economic  development itself.

And thirdly, we have an interest, together with countries around the world enhancing what  we call the global order, which means that when you have real poverty around the world,  together with other countries you can make a difference and in recent decades hundreds-of-millions of people have been lifted out of poverty.

So we see this as consistent with Australia's national interests.

Furthermore, we made a commitment that we'd increase our overseas development  assistance cooperation to 0.5 per cent of gross national income by 2015-16.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

2



It is sensible to bring this about step-by-step between now and then, rather than some mad  rush towards the end. We think therefore this is the reasonable, responsible approach.

JOANNA McCARTHY:  Joe Hockey told Radio National this morning that families who are  earning $45,000 a year will be worse off with the freezing of the family tax benefit  supplements and then on the other hand, the government is increasing the foreign aid  budget. He said that's a contradiction. Do you think it is?

KEVIN RUDD: I think it's pretty important that we frame the debate about our overseas  development assistance in terms of the government's longstanding budget strategy and  what has that been? For the government to intervene in the last several years in the  Australian economy, to cushion the impact of the global financial crisis, to prevent the  Australian economy from going into recession and throwing a-half-a-million people into  unemployment, who otherwise, because of the measures we've taken have stayed in jobs.

Let's think about it a bit more. Had we simply not acted through our fiscal strategy in the  last several years, then we'd be looking at the sorts of unemployment numbers that you  have in Europe and in the United States, which is bubbling around the 10 per cent mark and  if we look at Australia by comparison, we have unemployment with a four in front of it.

So when you put it into context, the reason that we have gone for a budget deficit the last  couple of years is to make a huge impact to the Australian real economy, the only  developed economy in the world not to have gone into recession.

JOANNA McCARTHY: As Prime Minister, you closed the Manus Island Processing Centre. We  now understand you've held talks with Sir Michael Somare about reopening it. Why was  Manus Island bad policy then, but good policy now?

KEVIN RUDD: The first thing to say is that the critical agreement that we have reached and  I've participated in these negotiations as Foreign Minister has been the regional framework  agreement concluded in Bali about six weeks ago.

Why is that critical to any discussion of an individual processing centre within the region?  First and foremost, because the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the  International Office of Migration are now fully engaged and fully supportive of that regional  framework agreement - that was not the case before when the Howard Government acted  unilaterally, rather than multilaterally.

Secondly, the Bali regional framework agreement also has a mechanism for the buy in of all  regional states. It was a statement made by the chairman of that conference, myself and the  Foreign Minister of Indonesia, which has application to regional countries, should they  choose to engage in processing arrangements.

And thirdly, that agreement itself specifically, specifically made reference to the possibility  of processing centres by states if they agreed with one another to have such centres.

So ask what is different? That Bali regional processing framework, that Bali regional  framework agreement is something we only put together six weeks ago, after many, many  years of negotiation.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                      Department: 02 6261 1555

3





JOANNA McCARTHY: Scott Rush has had his death sentence commuted to life by the  Indonesian courts. Will you be seeking a prison transfer arrangement with Indonesia?

KEVIN RUDD: The negotiations with our friends in Indonesia on prison transfer  arrangements have been underway for some time. Some progress has been made.

Let's put it into context. Indonesia has no such arrangement with any other country in the  world, so this would be a first. But we've made significant progress.

But I'd also like to record again our Australian government appreciation for the decision of  the Indonesian courts on this matter.

Australia as bipartisan policy opposes the death penalty, and for those reasons, we have had  a long and consistent and strong position on this, but we still have our challenges ahead of  course with those who remain with capital sentences against them as part of the Bali Nine.

Again, a very, very sober warning to all those out there in the region about the perilous  circumstances into which they can put themselves should they engage in the narcotics  trade.

JOANNA McCARTHY: One final question. You would have seen Michael Wesley's latest book.  He suggests that Australians are ignorant and complacent and incurious about Asia. Now if  this is the Asian century, does that concern you that there are seemingly such low levels of  Asia literacy among Australians?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, Michael Wesley and academic contributors such as him will always  enliven the national debate.

What's my experience? We've got about a million Australians out of the country at the  moment and a large slab of them are in various countries in Asia - rock through Beijing;  Shanghai any day of the week; Jakarta; elsewhere in South East Asia. I see young Australians  out there learning languages, studying the cultures, engaged in businesses.

I think there is always more that we can do, but the reason why a decade or so ago, I was in  a different capacity, deeply involved in the development of the National Asian Languages  and Study Strategy for Australian Schools, NALSSAS is to broaden the base of this for the  future across the Australian education system.

Last numbers I saw is we had something close to a million Australian kids studying one or  other languages of Asia in the school system. Not all of them will end up as bilingual  interpreters and translators, but let me tell you, I think the base for the future is strong, but  given our unique circumstances, we can always do better and I suppose that's what Michael  is encouraging us to do.



END

