CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS UHLMANN, 7.30

MONDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2011

SUBJECTS: Legislation to restore Migration Act powers, Malaysia  transfer arrangement.

CHRIS UHLMANN: We’re joined now by the Immigration Minister, Chris  Bowen. Welcome.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, Chris.

UHLMANN: What’s Plan B?

BOWEN: Well, we’re concentrating on Plan A. All we’re asking for here is the  right to implement Government policy. Mr Abbott said a couple of weeks ago  that he thought the government of the day should have the ability to  implement its policy and we want that and we agree that that’s right.

We’ve said we don’t expect Mr Abbott to endorse Malaysia, we don’t expect  him to agree with it - just as we won’t endorse or agree with the Nauru  option; we think that would be a bad option - but we think if Mr Abbott were  the Prime Minister he should have the ability and capacity to implement it,

just like we are seeking the ability and capacity to implement the Malaysian  arrangement.

UHLMANN: But he’s effectively knocked back your solution tonight and you  were blindsided by the High Court decision. Surely you won’t be blindsided by  the Opposition saying no. You must have a contingency plan?

BOWEN: Well, we’re concentrating on what we’ve been seeking to  implement. Now let’s be clear, Chris: Mr Abbott has announced his  amendments; we’ll need to see how they play out. He’ll need to try and  convince both Houses of Parliament to implement those amendments, that’s  far from clear. Nobody should predict what the result of that would be. I’m  not predicting what the result should be; Mr Abbott shouldn’t predict that. He  would need to convince the crossbenchers in the lower house, he’d need to  convince the Greens in the upper house, and the Greens are on the public  record saying they don’t support the Bill and they won’t support Liberal Party  amendments.

UHLMANN: But effectively if this standoff continues offshore processing is  dead?

BOWEN: Well, it’s certainly very difficult and, as you say, very clearly in most  cases unlawful. And yes, I think the point you’re trying to make I agree with:  both major parties in Parliament agree with offshore processing, both major  parties support it. All we’re asking for is Mr Abbott to work in the national  interest to try and legislate for it.

Now today he put, frankly, politics before the national interest. The reason I  think he’s proposing these amendments is very clearly to try and stop the  Malaysia arrangement. Now he has the advice, the advice from the experts,

that the Malaysia arrangement is the best one as a deterrent. I think it is  open now for the Australian people to conclude that the only reason he’s  proposing these amendments is to stop the Malaysia agreement because he’s  been told it can work, and it will work, and he doesn’t want it to work  because it is not in his political interest for it to work.

UHLMANN: I know that he wants to kill this Government, but what makes  you think that tomorrow this won’t be your problem? It’s certainly not going  to be his.

BOWEN: Well, look, we have a very clear policy and our policy is to  implement the Malaysian arrangement. Now Mr Abbott has very hypocritically  today said that he would propose an amendment that should only provide for  refugee signatory countries. Now this is at the same time as his policies to

turn around the boats on the high seas and point them towards Indonesia:  not a signatory to the Refugee Convention, no protections negotiated, no  guarantees about non-refoulement, no guarantees about schooling or access  to health or education. And yet he says somehow, for the Government to

negotiate this arrangement with Malaysia and to get those guarantees, even  though they are not a signatory country, is somehow wrong. He is the one  with the big inconsistency here.

UHLMANN: But certainly - and let’s assume for the moment for the  purposes of this discussion that everything you say about him is true -  tomorrow morning it will still be your problem and not his. What makes you  think that he will support you tomorrow when he is not supporting you  tonight? That given, what do you do?

BOWEN: Well, Mr Abbott’s position is a matter for him. He’s clearly acting in  his own political interest. Now, as I say, Chris, whether he can get his  amendments through is an open question: nobody should predict the vote in  either house of Parliament because this is an unpredictable thing; certainly  I’m not seeking to predict it.

Mr Abbott has not yet made clear if his amendments fail whether he will  support the Government’s Bill, and that would be in the national interest. He  could try his amendments but say, ‘If they fail, I do support offshore  processing, therefore in the national interest I will support the Bill’, and if he  is fair dinkum that’s the only logical position for him to take.



UHLMANN: For a moment, in a triumph of optimism over experience, let’s  assume that at some point he does support you and your Bill goes forward, it  does not provide a legally binding guarantee that people get the refugee

rights which you say you’ve got assurances for, does it?

BOWEN: There’s been some criticism and some commentary about that, not  only today but in recent weeks. I make this point: Malaysia has entered into  this agreement in good faith and I think the criticism of Malaysia by the  Opposition is very severely misplaced -

UHLMANN: But it’s an assurance, it’s not legally binding, is it?

BOWEN: It’s not legally binding on Malaysia or Australia -

UHLMANN: And you wouldn’t buy a car based on assurances -

BOWEN:  It’s not legally binding on Australia either - our commitments  under the arrangement - and that’s fair enough. This is an arrangement.  Now, nobody forced Malaysia to go into this. Why would Malaysia give these  commitments to Australia, negotiate this in a painstaking fashion over a  period of months between the Australian Government and the Malaysian  Government and then not honour its commitments?

And frankly, I find it offensive that the Opposition gets up and says, ‘Well you  can’t trust Malaysia.’ I mean, Malaysia is a sovereign government and a friend  of Australia, working with Australia on these issues. They could have said to  me when I first approached them last December, ‘Well look, we appreciate  this but we’re not going to be involved in this.’ They didn’t, they sat down in  good faith and negotiated these changes. They had been developing changes  in the way they deal with these issues. Prime Minister Najib made  announcements just last week about very significant changes to Malaysian  law.

UHLMANN: Do you accept that no matter what happens from here on, it is  the Government that will wear the blame and not the Opposition, not matter  what you might say?

BOWEN: Well, the situation is, Chris, we are the Government but we have  the situation where the Opposition says it supports offshore processing, but is  saying they are going to make it difficult and may say they’ll vote against the  legislation. We’ll be making the point very clearly that if you want offshore  processing - and we believe it is an effective deterrent when part of a

properly negotiated and talked through regional framework which this is -  that that’s a deterrent for people getting on the boats to come to Australia  and making that dangerous boat journey.

Now, if offshore processing doesn’t occur, and Mr Abbott hasn’t acted in the

national interest and he’s put his political interests first, then we’re entitled as  the Government to be regularly pointing that out.

UHLMANN: Pointing it out, but also if that does happen then do you have a  contingency plan?

BOWEN: Well, as you say Chris, then clearly if there is no offshore  processing then there is only one conclusion, that the processing needs to  occur onshore -

UHLMANN: And because of that we’ll see a surge of boats, that’s your  expectation?

BOWEN: Well, I’ve made it clear that offshore processing and the Malaysia  arrangement is an important deterrent, and it has had an announcement  effect and it would have a further effect if it is implemented. And clearly, if  you don’t have that then yes, you are removing the disincentive to come to  Australia by boat.

UHLMANN: And then would mandatory detention have to be reconsidered?

BOWEN: Well, look, I’m not going to get into those hypotheticals yet. Our  policy is mandatory detention, let me be clear. We have moved considerable  numbers of people out of detention: there are about 2,000 people less in  detention centres and facilities than just in April because of the changes this  Government has made to a variety of mechanisms, and also because of the  reduction in the number of boat arrivals which means less pressure. So we  have had an increase in capacity because we’ve moved a considerable  number of people into the community and we’d continue with those programs  very clearly.

UHLMANN: Chris Bowen, thank you.

BOWEN: Thanks, Chris.

Ends



