Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Malaysia transfer arrangement,  asylum seekers, children Tuesday, 13 September 2011

Interview with Jane Doyle and Jon Blake,  5AA Breakfast

Jane Doyle: Welcome to the program Minister and thanks  for joining us.

Chris Bowen: Pleasure Jane.

Doyle: This is an issue that has really been bedevilling your  government. Yesterday was a bit of a watershed, the  Caucus and Cabinet meetings. You're now in a situation  where you're - is it really the ultimate in consensus  government: the Greens have labelled your decision  shameful, you're now left with no option but to curry favour  from the Opposition.

Bowen: Well look, for ten years it has been the situation  where both sides of Parliament, both Labor and Liberal  Party, had passed legislation to allow for processing in  other countries and that was unanimous legislation. And  when it went through the Labor Party supported it and both  sides had an understanding as to how it worked.

Now, two Wednesday's ago the High Court changed the  interpretation of that law and we want to restore it to its  previous understanding and Tony Abbott had previously  said that he would work with the government in good faith  and he thought the government of the day should have all  the options available to it and I think he should stick to that.

Doyle: So where do you think he'll jump? Will he support  what you're staying has to be the 'Malaysian Solution', he  says it can't be that, it won't be that, it has to be Nauru.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 7 Malaysia transfer arrangement, asylum seekers, children

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm

Bowen: Well look, that's a matter for him, but I would make  a couple of points. Firstly, we're not expecting him or asking  him to endorse the Malaysia arrangement or to welcome it  or to give us a standing ovation about it. What we are  asking him to do is to stick to his word, which was to say  the government of the day should have the ability to make  the policies it thinks it needs.

Now, we don't agree with Nauru: we think Nauru would be a  waste of money, it would have operational costs of $1  billion over four years, that's not including the capital cost to

fix it up and get it up and going again. And we don't think it  will work because it is simply a staging post: people get  sent to Nauru, they get processed and if they are refugees  in all likelihood they end up in Australia; and the people  smugglers know that, the asylum seekers know that.

So we think it's an ineffective and expensive option, but we  accept that if the Liberal Party ever forms office, if Mr  Abbott becomes Prime Minister he should have the right to  do it, the legislation should give him the right to do it. Now  what we're saying is, 'We don't like Nauru, we wouldn't do it,  but we think the law should allow for it to happen if the  minister of the day or the government of the day thinks it  should'.

We understand Mr Abbott doesn't like Malaysia, but we  think the government of the day should have the power to  implement it because all our advice is from the experts that  the Malaysia arrangement is the thing that will work: that if

you say to people, 'If you get on a boat and come to  Australia, we'll put you on a plane and take you back to  where you started that boat journey and you'll be processed  in line with all the other 90 000 and you've got no special  chance of being settled in Australia', that's a much more  effective deterrent than just a processing centre at Nauru by  itself.

Jon Blake: Minister - sorry Jane - Minister, why is the  government so committed to offshore processing? Polls  suggest that over half of Australians would be quite happy  for the government to take up onshore processing. Why are  you so committed to offshore?

Bowen: Because we've got to base our decisions not on  the polls but on what we think is the best policy and what  the advice we're getting. And the advice we're getting is that

Page 2 of 7 Malaysia transfer arrangement, asylum seekers, children

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm

onshore processing, just by itself, would not provide a  deterrent to get on a boat.

And look, what we've really got to do, and I think most  people in this debate would understand this, people getting  on a boat and coming to Australia is a really bad outcome.  People die: on some estimates of my department up to  four per cent, four per cent of people who get on a boat and  come to Australia drown. Now can you imagine another  area where we thought that was acceptable? And it is not

good enough to say, 'Oh well, we don't like people getting  on boats but we're not going to do anything about it', which  is the Greens' position, it's simply unacceptable.

The other point is that there are millions of people who are  applying for asylum around the world, who are displaced,  and those people can't afford a people smuggler. There are  people in camps in Africa and Burma, in Thailand, Syria,  Jordan; who are trying to get a place in Australia or Canada  or America and they're simply waiting. Now these people  deserve a say in this debate as well, it's not just the people  who can afford to pay a people smuggler and who can  make it to Australia's shores who we should be worried  about.

We need to be worried about them, but they're not the only  people in this debate, and so what we've done is say, 'Well  let's take a holistic approach, let's work with countries in our  region, let's work with Indonesia, let's work with Malaysia,  let's increase our refugee intake, let's take more genuine  refugees, but let's do it in a proper way and let's not  encourage people onto the boats'.

Doyle: What are you going to do about unaccompanied  children when they turn up?

Bowen: Unaccompanied children is a big problem because  it really worries me that there are people who put their  children on boats and say, 'You make the journey to  Australia and you'll get accepted as a refugee and then you  can sponsor in the rest of us' —

Doyle: With respect Minister, doesn't that demonstrate the  absolute desperation of those parents? If its that bad that  you're prepared to put your 14 year old on a boat alone,  doesn't that deny the argument that these people are well-

Page 3 of 7 Malaysia transfer arrangement, asylum seekers, children

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm

off and comfortable and that they're just trying to 'jump the  queue'?

Bowen: Well there are people in all sorts of circumstances  who get on boats and put their children on boats and I don't  think - I think one of the big problems in this debate Jane,  with respect, is overgeneralisation and simplification. You  can't say that all people fit one particular category. Not all  people are genuine refugees who come to Australia by  boat, not all are people who are economic migrants: these  are individuals, these are people with different stories, with  different backgrounds, with different motivations.

But there is one underlying factor: that getting on a boat is  really dangerous, that people drown doing it and I don't  think Australia ever wants to go through what we did last  December and bury children who drowned off

Christmas Island. And can I say, Christmas Island was just  the one we saw —

Doyle: Of course.

Bowen: — on Christmas Island we had TV cameras.  Christmas Island is the one which Australians understood. It  happens regularly: there are people who drown who we  never know about - don't see - in between Malaysia,  Indonesia and Australia.

Doyle: So will you be looking to change the Migration Act  so that you can make a different decision about children?  What are you going to do about it? Are you going to send  them offshore as well?

Bowen: Well look, what we need is the discretion to deal  with them as appropriate. So the High Court changed the  law and said that unaccompanied minors - in effect their  ruling was that unaccompanied minors can't be sent  anywhere, even if they're not refugees by the way was the  High Court decision -

Doyle: Of course, they're children.

Bowen: So if they come to Australia and their parents send  them, and we look at them - and this does happen Jane  and these are difficult areas, but it happens - people come  to Australia and they may be unaccompanied minors and  they go through all the processes and at the end of the

Page 4 of 7 Malaysia transfer arrangement, asylum seekers, children

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm

process and all the appeals the government, through the  courts and through the tribunals, says, 'Hang on, you're not  a refugee, you've come -

Doyle: So what do you do with them now?

Bowen: Well at the moment we take steps to return them,  but we do so in consultation with people like the UNHCR.  We've got an agreement for example with Afghanistan to  return people to Afghanistan if they're not genuine refugees  that includes unaccompanied minors. But we've got special  care and arrangements in place to make sure that they're  properly reintegrated and there is care in support in place.

Doyle: So why would you need to change the Act?

Bowen: Well because under the High Court's ruling that  would now be illegal, because now the High Court has said  that a child can only be removed if it is in their best interest  and that's subject to judicial review, so you'd be in courts for  potentially years sorting that through. It's just not a workable  policy.

Doyle: So back to this political dilemma that you've got,  what if Tony Abbott just refuses to toe the line? Where are  you left then?

Bowen: Well look, that would be an act of bloody-mindedness on his behalf and -

Doyle: Politics is full of that Mr Bowen!

Bowen: Well but particularly some of us more than others  [laughs] I'd suggest. But in relation to that, look, Tony  Abbott's got a choice to make: either he supports the  legislation or he doesn't, and if he doesn't support the  legislation as we've put forward that means he is stopping  the government from implementing offshore processing and  that would go against everything the Liberal Party has stood  for.

Now as I say, we're not holding Mr Abbott to account for the  Malaysia agreement, he can say, 'I hate the Malaysia  agreement, I don't support it, but I'm prepared to pass the  legislation and it is on the government's head', and that  would be a perfectly appropriate thing for him to do, but we  would say, 'Well that's fine, we will pass the legislation and

Page 5 of 7 Malaysia transfer arrangement, asylum seekers, children

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm

we will implement the Malaysia arrangement and if it works  then that is something that the government - or doesn't  work, either way it is obviously something the government  will be held accountable for.

Doyle: But the semantics of that - you know, you're right,  you're not asking him to pass the Malaysian thing but  effectively you have this extraordinary situation yesterday in

Parliament where you had your Prime Minister - or our  Prime Minister, effectively saying, 'Listen Opposition, you  need to help us with this because when you're in  government you'll have the same basket to deal with'. That  was an extraordinary political moment, would you not  agree?

Bowen: Well it's a fact, it's a fact because under the High  Court's ruling, the Liberal Party couldn't do what they want  to do, they couldn't implement the Nauru arrangement,  there's legal consensus on that: they've got five QC's  saying that it would be very difficult for an offshore  processing centre at Nauru to be established lawfully. The  High Court not only knocked out my declaration of  Malaysia, on the same logic, again the legal consensus is  that Minister Ruddock's declarations of Nauru and PNG  were invalid as well.

Doyle: You must be a bit shy of legal advice at the moment  because ahead of the High Court decision your legal advice  was that it was fine.

Bowen: Yes, and that was based on existing law and yes,  we are being cautious and we're making sure our  amendments are as robust as they can be because this is a  very litigious area and people, you know, do take us to  court all the time.

Doyle: Thanks very much for joining us this morning.

Bowen: Nice talking to you Jane.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 13 September 2011 at 13:06 AEST

Page 6 of 7 Malaysia transfer arrangement, asylum seekers, children

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 7 of 7 Malaysia transfer arrangement, asylum seekers, children

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb171799.htm

