MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE &  TRANSPORT  LEADER OF THE HOUSE



TRANSCRIPT OF PRESS CONFERENCE    BLUE ROOM  PARLIAMENT HOUSE

21 JUNE 2011



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Volcanic Ash Cloud; Abbott’s plebiscite stunt; carbon  pricing

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Thanks everyone. I've will make some comments  about the aviation situation first.  I will take questions on that and then put my  Leader of the House hat on to comment on Tony Abbott's failed stunt.

The situation is that a number of airlines have cancelled flights into and out of  Adelaide, Sydney, Canberra and Melbourne due to volcanic ash from Chile.

This is an extremely rare occurrence, and certainly I recognise that it is  extremely disruptive for passengers, for the community and of course there is  an economic impact as well.

Safety must be the first priority when it comes to aviation.  The Government  supports the decisions of airlines in putting safety first.

The Civil Aviation Safety Authority and Air Services Australia are working with  the airlines to make sure that safe procedures are being followed.

As people would be aware the weather is not something that can be predicted  with surety, and circumstances are changing all the time.  My office has  continued to receive regular updates and briefings over recent days.



The current situation is that Virgin has announced cancellations of all flights to  and from Melbourne from 4 o'clock today.  Qantas and Virgin have cancelled  flights into and out of Sydney, Adelaide and Canberra from this afternoon.   Tiger has cancelled all of its flights and operations to Port Macquarie.  Newcastle and Coffs Harbour are also affected.

This is changing at regular intervals and my advice for potential passengers is  to make sure they check with the airlines.  The airlines are indicating that  they're having difficulty keeping up with the number of calls that are being  made to the respective phone lines, but information is regularly updated on  airlines' websites.



QUESTION:  [Indistinct] Is there any sense of how long this is likely to last?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   The advice from the Bureau of Meteorology - and  once again they would put a caveat on it that it does change - but as of 12  o'clock today the rough estimates from the Bureau of Meteorology were that  Adelaide was likely to be affected for around 24 hours, Canberra and Sydney  for around 36 to 48 hours from this afternoon, and Melbourne for around 36 to  48 hours from tomorrow morning.  They are the Bureau of Meteorology's  estimates but as people would be aware there’s been a significant change  from this time yesterday.

The only thing I am certain of is that safety will be put first, and that that's a  good thing.

QUESTION:  Dick Smith says that Australia doesn't have the technology to  measure the density of this dust. Is the Federal Government considering  investing in that kind of technology?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I have every confidence in our existing systems.

QUESTION:  Does this highlight perhaps the need for light rail, high speed  light rail between - not light rail, [laughs] high speed rail between Sydney and  Canberra and Melbourne?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I think regardless of other transport modes there'll  always be a place for aviation.

Yesterday morning people would have woken up to front page newspaper  headlines around the country that Tony Abbott would be introducing a Bill into  the House of Representatives at 10 o'clock and be debated for there to be a  plebiscite on any proposed carbon tax.

We know that 10 o'clock came and went and nothing happened.  That's  because Parliament wasn't even sitting.

That is indicative of the lack of attention to detail and lack of respect for proper  Parliamentary processes which Tony Abbott shows.

Last Friday the Daily Program was issued for the House of Representatives.   It indicated, and indeed I moved a motion to that effect, that the House would  meet at 2.30pm with an address by the New Zealand Prime Minister John  Key.

So 10 o'clock came and went - nothing happened.

Tony Abbott couldn't even speak to his proposed Bill yesterday because he  hadn't put it on the Notice Paper.  This is evidence that this was a last minute,  cooked up stunt.  It has been recognised by Independent Members as being  just that.



Tony Windsor said yesterday:

“So  I  think  Tony  Abbott's  call  for  a  plebiscite  is  just  another   political stunt.”

Senator Fielding said this morning:

“Look I met with Tony yesterday, I had a look at it, look I must  admit  I  thought  it  was  a  political  stunt  to  start  with,  and  then   after  hearing  that  no  one's  going  to  be  bound  by  it,  it  is  a   political stunt.  Seriously why should we waste $80 million on a  glorified opinion poll just because Tony has got a problem?”

The fact is Tony Abbott made a mistake when he said he'd introduce it at 10  o'clock.  He also made a gross political mistake when he said yesterday  morning in advocating that we should spend taxpayers’ money on this, that  his views wouldn't be changed by the outcome.  That has led to its rejection.   It has led to the farcical situation whereby he’s saying taxpayers’ money

should be spent on a plebiscite which won't change his opinion.

We know that he’s opposed to action on climate change.  We know that in  spite of the fact that he said yesterday morning this wasn’t about climate  change, it is precisely what it's about.  But more importantly it’s about Tony  Abbott’s political opportunism.

The fact is Parliament is working and functioning well, with 137 pieces of  legislation being passed by the Government with not a single piece of  legislation being amended without the support of the Government.  Yet Tony  Abbott day after day suspends Question Time - now almost half the Question  Times this year have been suspended.  When he can’t do that, like yesterday,  he supported a suspension, this time by Bob Katter and Andrew Wilkie who  have very different views about live cattle exports.

Last Thursday Tony Abbott supported the Greens motion on asylum seekers  who have very different views to those Tony Abbott has held in recent years.

Parliament will resume at 2 o'clock today with Question Time.  We have  Government Business being conducted at the moment.  There was a  resolution carried for no divisions and no quorums between 12 and two today.

We expect yet again Tony Abbott will probably move for the suspension of  Standing Orders.  If he does it indicates that he’s simply given up on the  opportunity to hold the Government to account.

Any questions?

QUESTION:  Minister Albanese, there are rumours being held by some  people unhappy with the plebiscite decision that Steve Fielding as been

offered a job by the Government after he leaves the Senate. Can you confirm,  deny or otherwise that?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Well, that’s just absurd.  The idea that Steve  Fielding is pro-government Senator is absurd.  However Senator Xenophon  has always been prepared to sit down and discuss issues.



Clearly yesterday he sat down with Tony Abbott and discussed these issues.   When Tony Abbott said I want this taxpayers’ money to be spent on a  plebiscite but the outcome doesn't matter; I'll hold the same position, it  reduced the proposition to a stunt and a farce.

QUESTION:  Would it be appropriate now for voters to regard the next  election as a referendum on a carbon tax?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Every election is a vote on all the issues before the  Parliament.  We’ll have legislation on taking action on climate change,  including pricing carbon, before the Parliament at the end of the year.  The  next election will be about Labor with a positive vision for Australia, with a  Government that's taken action to protect Australia from the Global Financial  Crisis; to protect Queensland and other areas that are affected by the natural  disasters earlier this year; that has a plan for taking action on climate change;  that has a plan for giving opportunities to young people with education; that  has a plan to assist people with cost of living, through the paid parental leave  scheme that's in place, through the increases to the childcare tax rebate,  through the increases for the education tax refund, through the nation-building  infrastructure where we’ve doubled the roads budget and increased the rail  budget by more than 10 times.

All of those issues will be in voters' minds when they go to the ballot box.

In contrast we'll have Tony Abbott, if he lasts the distance between now and  2013. I think that it will be about his negativity and his failure to put forward  anything positive whatsoever except for stunts day in and day out.

QUESTION:  You just said you'd have legislation on pricing carbon before the  Parliament by the end of the year. Is that statement based on the assumption  that you will definitely get a deal with the Greens and the crossbenchers or…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Well, that’s the proposal. Of course…

QUESTION:  …or that you'll do it - or that you'll put up some form of  legislation even if you don't get a deal?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No, it's based upon we’re working through the  Multi-Party Committee on Climate Change.  It is our intention to come to an  agreement and to therefore put legislation before the Parliament.  Our  intention, as you’d be aware, is that we will price carbon from 1 July next  year.  One of the things that business is asking for - business wants - is  certainty in terms of moving forward, in terms of pricing carbon.



QUESTION:  Just as a follow-up, if you don't get an agreement in this next  two weeks out of the Multi-Party…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Well, frankly, that’s a question for Greg Combet,  with due respect, and the Government.

QUESTION:  But you’re in cabinet.

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Yes, I'm the Leader of the House and I'm happy to  answer any detailed question on infrastructure and transport that you like.

QUESTION:  Is it your understanding that you would go ahead with carbon  pricing anyway?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Look, that’s a question for the people who are  responsible for it, frankly, and you know, we’re working towards getting an  agreement.  We’re working very hard and people in the Government have  been a party to those talks.  Of course, I’m working on the side, if you like.  I’m  having discussions with Minister Combet when it comes to issues which  impact my portfolio. That’s the role I'm playing.  I’m not a member of the Multi-

Party Committee so I can’t comment on its deliberations.

QUESTION:  Have you heard from Andrew Wilkie about which way he's sort  of swinging on the plebiscite?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I have had a discussion with Andrew Wilkie, but I  keep my discussions with the Independents private, as you’d expect.

QUESTION:  Has he told you which way he's going though?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I keep my private discussions private.

QUESTION:  If it goes down in the Senate, do you think - would you urge the  Opposition to perhaps not waste the time of the House of Representatives?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   This is just a stunt.  We’ve had now more than 120  questions that could have been asked in the House of Representatives this  year alone.  Six full Question Times have been thrown away with these  wastes of time.  Every day at 10 to 3, Playschool comes on just after three, so  Tony Abbott moves his suspension so he can talk for 10 minutes, and rant  and rave.

Really, I think that it's tiring for those of us who have to put up with that, and I  say ‘us’ in the broader sense, for all those watching.  It has undermined, I  think, an important part of parliamentary process.



The normal process for moving a censure resolution is you seek leave.   There’s been no attempt to censure the Government.  What there have been  are attempts to suspend Standing Orders each and every day, and that shows

he’s simply not fair dinkum and I think he’s undermined the value of moving  suspensions.

Normally for oppositions since time immemorial there’s been a build-up.  What  we have is a premeditated decision day after day to move a suspension of  Standing Orders or to support anything that anyone else does that’s  disruptive.  And it stands in stark contrast to the statements that were made  by Tony Abbott when he was in government.

And I might conclude by quoting someone who I don't normally quote, and  that's John Howard, who said this on 17 September 1998:

“In  any  one  year  you  could  have  40  or  50  contentious  issues   and  the  only  way  that  democracy  can  work  in  an  orderly   fashion is to have the sort of electoral process we have unless  you  resort  to  a  method  of  having  plebiscites  or  referendums

on  each  individual  issue,  and  I  think  the  Australian  public   would  get  very  angry  and  tired  about  that.   They  would  say,   what's  wrong  with  you,  fellas,  we  elected  you  in  three  years,

you  go  away  and  take  all  the  decisions  you  want  to  on   individual  issues  and  then  when  these  decisions  have  been   taken at the end of your three-year period, if we don’t like you  we’ll vote you out.

“I don't think you can run it any other way.”

The fact is Tony Abbott isn’t a conservative; he’s a reactionary and he’s a  destructive reactionary who’s prepared to trash the parliamentary system that  we hold dear.

Thank you.



[ENDS]

