







THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

Sky News AM Agenda with Kieran Gilbert



3 May 2011

E&OE

Subjects: Newspoll, death of Osama bin Laden.



KIERAN GILBERT: With me now in the Canberra studio,

the Trade Minister Craig Emerson, and  from Brisbane we've got the Shadow  Attorney-General, the Deputy

Opposition leader in the Senate,  Senator George Brandis. Are you  encouraged by that number Senator  Brandis: Tony Abbott's approval rating  up?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Well I'm not complaining about it, but  you know it's a long way to the next  election. I think what it does reflect,  though, is the collapse of public respect  for the Prime Minister and there's a  reason for that. The Prime Minister lied  to the public about a carbon tax and  when somebody lies to you then your  respect for them evaporates. That's

2



what happened with this Prime Minister.  If you look back over the polls

historically, the real tipping point for  public regard for Julia Gillard was after  she announced the carbon tax, having  promised faithfully at the election that  there would be no carbon tax under any  government she led. Now I don't think  she ... she obviously hasn't recovered  from that and I don't expect she will  because the public knows they can't  trust her.

GILBERT: Tony Abbott - there have been

suggestions Senator Brandis that he  hasn't been positive enough. Does he  show that he should just stay negative?

BRANDIS: I think Tony Abbott's doing just fine.

And you know one of the rules about  public opinion is ordinarily when prime  ministers do these world trips and are  showcased with other world leaders, as  Julia Gillard was, their popularity goes  up and the opposition has a bit of a  vacuum in the media. But that certainly  hasn't happened on this occasion.

I think Tony Abbott, by visiting the steel

workers in Whyalla - whom even the  AWU says will lose their jobs because  of the carbon tax - visiting Christmas  Island to better inform himself about the  collapse of the Government's asylum  seeker policy - if one can charitably call

3



it a policy; it's a fiasco - I think has done  exactly what an opposition leader  should do, and that is focus on the  areas where the Government is  demonstratively failing.

GILBERT: Craig Emerson, whatever Tony Abbott

is doing, it's working thus far and you  know there have been suggestions that  he hasn't had enough of an alternative  agenda. But, really, at the moment this  time of the electoral cycle, why wouldn't  he just be targeting your weaknesses,  as Senator Brandis asserts that?

EMERSON: He doesn't have any alternative

agenda. But Lindsay Tanner's book is a  timely reminder of the fact that we  should not get hung-up on individual  polls. And the truth is, and I understand  why, every second Tuesday we have a  discussion about polls, when George is  happy with the polls he's happy to  comment on them, when he's not happy  he says, ‘well we don't comment on  polls’. I've been consistent on this that  we are a reforming Government; we're  going to drive reforms such as putting a  price on carbon, which is a very

important reform…

GILBERT: You say Tony Abbott's got no agenda…

EMERSON: … and we can see our way through to

the other side on this.

4



GILBERT: But Tony Abbott's got ... has proposed

things in the last few weeks, significant  measures like ...  well he's well ahead  of the Government on mental health  and he's also ahead of the Government  on welfare, welfare reforms which, as I  understand it, you know, the Budget  next week's going to feature welfare,  welfare to work - but Tony Abbott's  been out there well before you.

EMERSON: On welfare reform, we've been

advocating and putting in place  measures such as the quarantining of  Centrelink payments for years now.  Now, okay, if Tony Abbott wants to join  in on that, that's fine. But you say that  he has alternative policies. On carbon  pricing, he either believes that …

BRANDIS: Carbon tax.

EMERSON: …climate change is absolute crap or,

alternatively, he's got a direct action  plan that will cost taxpayers $30 billion -  $30,000 million dollars! That would see  the return of a high-taxing government  just as the Coalition was the highest-taxing Government in Australia's history  when it was last in government.

GILBERT: Senator Brandis, I want to move on if I

can and talk about the major story of  the last 24 hours: Osama bin Laden  dead - it's taken so long to come. But

5



tell me, what's your sense, it's ... you  know, I spoke to Clive Williams,  terrorism expert, he says it's obvious  that someone within the Pakistani  authorities, intelligence or government,  knew that ...  knew exactly where this  man was, and for a long time.

BRANDIS: Well, look, Kieran I'm not going to

comment on what may or may not have  been known within the interstices of the  Pakistani intelligence or military  establishment - it's not something that I  claim to have any specialist knowledge  of. I think it's a little surprising to most  people that bin Laden could have been  living under the noses of the Pakistani  military establishment for so long  without them being a wake-up to that  fact.

But may I just take the opportunity to

say, though, on behalf of the Opposition  this is a great triumph for the West.  There is no doubt at all that Osama bin  Laden was one of the great enemies of  the West, one of the great enemies of  world peace. And I'd like to congratulate  both President Obama, who took quite  a courageous decision to give this  mission the go-ahead - because it was  a risky mission - and the American  personnel, and both the soldiers and  the intelligence personnel who carried

6



this mission out with superb

professionalism.

GILBERT: Craig Emerson, bin Laden - you're

Acting Foreign Minister now as well so  in that context, we'll get the latest on the  travel advisories from you.  But tell me -  you know what Senator Brandis said  there is an accurate assessment - that  bin Laden was under the nose, not just  of the authorities but of the ... the

military were right there and one of their  training camps, their elite training  camps was near Abbottabad.

EMERSON: I think it's really best that I refer to

President Obama's statement on this  yesterday, where he thanked the  counter-terrorism authorities for the co-operation that led to the location of  Osama bin Laden. In fact he said ‘our  counter-terrorism co-operation with  Pakistan helped lead us to bin Laden  and the compound where he was  hiding’.

So, I don't think it's of any useful

purpose on my part speculating about  who knew what and when. The fact is  that Osama bin Laden has been at last  tracked down and he was an enemy of  Pakistan, as he was of the West. He  basically declared war on Pakistan, so  they were no friends as a nation and as  a government of Osama bin laden.

7



GILBERT: Okay, and for people travelling, as

Acting Foreign Minister, what's the  latest advice to anyone heading  abroad?

EMERSON:                               It's essentially unchanged, as of

yesterday, and that is - I'll just read this:  The US Government has strongly urged  its citizens overseas to limit their travel  outside their homes and hotels and  avoid mass gatherings and

demonstrations. We advise Australians  in areas likely to be affected by such  gatherings to exercise enhanced  vigilance regarding their personal  security.

In other words, don't join in big

gatherings, particularly if they're  protests or about the killing of Osama  bin Laden.

GILBERT: I want to play you both a comment from

John Howard this morning, articulating  something that he ... he also mentioned  yesterday in response to this

development.

[Excerpt]

JOHN HOWARD: To boost the morale of the anti-terrorist  cause, it doesn't mean that we can  relax; it doesn't mean, for example, that  we can accelerate our pull-out from  Afghanistan. If anything, it should

8



reinforce the commitment, because  what it shows is that progress can be  made, not only on the ground which we  have been doing in Afghanistan. The  military news in Afghanistan is getting  better and to have this news of having  taken out the top man, psychologically  it's a huge boost as well as delivering  justice.

[End of excerpt]

GILBERT: The former Prime Minister John Howard

there on the Nine Network's Today  show.

Senator Brandis, John Howard says it

show that the fight against terrorism can  be won but, gee, there's still a long way  to go and as we've seen many times  before where one leader is knocked off  in these groups, another emerges.

BRANDIS: Well that's true, Kieran, and I agree with

what Mr Howard had to say. I must say,  I think it was rather refreshing to see Mr  Howard back on the television in the  last 24 hours and to be reminded what  a grown-up prime minister looks and  sounds like.

We have always -  and I think this is a

view shared by both the Coalition and  the Labor Party - we have always said  that the war on terrorism was a war that

9



was going to last for a very, very long  time. And you know, it's been nearly 10  years since the outrage on the Twin  Towers and the Pentagon on 9/11 and I  don't think we should kid ourselves that  although this is a tremendous boost to  the morale of the forces who are  seeking to wage war against terrorism,  there is a lot of work to be done and we  shouldn't be complacent or think that  this is mission accomplished.

GILBERT: Okay, well gentlemen unfortunately

we're out of time and it has been a busy  program, a busy day. Senator Brandis  and Trade Minister Crag Emerson,  thank you both as always.

EMERSON: Thanks Kieran.

BRANDIS: Thanks Kieran.







