













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW

WITH GREG HOY

ABC NEWS 24 - NEWSLINE

23 MARCH 2011



Subjects: Libya; Syria; Japan

E & OE - PROOF ONLY

GREG HOY: Libya's Colonel Muammar Qaddafi has appeared in public rallying his  supporters and defiantly predicting victory against both the internal opposition forces and  the continuing allied bombardment.

Across the region discontent with old regimes is fomenting. In Syria protesters and security  forces have clashed as opposition mounts to the rule of President Bashar Assad.

Kevin Rudd is Australia's Foreign Minister.

Foreign Minister, thanks for joining us.

KEVIN RUDD: Thanks for having me on the program.

GREG HOY: Opposition to regimes in the Middle East and North Africa appears to be  spreading. Syrian security forces are now firing on protesters. How serious is the situation in  Syria?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, I've been briefed on that earlier this evening and, of course, there have  been sporadic outbursts of protest activity across Syria over the last several weeks,



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

2



however, things appear to be coming more focused in Syria as demonstrated by these new  reports of the severity of the regime's reaction.

We seem to have reports of tens of people killed but I would like to get those reports  corroborated first.

Again, in the case of the Syrian regime in Damascus, we would call upon them to exercise all  restraint in responding to peaceful protest activity.

GREG HOY: This developing pattern of uprisings in the region though must be difficult to  frame policy around, given repercussions for stability and oil prices, for starters. Is it?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, Australian interests are - and values - are deeply seized by what is going  on in the wider Middle East. If the region becomes grossly unstable it becomes potentially a  greater area, a more accommodating area for terrorists to operate.

The second point is that if instability is maximised in the region it probably means a better  set of strategic opportunities for Iran which is itself a destabilising power which funds  terrorist organisations and, on top of that again, if there's massive instability in the region it  does over time lead to people movements out of the region, becomes a new push factor as  people try to escape this instability and you've just mentioned a fourth interest which is, of  course, instability, the oil price, global inflation. We've seen it in previous decades and we  may be seeing it again.

GREG HOY: Meantime in Libya, of course, the attacks by the US and the allies have  disrupted Qaddafi's forces but they're far from defeated so what is the endgame here?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, the endgame is as described in the UN Security Council resolution 1973.  It's got two operational clauses, effectively.

One is operational clause four and the other is operational clause eight, from memory.

They're the two which authorise all necessary measures to be deployed by member states  and what's the objective in each case?

In the first case, operational clause four, it says member states may deploy all necessary  measures to protect the Libyan people from threat of attack by the Libyan regime. It's a very  broad power.

And the second one, in operational clause eight, is more specific. It refers to protecting or,  shall I say, bringing about arrangements to enforce a no-fly zone, again to protect the Libyan  people.

That's what we're authorised to do through the international community. That should be  the focus. I note since this has come into being and both the resolution and its  implementation, Qaddafi's march on Benghazi, at least at this stage, seems to have been



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

3



interrupted. What I feared most was the butchery of Benghazi had he been allowed to  continue unimpeded.

GREG HOY: So should Qaddafi be targeted?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, if you look carefully at what the Security Council resolutions contain, it  does not provide that language. It is as I've just described. Of course the position of the  Australian Government, which I've articulated on many occasions, is that Qaddafi's time has  come and it's time for him to go but if you look specifically at the provisions of the Security  Council resolution which authorises, through international law, the military actions that are  underway, they are quite specific in their remit and what therefore military forces should be  deployed to do, which is to protect the Libyan people.

GREG HOY: The coalition though are effectively backing the opposition forces in a civil  war. Could there still be a bloodbath even if the opposition was to win that war?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, as I said in the Australian Parliament only a day or two ago, and I've said  more broadly, this no-fly zone, this imposition of a Security Council resolution, 1973, comes  very late and let's hope and pray it doesn't come - it hasn't come too late.

We've seen some modest success when it comes to the advance on Benghazi not  proceeding to the full occupation of Benghazi and the butchery which would then follow but  I've also said consistently that this is a highly uncertain military environment, highly  uncertain, and because of that it's a highly unpredictable political environment in terms of  how it's going to unfold.

But whatever the respective political groupings may be in Libya, let's remember there are  millions and millions of civilians who we, deploying a doctrine of the responsibility to  protect civilians in armed conflict when their regime turns on them, that's what we're on  about as the international community. That's why Australia backed the no-fly zone. That's  why we backed UN Security Council 1973 and the military actions being taken.

GREG HOY: But this opposition is not very well-equipped. Should they be supplied with  heavy weapons and transport?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, again, look at the provisions of the Security Council resolution, both this  one, 1973, and I think the one which preceded it about two or three weeks back, from  memory 1970, these outline what the international community can do and they were quite  clear about it.

One thing the international community is entirely authorised to do is to provide  humanitarian assistance to people within Libya who are under threat from the regime and  that's what we in Australia are doing.

For example, right now across the entire world, Australia is the third largest global  contributor of humanitarian aid to the needs of the Libyan people and to those crossing



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

4



either the Tunisian or the Egyptian borders, third largest after the United States and the  European Union.

GREG HOY: President Obama has indicated that the US will hand over command of the  coalition to other air forces. Does that send any sign to Qaddafi of a lack of resolve, do you  think?

KEVIN RUDD: I don't believe so. If you look at the formidable fire power, which is available  to the United States, the world's remaining super power, as well as the capabilities of both  the United Kingdom, and France and some other states, this remains a considerable force to  be deployed. And the command structure, I understand, the US position, particularly in a  post-Iraq environment, where the United States does not wish to be seen to be running this  military operation, NATO is infinitely capable of providing that command structure.

The key thing is the assets, and in the case of the United States, often the unique assets  which they can bring to the field in order to give effect to the Security Council resolution.

GREG HOY: The UN resolution excluded an occupation force in Libya. But ultimately, isn't  that the only way to bring these hostilities to some sort of conclusion?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, as I said, the operation so far, and into the immediate future, is highly  uncertain in terms of its military and political terrain.

We, in the international community, didn't go as far legally as the UN Security Council  resolutions permit. That's the first point. But the second is, the Security Council also said at  the end of resolution 1973 that it will remain seized of the matter.

What does that mean in layman's English or layman's terms? It means the Security Council  will revisit this matter. And they, the Security Council, I'm sure, are highly mindful of the fact  that we are looking at some very uncertain military and political days ahead of us, and these  matters may well need to be revisited.

GREG HOY: The US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, has been suggesting that Qaddafi  might be looking for an exit strategy. Do you see any signs here that he's likely to be looking  to leave the country?

KEVIN RUDD: Look, I think it's not productive on my part to speculate on possible exit  strategies for Qaddafi. What we know about Qaddafi is that he's a brutal dictator, and it  would be a very good thing if he was not in the country. That's the bottom line.

But I know for a fact that multiple states have offered various exit strategies in the past,  prior to the UN's intervention through the Security Council, and prior to the commencement  of military operations four days ago, and none of those came to anything.

So, I'm not in the business of predicting what might or might occur. The key thing is, number  one, provide for the humanitarian needs of the Libyan people on the ground through



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

5



agencies, such as the High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Office of  Migration[sic], as well as the ICRC.

Two, for the Americans, the NATOs, European NATOs and some of the Arab states to give  military effect to the resolution. And three, let us see what unfolds on the ground, including  in the [indistinct] of Tripoli within the regime.

GREG HOY: If we could turn to Japan, Minister, with smoke, again, coming from one of  the reactors, is Australia receiving the regular urgent briefings that you had called for 10  days ago?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, the reason I articulated that 10 days ago is that one day into the crisis,  we were concerned about the full flow of information, and we could see at that stage that  this was going to evolve in a way which would create many uncertainties within Japan and  elsewhere.

Now, since then, we have had the officials from the United States' Nuclear Regulatory  Commission, the NRC, on the ground in Tokyo. We've seen also folk from the United States  armed forces, I think, Admiral Willard from the US Sixth Fleet, is also in Tokyo. He has a  team of specialists to work in this area.

The International Atomic Energy Agency has the same. Our own, ARPANSA, the Australian  Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Authority[sic], individuals are monitoring the data  as well.

With all these layers of analysis, we are doing the absolute best we can to examine carefully  the data which comes through. And so - but note carefully what we said in our last travel  advisory on these matters several days ago. Because of continuing uncertainty about the  Fukushima reactors, we've provided the advice that Australians in Tokyo, and in northern  Honshu should leave unless their presence was absolutely necessary. And one of the  grounds we gave for that advice was because of our uncertainty about the future of these  reactors.

GREG HOY: What sort of assistance is Australia now offering, Minister, given that this  crisis, obviously, is going to continue for many months?

KEVIN RUDD: Firstly, our friends in Japan and the United States have requested our  particular assistance with the provision of a particular high-pressure hose which has been  dispatched through two C-17 aircraft - these are massive aircraft - out of Perth in Western  Australia to Tokyo. They're on the ground.

As to how, and when, and if they'll be deployed, we'll be very much relying upon the  Japanese, and American, and other officials on the ground. That is one item.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0434 664 589                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

6



The second is, of course, C-17 aircraft themselves. Japan does not possess these. Australia  and the United States uniquely do. They're very expensive aircraft, but they are huge,  heavy-lift capabilities.

So, we have these aircraft in Japan. We've extended the use of one of those aircraft to the  Japanese Self-Defense Agency for at least another week, so they can ferry their own  equipment and troops in large numbers around the country than would otherwise be the  case.

And, of course, we stand ready to provide any other forms of assistance which Japan may  want.

GREG HOY: Are you concerned about the long-term effects on Japan's economy and the  flow-on effects through our region?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, Japan is the second largest - now the third largest [indistinct] economy  in the world after the United States and China. Therefore, Japan has a huge potential impact  across the global economy, depending on the precise quantum of damage to the economy.

Therein lies the key point.

I think one thing we must focus on, in particular, is Japanese power generation. We've seen,  obviously, a hit to their nuclear generation capability. A number of coal-fired power stations  have also been hit. Therefore, if you are drawing down the power generation and  transmission bases of that economy, it's going to, therefore, affect overall production.

On the individual numbers though which flow from this, some estimates have been put  forward. It's going to take a little more time yet. But I believe our friends in Japan will  bounce back from this. And apart from anything else, there's going to be a huge  construction task within Japan itself which will, in turn, fuel economic activity.

GREG HOY: And that's all we have time for. Kevin Rudd, thanks very much for taking the  time to talk to us.

KEVIN RUDD: Thanks for having me on your program.

ENDS

