Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade

Sky News, AM Agenda with Kieran Gilbert

Monday, 20 June 2011

Subjects: Carbon tax plebiscite; live cattle exports; Foreign Minister missing in action; Scott  Morrison’s visit to Malaysia; New Zealand PM John Key

E&OE…

KIERAN GILBERT    Julie Bishop thanks for your time. Bob Brown this morning has  ridiculed this idea of a plebiscite on the carbon tax. He says there was no plebiscite under the  Coalition when the nation went to war in Iraq or in Afghanistan. Sending troops to war the  most grave of decisions, no plebiscite on that, but the Coalition wants one on this proposed  tax.

JULIE BISHOP    This is going to give the people of Australia the opportunity to vote on  what will be one of the biggest economic changes in our history. Before the last election Julia  Gillard promised there would be no carbon tax, after the election she is seeking to introduce a  carbon tax.

And this is no ordinary tax, this is a tax that will transform our economy and we believe in a  very damaging way. It is a tax designed to increase year on year on year. It is a tax on energy  so it will have an impact on prices, on petrol. It is designed to change people’s behaviour. It  will be the most dramatic impact on our economy, it has the potential to send jobs,  production, manufacturing offshore and we believe the Australian people have the right to  have their say, that Julia Gillard denied them.

KIERAN GILBERT    But if the Coalition didn’t support plebiscites, or have plebiscites at  times when in Government our troops were sent to war, the argument from Bob Brown is  isn’t that a bit duplicitous now to be suggesting a plebiscite is the right course of action when  the Government is trying to implement its policy on this?

JULIE BISHOP    The Labor Party have tried to draw a parallel between the introduction of  this tax and the GST. Now that was a significant tax, the difference is that John Howard took  that tax to the Australian people and they got the opportunity to vote on it.

Julia Gillard betrayed the Australian people by saying there would be no carbon tax, she is  now seeking to introduce one. It has the potential to really reduce people’s standard of living  in this country, change the economy forever and I think that people have the right to have a  say on that.

KIERAN GILBERT    It would be expensive though wouldn’t it? A plebiscite of this sort  would cost tens of millions of dollars and it would be overall a very expensive and  complicated process wouldn’t it?

JULIE BISHOP    The carbon tax is designed to raise $11 billion in its first year and it is  designed to increase year on year to change people’s behaviour. I think the cost of giving  people the right to vote pales into insignificance when compared to the size of the tax and  how the tax will transform, for the worst, the Australian economy. Jobs are going to be lost,  jobs are going to be sent offshore - production and manufacturing - to countries that don’t  have a carbon tax.

And Kieran no other country in the world has an economy wide carbon tax or an economy  wide emissions trading scheme.

KIERAN GILBERT    Did you expect this to get through the parliament or is it just an  elaborate stunt? Andrew Wilkie has said he was going to back the Government in minority  status, the other independents and the Greens have said that as well, or at lease Wilkie,  Oakeshott and Bandt have said that, so it would be very unusual for them to now to back this  plebiscite which would be devastating for the Government’s ability to govern.

JULIE BISHOP    This is an opportunity for the independents to listen to the views of their  electorate. I know in some electorates that they represent there is a very, very strong view  against this tax and this gives those people an opportunity to have their say.

Now, democracy is a good thing. A robust democracy is a very good thing and that is what  we are giving the Australian people the opportunity to do, to have their say.

KIERAN GILBERT    It is not just an elaborate stunt?

JULIE BISHOP    Absolutely not. There is a serious risk here and that is the Australian  economy is at risk of being damaged, severely damaged, by this carbon tax and we think the  Australian people deserve the right to have a say and we respect their right to have a say.

KIERAN GILBERT    On another couple of issues in your role as the Shadow Foreign  Minister, the Agriculture Minister Joe Ludwig heading to Indonesia for talks today on the  live cattle exports. Mr Rudd did keep his counterpart in the loop as well during talks in  Europe. Do you concede that the Government has kept Jakarta across this at every turn?

JULIE BISHOP    Not at all. This is another ham-fisted attempt at foreign relations that  must be laid at Julia Gillard’s door. The visit by Joe Ludwig is too little too late. This is the  kind of discussion that he should have been having weeks ago.

I find it odd that the Trade Minister Craig Emerson came back from Indonesia in April and  had an interview applauding the live cattle trade to Indonesia, saying it was a very good thing  and insisting that Australia must continue to be a reliable supplier to Indonesia because of the  millions of people in poverty there, and yet our Foreign Minister is nowhere to be seen. He  may well have seen his Indonesian counterpart on the sides of a meeting in Europe but he  hasn’t been involved in this issue.

Now it is the job of the Foreign Minister to be personally involved in trying to maintain  relations with our near neighbours and Kevin Rudd has either deliberately avoided being  involved in this debacle or he has been kept away from it. Either way it is damaging our  relationship with Indonesia.

You’ve got the Trade Minister saying one thing just before the ban and now obviously saying  another thing after the ban. Joe Ludwig should have been up there weeks ago, the Foreign  Minister is nowhere in sight. It is just another example of Julia Gillard not being able to  manage our foreign relations.

KIERAN GILBERT    Ham-fisted foreign policy, there have been suggestions that the  Coalition’s approach to Malaysia and the fact that Scott Morrison is heading to Malaysia on  Thursday is over stepping the mark. The tradition, the convention is that that Australian  politicians don’t go abroad to trash the Australian Government and that is what he is going to  be doing this Thursday?

JULIE BISHOP    No. Scott Morrison is going over to see the facilities that Julia Gillard  intends to send those people back to …

KIERAN GILBERT    It is a fine line though isn’t it? If he is going there to highlight how  bad the facilities are there…

JULIE BISHOP    He is going to find out the facts.

KIERAN GILBERT    …and bag the Government policy.

JULIE BISHOP    Kieran, he is going to find out the facts. The Immigration Minister has  never visited the facilities to which they are going to send 800 asylum seekers. He hasn’t  visited the detention centres, he hasn’t visited the schools or the health centres. He knows  nothing about the circumstances to which he will be sending 800 people.

KIERAN GILBERT    But as foreign affairs spokesperson aren’t you worried that Mr  Morrison is overstepping the mark on this?

JULIE BISHOP    Not at all.

KIERAN GILBERT    But he is going overseas and essentially criticising the Australian  Government while abroad.

JULIE BISHOP    No. He is doing exactly what the Immigration Minister should have been  doing, or indeed the Foreign Minister should have been doing, visiting Malaysia and finding  our the facts. Just as Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison did the other day when they went to  Nauru you actually go and inspect the places yourself, meet the Government officials. And  this Government has done an appalling job of our relations in the region, with Malaysia, with  Nauru, with East Timor, with Papua New Guinea. The Foreign Minister should be personally  involved in visiting each one of these countries and trying to repair the damage that this  Government has done.

KIERAN GILBERT    Would you urge Mr Morrison not to try and embarrass the  Government or try to criticise the Government while he is in Kuala Lumpur, while he is in  Malaysia?

JULIE BISHOP    Scott Morrison is a very competent politician, he won’t do anything that  is not in Australia’s national interest. He went to Nauru recently and had a very productive  visit there, came back with the facts. We now see Nauru is going to sign up to the UN  Convention on Refugees. Julia Gillard said that she would not do a deal with a country that  wasn’t a signatory to the UN Convention yet she has now turned around and done a deal with  Malaysia that is not. She has some explaining to do.

Scott Morrison is doing the right thing by visiting Malaysia, inspecting the facilities for  himself, coming back to Australia with the facts. That is what the Immigration Minister  should be doing, that is what the Foreign Minister should be doing.

KIERAN GILBERT    Okay, one last question. John Key is going to be addressing the joint  sitting of parliament today, the first New Zealand Prime Minister to do that, why has it taken  so long?

JULIE BISHOP    Well I think this idea about having the leaders of our neighbouring  countries or our allies address the joint sitting of parliament is a very good one. It has  occurred in recent years - George Bush from the United States, we’ve had Stephen Harper  from Canada. And yes it is about time the New Zealand Prime Minister address the joint  sitting of the houses of parliament. He is a very popular Prime Minister in New Zealand, he is  doing a wonderful job. I met with him recently in Auckland, they’ve had some very difficult  times to get through with the Christ Church earthquake and he has been stoic and a fine  representative for his country so I look forward to hearing from him today.

KIERAN GILBERT    Yes indeed a welcomed visitor. Julie Bishop, appreciate your time on  AM Agenda.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.

