THE HON. JASON CLARE MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

MINISTER FOR JUSTICE



Transcript

Interview with Nick McCallum, 3AW  08:42 AM  Monday, 19 December 2011



NICK McCALLUM:   Jason Clare is the new Home Affairs minister.  He joins  us now.  Good morning, Minister.

JASON CLARE:       Good morning, Nick.

NICK McCALLUM:   First of all, an update on the number of people we think  were on the asylum seeker boat and how many have been rescued?

JASON CLARE:       The advice from the Indonesian authorities is  approximately 250 people were on the boat and their advice to me last night is  still that around about 86 people have been rescued. I know in the press  there’s different numbers being mentioned, as low as 33 or so.  I guess it’s not  surprising in a situation like this that there’s confusion over how many people  have been rescued.  It’s just my hope that it’s higher rather than lower.

NICK McCALLUM:   What is Australia doing initially to help in the rescue  efforts and to help the people who have been rescued?

JASON CLARE:       Yesterday I offered a P3 surveillance aircraft to  Indonesian authorities to help with surveying the area as well as one of our  Armidale Class patrol boats and overnight the Indonesian authorities had  accepted that offer.  So this morning HMAS Ararat is leaving off the coast of  Christmas Island into the search and rescue area to assist and one of these  P3 surveillance aircraft will fly over the area and work with Indonesian  authorities.

In addition to that, I can tell you, I can just confirm right now that a Dash-8, a  Customs’ Dash-8 vessel will assist, sorry Dash-8 aircraft, will assist with the  search and rescue as well.

NICK McCALLUM:   But really realistically, what, it’s almost 48 hours now, so  the chances of anyone still being alive is not great.

JASON CLARE:       It’s looking increasingly grim.  The 48 hour window is  now closing and I’ve got to tell you that the weather is getting worse up there.   It’s in the middle of a monsoon trough.  Yesterday waves were in the order of

five to six metres and... [Audio break]

NICK McCALLUM:   An associate of an infamous people smuggler who has  recently been arrested was responsible for putting these people on this clearly  overloaded boat.  Is that true?

JASON CLARE:       Well, I’m not going to comment on operational matters.   You wouldn’t expect me to do that.  What I will tell you is that Australian and  Indonesian authorities worked very closely together last year, twelve months  ago, when the tragedy occurred on Christmas Island when that boat smashed  against the rocks.

The work that Australian and Indonesian police did led to the arrest of the  people smuggle responsible for that, a bloke called Haydar Khani, and you  can expect that Australian police and Indonesian police are going to be  working very closely on this case tracking down the people smuggler as well.

In that regard, I can tell you that the Indonesians have asked for our help and  Australian Federal Police are travelling from Jakarta into Java into the area  where we think the boat took off and they’ll be working with Indonesian police  on that one today.

NICK McCALLUM:   It’s not like there wasn’t any forewarning about this.  In  fact, what the head of the Immigration Department, was it last week or the  week before, told the committee that he was anticipating a surge of boats  around this time.  Have the Indonesians and has the Australian Government  for that matter, but specifically the Indonesians, done enough to make sure  that these boats haven’t been leaving, particularly in the state that this boat  clearly was?

JASON CLARE:       We’ve made the point repeatedly that we expected the  number of boats to try to get to Australia to increase since the failure to get  that legislation through the Parliament.  I should tell you I think police, both in  Indonesia and Australia, do a very good job but their task is made harder by  that long archipelago that makes it very difficult to disrupt and stop boats  before they hit the sea.

There’s more that we can do there.  Part of the solution here has to be  Australian Federal Police, Indonesian National Police and for that matter  Malaysian Police and police of other regions working together.  So I think they  do very good work at the moment but we shouldn’t be under any false  impression that they can stop every boat before it hits the sea.

NICK McCALLUM:   If the Malaysian solution legislation had got through,  would you have been confident something like this would never have  happened or was unlikely to…

JASON CLARE:       The advantage of that…[Audio break]…to Malaysia  rather than Christmas Island.  You never assume that it’s going to stop every  boat but it creates that real disincentive.  Ultimately though, the people that  are responsible for this are the people who put them on the boat, who’ve  shown a callous disregard for human life.

We’re dealing here with people who are making sometimes hundreds of  thousands, millions of dollars, putting people on a boat that’s over crowded,  leads to them drowning.  I think they deserve the odium of the community.   They’re the ones who are responsible for these deaths.

NICK McCALLUM:   Do you consider the Opposition is also to blame or not?

JASON CLARE:       No, no, I wouldn’t say that.  I’d never say that.  What I  would say is that both the Government and the Opposition share a lot of the  same views on this.  We both support off shore processing and I think we’ve  got an obligation to work together to get this done.  People listening to your  program, and there’s many of them, would say Government and Opposition  need to sit down in a mature and a sensible way to get this done.

There are good people, people of goodwill, on the Labor side, on the Liberal  side, across the Parliament, and we need to work together to implement off  shore processing.

NICK McCALLUM:   Well, I was hoping this time last year what happened in  Christmas Island would be the circuit breaker and there would be some sort of  bipartisanship.  Now, clearly that didn’t happen.  Do you, I mean, can we say  that this is the circuit breaker, finally the Opposition and Government will stop  political point scoring about asylum seekers, get together and come up with a  mutually agreeable solution?

JASON CLARE:       Well, terrible things, the loss of human life shouldn’t have  to be the precursor to make sensible decisions.  We do need to get this done  and I’m hopeful that working together we can because we know that off shore  processing is the way to go.  Think back, Nick, about Vietnam.  Remember  1975, the fall of Saigon? We had about half a million Vietnamese drowned off  the coast of Vietnam.  The solution there was regional processing centres in  places like Malaysia, the Philippines.

NICK McCALLUM:   And that’s the point.  The Malaysian solution I don’t think  is a regional processing centre.  We really need a genuine regional  processing centre, don’t we?

JASON CLARE:       It’s part of it.  I think you’re right.  It needs to be part of it.   What happened thirty-five years ago with Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand,  regional processing centres, the UN was involved.  The UN won a Noble  Peace Prize in 1981 for the work they did.  It helped to stop people drowning  at sea and trying to get to Australia by boat and it meant that we took more  refugees that we otherwise would. So there’s plenty of precedents that tells us  that a regional approach and off shore processing is the way to go.



NICK McCALLUM;   Jason Clare, Home Affairs minister.  I know you’re very  busy.  I appreciate your time.  Thank you.

JASON CLARE:       Not at all, Nick.  Thanks very much.

- ENDS -

