

CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

WEDNESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Indonesian boat tragedy, Malaysia Arrangement.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, what’s the latest information you have on the  incident - the drownings off Java.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well Marius, obviously we continue to discuss this with the  Indonesian authorities but we do know this vessel sank, that it had around 70  people on it - although the exact number is very hard to pinpoint and we will  probably never know the exact number, but we believe it was about 70.

We do know that six people are confirmed dead, tragically at least one child, and  we have around 20 people still missing.

BENSON: Does the Government feel any responsibility for these deaths?

BOWEN: Well Marius all through the last several months I have argued  consistently and other Government Ministers have made the point that if we  didn’t have offshore processing as part of a regional arrangement, if we didn’t  have the sort of arrangements like we had with Malaysia, we would see more  deaths. I have never been more disappointed to be proven right.

This is a terrible tragedy but it is a fact that when you have more boats coming  to Australia you will see more deaths. That’s why, despite the considerable  criticism of our policy, we adopted that road. We didn’t adopt the Malaysia

Arrangement because it was politically easy or it was convenient, quite the  opposite. We adopted it because we knew that this was the sort of arrangement  that was necessary to avoid more deaths at sea, and that’s exactly what we’ve  seen.

BENSON: Then, politically, do you blame the Opposition and those who  opposed the Government’s policy on this for these deaths?

BOWEN: Marius I’m not going to get into blame. I’m simply going to continue to  make the point, as we’ve made consistently over recent months, that if you have  more boats and if we’re not able to reach a political agreement in Australia to  have offshore processing then you’ll have more boats and more deaths. That’s  just a statement of fact.

BENSON: And is the fact that more boats are still coming? Is that going to  continue?

BOWEN: We’ve said consistently that you can expect more boats as a result of  the demise of our regional arrangements. We saw another boat yesterday with  more than 90 people arrive at Christmas Island. We have seen an uptake in boat

arrivals and I do think, as we’ve said consistently, that is what you can expect.

BENSON: Will you now review your policy, which is now a default policy, of  onshore processing? Will you in fact consider the Opposition’s offer of reopening  Nauru?

BOWEN: Marius the fact of the matter is that onshore processing is a practical  legal reality if we cannot pass our legislation. In all the expert advice to us,  which we’ve made available to every Member of Parliament who’s wanted it -  Opposition, Independent, et cetera - is that the Malaysia Arrangement is the  best opportunity for breaking the people smugglers business model.

Other policies won’t work. Mr Abbott’s even said that ‘even if the Government  offered us Nauru we would still vote against this legislation while it had Malaysia  as part of it’. He would still vote against this legislation despite all the expert  advice that the Malaysia Arrangement, or arrangements similar to it, are the best  way of breaking the people smuggler’s business model.

BENSON: Well, what about the proposal that the Opposition’s policy, for all its  shortcomings in your assessment, would be better than the onshore reality at  present, in terms of discouraging people?

BOWEN: Well no, we don’t accept that at all Marius, and you’ve seen advice  before Senate Estimates from the Secretary of the Department of Immigration,  you’ve seen advice from Admiral Griggs that the tow-back policy would risk the  lives of Australian Defence Force personnel. We don’t believe that off-shore  processing, by itself and not part of a regional arrangement and not part of the

arrangement we have with Malaysia, would provide the disincentive.

If people go to Nauru and they know that they’re going to be resettled in

Australia if they’re refugees - which is the inevitable result of the Opposition’s  approach - it is not a disincentive at all.

BENSON: The Opposition approach you’re rejecting there; what about the  Greens? They’re saying you need to do more to create safer pathways for asylum  seekers in the region.

BOWEN: I saw Senator Hanson-Young’s comments last night and, frankly, I  thought they were extraordinary. Creating safer pathways, increasing the  humanitarian intake, taking more people out of places like Malaysia is exactly  what this Government has worked so hard to do for months and what the  Greens Party has worked remorselessly to stop.

For Senator Hanson-Young to say we need to create more safe pathways when  her party, and she in particular, have been remorseless in opposing the Malaysia  Arrangement - which increased the humanitarian intake and took an extra 4,000  people out of Malaysia - I just found breathtaking and extraordinary.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thanks very much.

BOWEN: Thank you Marius.

Ends



