Transcript

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 6/11/11

TITLE: Transcript of Interview - Channel 10 Evening News with Scott Morrison

TOPIC: Asylum Seekers; QANTAS.



JOURNALIST: Let's go head-to-head now with our political heavyweights, Finance Minister Penny  Wong joins us tonight from Adelaide and shadow immigration minister Scott Morrison is in Sydney.

JOURNALIST: Welcome to you both. Senator, if I might start with you, Commonwealth prosecutors  have been forced to drop charges against six Indonesians accused of people smuggling amid fears  that they are not old enough to stand trial. Now the Government has gone in hard to bat for the  Australian boy in Bali up on drugs charges, is this not now though a case of double standards where  you’ve got Indonesian juveniles languishing in adult prisons here?

WONG: When it comes to people charged with people smuggling, obviously if you're a minor, you're  not charged - you're sent home. The difficulty arises when people don't have papers and may not tell  the truth about their age. And the Australian Federal Police have a very clear set of processes that  they go through to try and determine age in those situations. And those processes were improved in  July. Obviously, it is a difficult situation if people don't have papers, but I think the police do the best -  go through the best process they can in those circumstances.

JOURNALIST: Would you not say it's more than a difficult situation when you've got juveniles in adult  prisons here in Australia alongside effectively murderers and rapists and the like?

WONG: Obviously if someone is a minor - they’re not charged as an adult and they shouldn't be held  as an adult. The problem arises when people don't have identification and don't have the papers that  demonstrate their age. As I said, there are a clear set of processes, and just in July, the Government  did receive some recommendations about improvement of our processes and they’re being put in  place.

JOURNALIST: Mr Morrison?

MORRISON:  Look children shouldn't be in prison and I know Penny would agree with that and that's  what the policy is and that's that's how the policy should work. We've had another boat arrive just as  I've been standing here -- which brings to 50 this year, the number of boats to have arrived this year,  so the issue continues. But the kids who are on these boats, in terms of those who are a crew are just  more victims of the people smugglers. I mean they earn more money in one boat than they do in two  years, and when I was on Christmas Island, and I’ve been there several times, and when I've seen  boats arrive, the person who looks the most frightened is the young boy who is part of the crew. Now  Penny is right, it's difficult to assess their age and I make no criticisms here - it is very difficult. But we  should all be trying to ensure that kids aren't in prison.

JOURNALIST: Senator Wong if we can just quickly move on to the other big political issue of the  week - of course Qantas. We've heard today they're handing out $20 million in free tickets in a bid to  try to win back public support. We saw former Prime Minister John Howard say a couple of days ago  that Labor's axing of WorkChoices actually led to the chaos with Qantas but there's even been  criticism that the Fair Work Act is rigid. Does it need an overhaul?

WONG: Let’s be really clear. The Fair Work Act did not lead to this dispute. What led to this dispute  was an employer deciding to lockout thousands of employees, thousands of employees, and ground  all of their planes. Mr Howard -

JOURNALIST: Senator Wong, why didn’t the Government intervene earlier with all respect?

WONG: We did. We intervened when the dispute escalated. Remember, the industrial action prior to  the employer lockout was - from the pilots - was the wearing of red ties. Now, you know, that’s not  what you’d call the most drastic industrial action. We intervened as soon as the dispute escalated,  and we got the planes back in the skies, so that was -

But what I’d say is this - John Howard at least is honest about wanting to go back to WorkChoices.  He's at least upfront about it. What we know is Scott will say he's not interested but he knows that his  party room precisely wants to go back to WorkChoices and that's the way they've approached the  Qantas dispute.

JOURNALIST: OK Mr Morrison how would you solve -

MORRISON: I always know the Labor Party -

JOURNALIST: - the situation then?

MORRISON: I always know that the Labor Party is desperate when they keep playing the  WorkChoices card. I mean that issue was dealt with in 2007.

WONG: It’s not -

MORRISON: But what we do know Penny -

WONG: It’s your own prejudices -

MORRISON: Penny I let you speak, so you might let me finish my answer. What we do know is that  this dispute with Qantas would still be going on today if Qantas hadn't brought things to a head a  week ago. The Government had no plan, they didn't use the powers they had available to them. They  said they didn't use them because they were worried about court action. Well Tony Sheldon, the next  president of the ALP, is going to take the whole process to court under the Fair Work Act.

The Government was caught flat- footed, no plan. The Minister makes very light of the process that  the unions were undertaking to bleed Qantas dry. And as a result, Qantas took some action. It was  regrettable action, and it was action none of us wanted to see. If Qantas hadn't acted, the  Government certainly wouldn't have acted and the dispute would still be happening now.

WONG: There is so much that Scott said which is not right, but I would say this -

MORRISON: Which bit?

WONG: Would Scott - what would Scott say if the unions walked every single employee off the job  and grounded all the planes? Now you would hear him from Sydney to Adelaide about how the unions  were doing something bad. But they -

MORRISON: Well if the Government wasn't going to act Penny, I don't know what you expected them  to do.

WONG: I have not heard one word of criticism of an employer that grounded planes and locked an  entire work force out. It was a very extreme act and I'm pleased that we intervened and got the planes  back.

MORRISON:  Anyone who doesn’t agree with the Government is an extremist, right, that’s how things  go. If you oppose the carbon tax, you're an extremist, and if you take action to try and bring a dispute  to an end, you're an extremist.

WONG: No, no, hang on - settle down, Scott. That's not what I said.

MORRISON: Sorry Penny I -

JOURNALIST: I'm so sorry.

WONG: No, that’s not what I said, I just think that the industrial action, the lockout was an extreme  act, yes, I do.

JOURNALIST: This is a debate that we’ll all have to continue later -

MORRISON: It was a very difficult act.

WONG: I would say the same thing about a trade union that walked the entire work force off the job.   MORRISON: Well, if they hadn’t have acted we'd still be in a dispute. And I’m pleased the thing’s  moving forward but not as a result of the Government's actions.

JOURNALIST: We’ll have to continue this debate another time.

WONG: I’m pleased that you’re pleased we intervened.

JOURNALIST: Thanks so much for joining us tonight Penny Wong and Scott Morrison. Thanks so  much.

WONG: Good to speak with you all.

MORRISON: Thanks Tarsh, Matt, thanks Penny.

ENDS





