CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH TONY JONES, ABC LATELINE

THURSDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2011

E&OE PROOF ONLY

SUBJECTS: Onshore processing, legislative amendments to  Migration Act, Malaysia Arrangement, immigration detention,  asylum seekers.

TONY JONES: Chris Bowen, thanks for joining us. Both the major parties  agree - or appear to agree - that onshore processing of asylum seekers is a  pull factor. Does that remain the case?

CHRIS BOWEN: It does remain the case that we believe that offshore  processing, if part of a properly constructed regional framework - like the  arrangement we had put in place and are pursuing - does provide a deterrent  to make the boat journey to Australia.

JONES: I'm talking very specifically about onshore processing, which is what  you're now going to be doing permanently.

BOWEN: What we've said is, as a matter of practical reality, as I said before  Tony, if this legislation didn't pass the parliament, the practical and legal  reality would be that offshore processing in any meaningful way is unlawful,  and therefore the natural conclusion you can reach is onshore processing is  the only viable alternative.

We remain, it remains the position that we believe offshore processing should  be in place, is appropriate, and that if Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison want to  pursue offshore processing, and want to give the Government of the day the  ability to implement its policies, all they need to do is vote for the legislation.

They had previously said they believed in offshore processing; they had  previously said the government of the day should have the power to  implement policies. They've walked away from that for cheap political  interests.

JONES: Is onshore processing a pull factor?

BOWEN: Well Tony, I would describe it this way: that offshore processing  can be a ...



JONES: Can I get you to describe to me what onshore process is?

BOWEN: It stands to reason, then, that you if don't have offshore  processing, you have less of a deterrent in place if it's part - and I need to be  clear about this, Tony - of a properly constructed regional framework; and  only in as much as it removes people back to where they began the boat  journey and they do not have the opportunity for resettlement in Australia,  which is exactly what our Malaysia arrangement delivered, as opposed to the  Nauru version of offshore processing which is simply: you process people in  another country, and if they're refugees you bring them to Australia. It's a  further away Christmas Island.

JONES: We've been through this many times -

BOWEN: It's important to make the distinction -

JONES: I understand the distinction, but onshore processing is a pull factor,  yes or no?

BOWEN: As I've said, Tony, I'm going to repeat my answer to you that off  shore process, if it's properly constructed and as part of ...

JONES: But I'm asking about onshore processing.

BOWEN: But they're two sides of the same coin, Tony, and I'm saying to you  that if you have offshore processing when it's properly done, properly thought  through, it can provide a deterrent.

JONES: Are you effectively saying today that your message that you're going  to be onshore processing from now on will be relayed immediately back to  people smugglers, and they'll start cranking up the boats coming to Australia  again?

BOWEN: As I've said previously ... after the High Court decision and all  through this process, I have said consistently that if you don't have the type  of arrangement we're putting in place then you could expect, and work on the  basis of an increase in boat arrivals.

We know just the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement had an impact.  We've seen a reduction in boat arrivals this year and a significant reduction  post the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement. We know that. That's  not Chris Bowen's view, that is a fact.

You can assume and work on the basis that now that the High Court has  made its ruling and the Parliament has failed to pass the necessary legislation  that you will see people smugglers maximising this opportunity - and this is  the point we've been making consistently, Tony. You've said in your -  correctly in your introduction - both sides of the Parliament believe in

offshore processing or are meant to; there's one side of the Parliament that's  prepared to deliver it, and that's the Government, but we can only work in the  legal and lawful constraints which we are provided with.



JONES: So what level of new boat arrivals are you preparing for?

BOWEN: I don't comment or speculate on intelligence and the Prime Minister  made it clear today we're not in the business of making public forecasts, but  we've both said very consistently that you could work on the basis and you  can expect that there's a strong possibility of an increase in boat arrivals. We  will always deal with that in a prudent fashion.

Let me make this very important point. We've received expert advice on the  best mechanism for dealing with the deterrent, and to provide that deterrent  to people smuggling. We acted on that advice. We made that advice available  to Tony Abbott. He's rejected that advice.

Now, the only conclusion you can reach is that he knows this is in the national  interest, he knows this is what's necessary to stop people drowning at sea. He  knows this is what's important for border protection. Yet he fails to do it. If he  won't do the right thing by Australia when he's Leader of the Opposition,  what chance is there of him doing the right thing by Australia if he were ever  Prime Minister?

JONES: I have to jump in there. There's a bit of blame shifting going on.  Each of your Government's offshore solutions have failed. Starting with the  East Timor solution, PNG solution, now the Malaysian solution. Are you really  saying that no blame attaches to your own Government?

BOWEN: Let's go through it. We reached an agreement with Malaysia. Plenty  of people said we wouldn't get a regional framework through the Bali  framework. We did so -

JONES: But it wasn't legal. That's the problem. It wasn't legal so your advice  was faulty.

BOWEN: Tony, just let me make the points and then I'm happy to respond  to your next question. People said we wouldn't reach an agreement with a  major regional partner like Malaysia. We did. People said we wouldn't be able  to reach an agreement with PNG. We did. Now yes, then there was a legal  challenge that overturned the common understanding of the law. On that  basis, not only was the Malaysia arrangement was ruled invalid, but very  clearly the PNG arrangement will be ruled invalid, and there is a clear legal  consensus that the Nauru arrangement - the proposed Nauru detention  centre - would be subject to successful legal challenge.

In that case it's open to the Parliament to reassert that offshore processing is  appropriate. That's the Government's view. The Opposition says it's their  view, but they've put politics ahead of what they have been told and what  they know is in the national interest.

JONES: Let's go to what happens next. In the media briefings from the head

of the Immigration Department, a figure of 600 a month additional arrivals  was talked about. Is that the figure you're expecting? Extra arrivals.

BOWEN: That was the figure that we saw, roughly, last calendar year. You  can expect, of course, that we would work on the basis that arrangements  that have been in place before and the sorts of figures we've seen in the past  are what we can work on the basis that it might be possible in the future, but  I'm not in the business of giving a prediction.

JONES: You've acknowledged essentially that figure, so if it were 600 extra a  month, within 2.5 months you'll use up your excess capacity in the detention  centres. You say you're not going to build any more detention centres on top  of the ones you're already building, so what are you going to do?

BOWEN: I have talked about the excess capacity - that is surge capacity,  that is the maximum capacity of our detention centres. I have also indicated  today, you'll recall, I commissioned two new detention centres: one in  Wickham Point in Darwin with a capacity of 1,500, one in Yongah Hill in WA  with a capacity of 600. In addition to that, we've seen a substantial reduction  in the number of people in detention centres and facilities over the last few  months for various reasons, some of which I've gone into. There is a little  excess capacity there.

What I've indicated is that we currently, for example, have a suite of  measures at our disposal: community detention which is not detention in a  meaningful sense, it's simply that somebody lives in a place which we  designate in the community.

We also have many people who arrive in Australia by air and claim asylum  living on bridging visas. That is an option available to the Government. I've  indicated you could expect to see that used more broadly because we don't  believe it is appropriate to continually expand the detention network further -

JONES: I'm going to stop you there so we can go through this in a little bit of  detail. Are you effectively saying you're going to be fast tracking people out of  detention into the community?

BOWEN: What I'm saying is that people - there will be mandatory detention  for health, identity and security checks. What I'm saying is there will then be  a case-by-case approach to individuals, and what you would see is clearly the  sorts of things we consider are length of time in detention; torture and  trauma; whether they're on what my department would call a "positive  pathway" or a "negative pathway", ie are they likely to be regarded as a  refugee or not; their behaviour in detention; and you could see appropriate  decisions made about moving people into the community.



I am flagging that today clearly because of the practical reality of onshore  processing, which I had previously said would be the result of the legislation  failing.



JONES: Let's go through the detail. Do you have numbers in mind? How  many more people could you expect to be fast-tracked out of detention into  the community?

BOWEN: That would depend on arrival numbers, but what I am saying Tony  is that you will see more use of things like bridging visas and community  detention where appropriate, and there will be different answers for different  people.

In community detention you actually have more support in place. You have,  for unaccompanied minors for example, 24-hour carers in place. For families  you have different care arrangements. You have houses sourced through our  colleagues with the Red Cross who do an excellent job working at this with  us.



For people on bridging visas, you have a different set of arrangements. You  don't have housing sourced for people. There are work rights but there is no  automatic access to social security. There's an asylum-seeker assistance  scheme which is available in some circumstances which provides access to  basic welfare. So -

JONES: 89 per cent of the special benefit I think you mentioned earlier.

BOWEN: Correct.

JONES: You get close to 90 per cent of the welfare payments, is that  correct?

BOWEN: Well, of the special benefit, which I must say is not the Newstart  Allowance or the Pension. For a single person with no children, for example,  that would equate to about $440 a fortnight.

JONES: What about access to Medicare and other Government support?

BOWEN: There's access to Medicare for people on bridging visas.

JONES: Housing?

BOWEN: No, there's no automatic access; certainly, as I say, for community  detention we've provided - through Red Cross and through other charities -  access to accommodation. For people on bridging visas you would have work  rights, but you would not have Federal Government assistance for housing.

JONES: So you would be hoping that people become absorbed into the  community; get jobs and while they were being processed become absorbed  into the community?

BOWEN: I think there is a case where you've got the sorts of numbers that  may arise in an onshore processing regime. There is a case for people, as

they're being processed, in some circumstances where it's appropriate for to  move into the community - begin the transition into community life; to work if  they can - not everybody will be able to, of course, but to work if they can; to

begin the process of resettlement into Australia. That won't be appropriate in  every case. There will be people for whom we keep in detention; there will be  other people for whom the decision is made - recommendations made to me -

for that sort of arrangement.

I'm flagging today that that is more likely. Now, of course I'll provide  implementation updates and further detail. We need to engage further with  the Red Cross. I have done some engagement with them, but now the  Parliamentary position is clear, that enables me to enter into further  discussions with them, about the sorts of capacity for community detention,  for example.

JONES: It's no secret that levels of self-harm in Australian detention centres  have sky-rocketed in the past year, and there seems to be a consensus  developing among psychiatrists that the longer you respond in detention the

sicker you become, and they've asked for a three-month maximum period to  be imposed. Are you considering imposing maximum periods in detention?

BOWEN: No. I would make this point about self-harm - and of course these  are very distressing instances and I get reports on them of course and it's a  very difficult area. I do need to make this point.

JONES: Why is it getting worse?

BOWEN: I need to make this point. When you have people who are in a  desperate situation, whether they're in detention or not, ie they believe they  are refugees - and we have people who go through the process and are not

regarded as refugees - but they have made a considerable investment and a  decision to try and come and live in Australia. They have frustration when  they are told they are not regarded as genuine refugees, and they will need  to take steps to return to their home country. We have a substantial  proportion of people in our detention network who are not regarded as  refugees -

JONES: And who can't be returned to their own countries for various  reasons, particularly Iranians, there are quite a lot of those for example. Will  they be ... will you be considering moving them out into community  detention, since they can't be returned to their home countries and large  numbers of them are self-harming.

BOWEN: I will deal with that, but just before I do want to finish the point I  was making. Even when people move into the community, we find that in  some cases, when they're given that bad news from their point of view that  they are not regarded as refugees, we still have instances of self-harm, still  have very difficult circumstances. So it's not as simple as suggesting - and  I'm not suggesting you're saying this - but it's not as simple as suggesting

that simply moving people into the community solves all their problems; that  because they're not in detention they won't self-harm -

JONES: But it's lot harder to put people in the community if they've acquired  some form of mental illness due to long to periods in detention. Will that be  taken into account?

BOWEN: Of course. We have mental health care in detention, and we have  mental health care for people in the community. Of course that will be taken  into account. The appropriate care arrangement for each individual.

JONES: The Prime Minister began the process today of preparing the public  for more asylum seekers - as you are now talking about - living in the  community. Why was it necessary to say, don't blame these people who come  here on boats? Why is it necessary to make that point so clearly?

BOWEN: I think the Prime Minister was just making the point that these are  difficult circumstances. We have strong views about people smuggling. We  have strong views about border protection, but what this Government has  never done is demonise individual asylum seekers -

JONES: Here's the point, do you fear a community backlash, as more and  more people come into the community?

BOWEN: No, I don't think you can read that into the Prime Minister's  comments at all, Tony, with respect. I think what the Prime Minister was  doing was making the point that we have policies which, very clearly, some  people regard as too tough. We have policies which some people would say  are too focused on border protection - some people would say that - but  what we are saying in this debate, let's keep a level of discourse about it,  because it can be a very sensitive debate, and let's see not see anyone in the  discourse blame asylum seekers or demonise individuals, and that she has  made, correctly, the point this is a community discussion which needs to be  regarded with the appropriate level of dignity and respect.

JONES: But she's changed the discussion, hasn't she, because earlier this  year and for lot of this year she’s been repeating the phrase over and over  again that people should be sent - these people, boat people, should be sent  back to the ‘back of the queue’. She's effectively saying they're queue-jumpers.

BOWEN: No, what she said is that there are 43 million displaced people in  the world; Australia can't take everybody -

JONES: That's not correct, with respect. She's been saying, ‘We'll send  people back to the back of the queue.’ The obvious implication is they're  queue-jumpers. They've jumped to the front of the queue, according to the  Prime Minister. Now she's toning down that rhetoric and changing it, and  saying, ‘Don't think of these people as queue-jumpers.’ Isn't that right?



BOWEN: With respect, the Prime Minister was describing the Malaysia  arrangement, which delivered on the objective of saying to people: ‘Don't get  on the dangerous boat journey to Australia because you won't get anything  out of it, you'll be returned to Malaysia ...’

JONES: You'll be returned to the back of the queue.

BOWEN: If I could make my point, Tony - you'll be returned to Malaysia  where 90 per cent of people begin their boat journey to Australia, and be  considered with the other 92,000 asylum seekers and refugees living in  Malaysia.

JONES: I appreciate that you've been putting in it those terms. The Prime  Minister has used the term ‘queue’. Can you say now - right now - that these  people are not queue-jumpers?

BOWEN: People who arrive in Australia are claiming asylum. We take the  view - very strongly and I don’t resolve from it for a second - that we need a  more orderly process, and that there are people who arrive in Australia  through that mechanism who - and that means less people are resettled in  Australia from refugee camps around the world.

And we are unapologetic and remain unapologetic for the view that if we had  a more orderly process, if Australia worked with the UNHCR to choose people  in difficult circumstances, and prioritise people and bring them to Australia,  that was better outcome which could see Australia increase its refugee -

JONES: It was actually a very simple question. Can you say now: these  people who are going to be living in the community are not queue-jumpers?

BOWEN: Tony, I am going to stick to the same language I have used  consistently, and that is to say -

JONES: You won't say they're not queue-jumpers.

BOWEN: People who arrive in Australia by boat in the current circumstances  - that means that people smugglers have taken the opportunity to bring them  to Australia. I would prefer that the UNHCR brings them to Australia with our  cooperation.



JONES: A final question, how much is this going to save the budget -  because if we understand correctly from what the head of the Immigration  Department was saying, it's a very, very expensive thing to process people  offshore. Must be considerable budget savings, in possibly the hundreds of  millions or even billions. How much?

BOWEN: No Tony, because if you have properly constructed offshore  processing, and that reduces or eliminates the number of boat arrivals in

Australia, that is what delivers savings. If you have the situation where you  don't need to process people onshore or offshore because you've broken the  people smugglers' business model, which is what the Malaysia arrangement -

JONES: Is onshore processing going to generate a savings to the budget or  not?

BOWEN: No, because if we can't have a properly constructed regional  framework which discourages people from coming to Australia, more people  would come to Australia and that has associated costs.

JONES: Chris Bowen, thank you for taking the time to join us tonight.

BOWEN: My pleasure, Tony.

Ends





