Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Malaysia transfer arrangement,  turning back boats, Nauru, asylum  seeker processing, Regional  Cooperation Framework, detention Wednesday, 21 September 2011

Interview with David Speers, Sky News PM  Agenda

David Speers: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time.

Chris Bowen: Pleasure, David.

Speers: Parliament is set to reject your legislation  introduced today. Why don't you accept the Coalition's  amendment to send asylum seekers to Nauru?

Bowen: Well, this is an excuse from the Coalition. This is  just an excuse they've come up with because they're  terrified the Malaysia agreement will actually work. Our  proposition is simple, David, and it's been simple all along:  give the government of the day the opportunity to  implement its policies. Give them the opportunity to  implement their policies if and when they form an  administration. Give us the opportunity to implement our

very clear policies because the Malaysia arrangement - all  the advice to us is - is the most effective deterrent and I  think the Opposition, having been briefed to that effect,  knows that and they're determined to try and stop it.

Speers: I don't think anyone doubts it's a deterrent. Their  concern is about the human rights issues, that it's much  tougher than Nauru ever was. We know that Malaysia's  record of treatment of asylum seekers is not good - people  have been caned there - and the safeguards that you have  negotiated are not legally binding.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, turning back boats, Nauru, asylum seeker...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172419.htm

Bowen: Crocodile tears, crocodile tears from the  Opposition. This is a party whose policy is to turn boats  around on the high seas in a highly dangerous fashion,  point it to Indonesia, not a signatory to the Refugee  Convention, no protections negotiated, not a word. In  contrast, we with Malaysia over six months negotiated a  written, formal agreement, with Malaysia giving  commitments in terms of non-refoulement, not sending  people back to danger, access to health, education, work  rights, treating people with dignity and respect.

Now, the Opposition says, 'Oh, it's not legally binding.' Well,  they don't have anything with Indonesia and it's their policy  to send people there - it's not a signatory either. That just  underlines the hypocrisy of the Opposition and it shows that  this is just an excuse to try and wreck a policy because they  fear it might actually work.

Speers: Well, without getting into the contradictions on your  own side over the years from only having onshore to now  having offshore, and whether or not asylum seekers should  be sent to signatory countries or not; getting back to that  question on Nauru, what's wrong with sending asylum  seekers there? Why don't you think it would work?

Bowen: Well, it wouldn't work in and of itself, by itself,  because it's not a deterrent, because it would just be simply  another offshore processing centre, not dissimilar to  Christmas Island. If the asylum seekers come to Australia,  get transferred to Nauru, they get processed and they are  found to be a refugee, they will inevitably be sent to  Australia, maybe New Zealand.

Speers: But on this point, why do they have to be then  taken in by Australia once they're found to be refugees? Is  there any way of getting around that so they don't have to  end up in Australia?

Bowen: Well, which other country's going to agree to take  them, David? I mean, that's the question for Mr Abbott to  answer.

Speers: And they would be Australia's responsibility?

Bowen: If you go to other countries in the world and say,  'Will you take these refugees?', they're going to say, 'Well,  they came to you, Australia. They're your responsibility.'

Page 2 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, turning back boats, Nauru, asylum seeker...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172419.htm

Unless Mr Abbott or Mr Morrison have a secret plan that  they're going to negotiate with other countries to take them  which they're not telling us about, then that's the reality,  that's the inevitable result.

Speers: Wouldn't that be your job as minister, to find those  other countries who could take them?

Bowen: Well, David, which country is going to agree to  take a refugee who's come to Australia? Now, we talk to  other countries at various times about individual cases or  small caseloads and, you know, we have arrangements  with likeminded countries like Canada or the United States,  but they're very, very small numbers that are involved.

Speers: But you managed to convince Malaysia to take  800 asylum seekers. Why couldn't they take some?

Bowen: Yes, we negotiated well with Malaysia and that's  the point, David. We negotiated with Malaysia, not having a  staging post through Nauru, but negotiated directly with  Malaysia to take asylum seekers who come to Australia in  return for Australia taking a greater number of genuine,  processed refugees who've been waiting for resettlement,  who can't afford a people smuggler, who deserve a chance  of life in Australia. Now, the Opposition says, 'Oh, you're  taking too many refugees.'

Speers: Okay, just back on this line, though, there's no way  Malaysia would take refugees who've been processed in  Nauru?

Bowen: Well, David, the point is, what's the point of Nauru  if you can have a direct relationship with Malaysia, as we've  negotiated with them, and return people who haven't been  processed as refugees for processing by the UNHCR and  then the UNHCR can mandate resettlement if and when the  UNHCR decides they've got a case that's compelling for  resettlement.

Speers: As you know, there are plenty of your colleagues  who would prefer to process all asylum seekers here in  Australia. Yesterday was, for the second week running, a  lengthy caucus debate over this. It looks now like onshore

processing will be the only option you have left if this  legislation doesn't go through. What's wrong with onshore

Page 3 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, turning back boats, Nauru, asylum seeker...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172419.htm

processing? Why are some of your colleagues wrong about  this?

Bowen: Well, the point about onshore processing is that it  doesn't provide the deterrent as part of a regional  framework. We do need to have a deterrent for these  dangerous boat journeys and offshore processing, as part  of a properly negotiated, considered regional framework  with Australia taking a greater share of refugees, I'm glad  and frankly proud of the fact that we could take an extra  1,000 refugees as part of the regional framework, and  Malaysia would just be the start of the regional framework  and the negotiations that we'd have across the region. But  onshore processing, in and of itself, does not provide as  part of that regional framework, that deterrent.

Speers: So you're adamant you need a deterrent to stop  people making that boat journey.

Bowen: Yes. I mean, that's been what we're working  towards under the regional framework, that's been the  whole idea of a regional framework, to let Australia take  more refugees but under an orderly process, a safer  process; people who've been through the process with the  UNHCR waiting for resettlement, can't afford or not inclined  to pay a people smuggler. I mean, a much more orderly and  humane system.

Speers: Because your argument there is about being  orderly and humane. Why not work better with Indonesia to  stop people making the journey: find people who are about  to make the journey, stop them making the journey by  either processing them, helping in the processing, helping  them come to Australia if they're genuine refugees? Why

can't that be done?

Bowen: Well, we do work with Indonesia very closely on all  sorts of law enforcement matters and we take refugees out  of Indonesia directly, of course we do, and from time to time  we've increased that.

Speers: But is that really working, if we're still going to see  some boats making the journey?

Bowen: Look, it could only be ever part of the equation,  David, and we have done it, we do work closely with  Indonesia. But whether it's stopping people getting on

Page 4 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, turning back boats, Nauru, asylum seeker...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172419.htm

boats, Indonesia's a vast archipelago with, you know, plenty  of places for boats to embark from, so you can do that and  we do do that, but it's limited in effect.

Speers: But given the situation you're now in where you're  going to have to have onshore processing alone, will you  turn to Indonesia and try to ramp that up?

Bowen: Well, as I say, David, we already work with  Indonesia very closely and of course there's always more  that you can do and we'd always be looking at options for  working with Indonesia, of course we would, in a very  cooperative way. They're a very close friend in terms of  these matters and they work cooperatively with us. And  yes, you know, there are things you can do in terms of  processing more asylum seekers in various countries and  we do it, but it can only ever be part of the equation if it's  going to be effective.

Speers: And a final question: if the end result here is just  onshore processing, what's that going to mean in terms of  detention centre capacity? Are you going to have to open  new centres?

Bowen: Well, of course we'd deal with the situation as it  unfolded. Now, we've got considerably less people in  detention facilities than we had even a little while ago.

Speers: What is it at the moment?

Bowen: Well, it's about 2000 less; around 4000 in detention  facilities and centres across the country. That's a lot less  than it was even a few months ago. It's the result of a  number of factors: it's the result of the reduction in boat  arrivals, it's a result of the faster processing, faster security  clearances that we've put in place, so some of the things

we've implemented have been working. But nevertheless,  obviously we still have considerable issues. We have  opened and have announced other detention facilities that  are coming online, so we have some of the contingency  planning that we've put in place over recent months.

Speers: But you will have to open more centres?

Bowen: Well, look, as I say, David, I'm not going to pre-empt. Let's let this legislation work its way through the  Parliament. Obviously, the Liberal Party's made certain

Page 5 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, turning back boats, Nauru, asylum seeker...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172419.htm

statements, but I think it's important we continue to make  the case in the national interest and they have opportunities  to adjust their position. But if there's onshore processing as  the only result, then we'd deal with that as and when that  happened.

Speers: Are we going to see more of the pressures in the  system that we've witnessed in recent years: the riots, the  protests?

Bowen: Well, this is always a difficult situation when you've  got people in detention, particularly people in detention who  have been told they are not a refugee. This is one of the  great challenges we've faced over the last 12 months.  You've seen the recognition rates falling, so less people  being told they're actually regarded as a genuine refugee,

departmental officials saying, 'Sorry, we've assessed your  case and we really don't think you're a genuine refugee',  and then it going to appeal and people getting the same  answer, and that leads to frustrations and tensions, of  course it does. That's one of the benefits of an offshore  processing regime: you can actually bring in more genuine  refugees, but you don't have to deal with that competing  tension in the Australian system.

Speers: Alright. Chris Bowen, thank you.

Bowen: Thanks, David.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172419.htm  Last update: Thursday, 22 September 2011 at 09:11 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 6 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, turning back boats, Nauru, asylum seeker...

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb172419.htm

