Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

Sky News

Australian Agenda

Nicola Roxon

31 October 2011



Interview with Nicola Roxon,

Australian Agenda program, 31 October 2011



Peter van Onselen:

Hello and welcome to Australian Agenda. I'm Peter van Onselen, thanks for your

company. Well there's no doubt that domestically the big issue is the decision by

Qantas to ground its fleet, that decision being made by CEO Alan Joyce. Paul Kelly and

I spoke to him a little bit earlier and we'll be playing that interview out to you in full on

Australian Agenda a little later in the program. Also later in the program we'll be

speaking to the Vice President of the Pilots Association, Richard Woodward out of our

Sydney city studio. But first up we'll be speaking with the Health Minister Nicola Roxon.

Now we will get to health issues in substance but obviously we'll also be talking to the

Minister at first about Government reaction to what is going on with the Qantas

dispute. All of that coming up shortly on Australian Agenda. Paul Kelly, welcome to the

program. Let me ask you straight up, why did Qantas do what they've done ?



Paul Kelly:

This has been a long-planned option by Qantas, it's a ruthless and desperate move by

Qantas to bring this industrial dispute to a crisis, to bring it to a head. The view of

Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce is that Qantas is bleeding to death. Qantas says that

it's losing $15 million a week as a result of this dispute and the unions had indicated

that they were prepared to conduct this campaign through into the new year. The

Qantas management took this decision cognisant that it would have two consequences,

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

it would force the Gillard Government to intervene and it would lead to the intervention

of Fair Work Australia. We're likely to get a decision by Fair Work Australia this

afternoon, Sunday afternoon. If this is a termination of the action it will mean there will

be a 21-day negotiating period between Qantas and the unions and it will mean that

planes will be back in the air quickly, either Sunday night or Monday morning.



Peter van Onselen:

You've mentioned some of how Qantas reacted. What about the Government, how has

the Gillard Government reacted?



Paul Kelly:

The Gillard Government reacted with surprise, concern and I think anger as well. The

press conference held by the Minister Anthony Albanese on Saturday afternoon was

very illuminating. The Minister said this dispute should have been resolved some time

ago. He said the Qantas action was particularly extraordinary. He expressed his

disappointment at what Qantas had done and he left the impression that he'd tried to

talk Alan Joyce from Qantas out of this action. This is now a major test for the Gillard

Government, it's a test for Australia's industrial relations system and for the

Government's capacity to influence the union movement.  I think at the end of the day

where we are now is that the Gillard Government is very involved in this dispute front

and centre. It's got to stay involved and it's got to act now as a facilitator to ensure

that this dispute is resolved as quickly as possible.



Peter van Onselen:

Paul Kelly, thanks very much for that analysis. We're joined now in the studio by the

Health Minister Nicola Roxon, thanks for your company.



Nicola Roxon:

Pleasure.



Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

Peter van Onselen:

Can I ask you about the Qantas situation just to start. I mean Anthony Albanese, I saw

his press conference yesterday, he was quite pointed in some of his comments in

relation to Qantas and the way that it's conducted itself. We had Alan Joyce in here

before that interview, will be played later, but he avoided trying to be joined into any

comment on what Mr Albanese had to say. What's your view on this? I mean, it struck

me that perhaps Anthony Albanese should have been staying a little bit out of this, he's

brought the Government into it more than he should have?



Nicola Roxon:

Well look, I think when he's the line Minister you absolutely should take his word as the

Government's view on this. Obviously as the Health Minister I don't have any direct line

responsibility. But this is an enormous problem. I mean, the Government would never

say that a company the size of Qantas, an Australian icon, the thousands of employees

that are affected let alone the thousands of ordinary consumers who are affected by

this very dramatic decision, of course the Government is concerned and we want and

have been urging all parties to behave like adults to actually get on and negotiate and

resolve this. Now, we wish that had happened earlier and I suspect players on both

sides of the dispute wish it had happened earlier and this is certainly one very dramatic

way to bring it to a head. Fair Work Australia had hearings late last night. As Paul

mentioned they've got hearings again today. Everyone is hoping that that will of course

be a circuit-breaker. The industrial umpire has been called in, and we want them now

to do their job.



Peter van Onselen:

Why did you call the industrial umpire in? I mean, there was the option there under the

legislation for the Government to act on this on its own but instead it chose to do it

through Fair Work Australia. Now I get the impression that Qantas would have rather

the Government acted directly. Why going the path that you did?



Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

Nicola Roxon:

I don't think it's right for Qantas to try to move responsibility for this dispute. There are

two key players in this dispute, Qantas and their employees represented by their

unions. We've always said that we think there should be a system where there are

negotiated outcomes and when those outcomes can't be achieved to use the industrial

umpire. That's why we set up Fair Work Australia, that's why we gave it these powers.

But obviously this dramatic escalation means that we can't have the population

suffering in the meantime. We can't have a very important Australian business suffering

in this way and we can't have the workers left high and dry. So making sure that we've

got a quicker way to get Fair Work Australia involved is an important think to do.



Peter van Onselen:

Do you accept that how it is resolved, whether it's effectively or ineffectively will in a

sense be a characterisation of how effective the Government's new IR legislation is?



Nicola Roxon:

I think it's inevitable there will be some of that commentary. I think we are getting to

the situation now where any event that occurs, people want to say the Government has

to fix it. We have a very, very strong reason to want to be involved, to want to make

sure that Qantas and the employees can solve this together but this is not a dispute of

our making, this a dispute that has been brewing for some time where we have been

urging both the company and the unions to try to get together and sort out an

outcome that everyone can live with and I think that's what Australians expect.



Paul Kelly:

I appreciate your point that this is not a dispute of the Government's making. Do you

accept though that given the crisis we are now in and given that the Government has

intervened that this has now become a test for the Gillard Government, a test of the

Government's judgment and influence?



Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

Nicola Roxon:

I think that we set up this system when we came to Government. It was a key thing, it

was a key platform for us to get rid of the old laws which we didn't think were fair, to

set up new laws which we thought worked better, and a big part of that was to make

sure that the industrial umpire had the powers that they needed to. Yes, it's a test of

that system but ultimately this is a test where the two parties, Qantas and the unions

are going to use the industrial umpire, they have to abide by those rules. We wish

they'd been able to negotiate more maturely together to resolve this well and truly

before this major inconvenience, huge loss in the economy. It's not just, as I say, for

every person who's travelling on Cup weekend.  It's actually for thousands and

thousands of employees.



Paul Kelly:

You'd be aware though that business over the last several months has been expressing

a lot of concern about industrial relations. I'd like to ask you generally in terms of the

cabinet, in terms of the cabinet response to this, to what extent is there a recognition

among senior cabinet ministers that there are problems and difficulties and concerns

about the industrial relations system? Do ministers feel that these business complaints

are justified or not?



Nicola Roxon:

I think you're trying to bring a couple of different things together here. The complaints

that have been made by some parts of the business community, I have never seen any

of them relate to the provisions that have been used in this Qantas dispute. So I'm

sorry, but I think it's a little bit cute to try to join those things together.  If the question

is does business like putting pressure on governments to get more involved in things or

to change laws that would suit them, of course they do, they do all the time, they do in

health, they do in industrial relations, they do in mining, they do in tobacco, in all sorts

of areas. And of course the cabinet talks about view that any major stakeholders have.

But we've been very clear about why we got rid of WorkChoices, why we put a system

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

in place that we thought would both work for businesses and be fair but protect the

interests of the community, the employees who need the system to work well for them.

So I do think it's a bit cheeky to try to combine those things together.



Paul Kelly:

There is one common element, Minister, one common element which combines all

these industrial relations issues and that is concern on the part of management that

unions are attempting to walk on to management areas, that is to influence the way

companies are run, and that is the particular complaint made by Alan Joyce in this

issue. So if we take that particular point, is there any recognition on the part of

ministers that business concerns about that are justified?



Nicola Roxon:

No, again I think that you're trying to combine and have us provide a commentary on

comments that Mr Joyce has made that I haven't even seen, and when we're in a

dispute which has reached this level I just don't think it's right for me to throw fuel on

the fire when I haven't even seen those comments myself. The point I'm making is the

rest of industry has complaints about bits and pieces. We of course look at those bits

and pieces. I've never seen these particular provisions be the ones that are in contest.

So I don't think you can turn Qantas as the example into something that is across the

whole business community. Most of the things that get raised with us are unfair

dismissal laws which businesses don't like and we have always said we think you have

to treat your employees decently, and we are not reconsidering those provisions which

protect the community.



Peter van Onselen:

Minister, let me ask you for some commentary on your earlier comment where you said

that you and the Government wished that the two sides of this had been mature up

until now. Now, one of those sides involved Tony Sheldon who's running for President

of the Labor Party. That's a bit of an indictment on somebody who's right in the mix to

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

be the organisational leader of the Labor Party, that you and the Government have got

concerns that he hasn't conducted himself maturely, in fairness in equal part I assume

you mean with Qantas as well.



Nicola Roxon:

In equal if not in more part. I think that Qantas has had a very aggressive approach.

Obviously the employees have been pursuing an outcome for a long time. We know

that the whole international environment is changing. Qantas is very much loved by the

community so people want it to be successful but they expect their staff to be paid well

and they don't like seeing too much of those jobs disappearing elsewhere. So I wasn't

trying to cast aspersions on any one individual but you can see, because we've got to

this point it is absolutely accurate to say they haven't been able to negotiate with the

maturity that everyone expects to get an outcome.



Peter van Onselen:

But what does that mean for the Labor Party? I realise that you weren't singling out

Tony Sheldon but I now am. I mean, he's one of the key players here, and that's a bit

of an indictment on somebody who may well end up being the President of the Labor

Party.



Nicola Roxon:

Well, you know, you can only dance if your partner is going to dance with you.

Obviously you've got to make sure in a negotiation that everyone is prepared to

negotiate properly. That obviously hasn't led to an outcome which has solved the

matter. Now Fair Work Australia is involved, the industrial umpire will require that one

way or the other and those negotiations hopefully will get on foot, hopefully it will be

brought to a head quickly and hopefully the travelling public will be able to get the

certainty back into their flying plans that they need and a business which has been a

very successful one for many, many decades will be able to continue to service the

community and keep its employees happy. That's the outcome everyone wants.

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon



Paul Kelly:

Let me just shift to your health portfolio . As Minister you've put a lot of extra money

into health and you've introduced a whole series of reforms. Yet  recently we see in

Newspoll on the health issue essentially Labor and the Coalition pretty much even

Stevens, how disappointed are you about that and do you think that rating will turn

around in the future?



Nicola Roxon:

I do think that that will change. I think health has been a plus for Labor for a long

time, with good reason. It's Labor that established Medicare, it's Labor that established

the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and it's now us that is reforming the system in a

way which is already starting to benefit patients.



Peter van Onselen:

But that's the point isn't it?



Nicola Roxon:

But the truth is...



Peter van Onselen:

Dispute all of that it's level pegging in community attitudes about  health management,

even though the Coalition doesn't have much of a health policy.



Nicola Roxon:

The Coalition's only health policy is to cut back a huge number of the things that we've

been investing in and I think that's what will change things over time. At the moment

there's so much political business, there's so much activity on other issues. Really

people are not focussed on health, certainly not in the national debate, but that could

not be more strongly contrasted with what happens when I travel locally, you know the

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

Blacktown clinical school which is now training doctors for the first time in western

Sydney, front page of the local paper when Julia is there, super clinics opening in

Grafton, front page of the local paper there, super clinics opening in Illawarra where I

was on Friday, you know, they cover that on their television news. So I think locally

people are seeing services being run in their communities that they really want, they're

seeing young doctors and nurses and specialists training in their hospitals that were

never there before, they're seeing the after-hours GP service there at the end of the

phone if you're a parent that's worried in the middle of the night that your child's sick.

So I do have a lot of confidence that delivering those things well, which we've been

doing, will turn around and be a plus for us. But when there's so much, I mean climate

change has been a huge debate, of course it's going to squeeze out other issues for a

period of time.



Paul Kelly:

If we just take that issue though, to what extent do you think we'll see a change in the

political agenda next year? It's been dominated very much by climate change and boats

over the course of the last 12 months. Do you think that Labor can change the agenda

and get it back on to issues such as health next year? Do you think that'll happen?



Nicola Roxon:

I do think that that can happen. I think that obviously getting the legislation through

the Parliament will make a big difference. Of course carbon and climate change and

pollution has been an enormous debate, of course asylum seekers has been an

enormous debate. But you also see the National Broadband Network rolling out. All of

us are flat chat at the moment going and opening new libraries and education services

and classrooms and halls in our schools where all of the Building the Education

Revolution investments are coming to fruition. There's a lot more that people can see

and feel and touch. It's not always the contestable things that are in the paper that are

the ones that people notice in their communities that are starting to come online. Our

challenge of course is to sell that even more strongly but I think that will turn around

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

and I think the truth is delivering something well and smoothly is not sexy in our

current media and political environment but it really matters to people that they're

getting those services online, and that will count.



Peter van Onselen:

I think that's true but by the same token there's also an issue here, isn't there, of

expectations management. I mean, I think part of the problem with community

attitudes towards health is that expectations were so high from your period in

Opposition and then transitioning into Government that Labor would fix public

hospitals, that was the initial rhetoric, that there was this looming possibility of a

referendum to take over control of public hospitals from the states. Now, that was all

very grand when the Government was travelling well, but the reform package I think to

superficial analysis seems to have just been watered down and watered down and I

think that just makes the public cynical.



Nicola Roxon:

Well, I don't think so. In fact, it was interesting just in the last fortnight a survey about

people's satisfaction with hospitals shows that it's actually gone up incredibly, that

people who use hospital services are starting to see the treatment that they get when

they're at hospital is actually good. There's a lot more to do, but actually there's a lot of

satisfaction . You see the Institute of Health and Welfare put out their reports and say

well actually the money is now flowing and beds are now being created.



Peter van Onselen:

That's so interesting, I don't dispute any of that. But that's really interesting that if at

that micro level people are starting to be more satisfied with their treatment at hospital

for example, but at the same time between when you were elected and now

community attitudes towards what Newspoll surveys, who's the better managers of the

health issues, despite that micro experience that people are having, at the macro level

Labor is not winning points from people.

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon



Nicola Roxon:

But I personally - obviously I have a vested interest in all of this but for me I think that

that is just that there hasn't been the political attention on it. I haven't been asked a

question in Parliament by the Opposition for more than two years . They didn't want to

debate me during the campaign. They did everything to starve health of attention

because ultimately they know the comparison will be made, what did Tony Abbott do,

their leader for four years as Health Minister, and what have we been able to achieve in

four years. Every measure we are just knocking them for dead. So they know as soon

as there's any more focus on that the public intuitively understand that, maybe haven't

got the attention on it now that we would like but I feel very confident that there's a

strong base there for the future.



Paul Kelly:

Let's look at your proposal again to means test the private health insurance rebate. The

Government has reintroduced legislation for this measure. How important is this for the

Government in financial terms and how do you rate the prospects of getting it through

the

Parliament this time?



Nicola Roxon:

It's very important in financial terms. It gives a very significant saving, the money that

we can then plough back into health for a whole lot of investments that people want us

to make, whether it's new drugs or better cancer screening programs or more

investments in hospitals or GPs. But this has failed twice in the Parliament before. We

have a new Parliament and we're confident that it would now pass the Senate. We do,

however, have difficulties in the House and we have a number of Independents who

haven't expressed their final opinion about this measure.  We're working closely with

them but in this season of horseracing I am glad I'm not a betting person because I

think it is very difficult to predict whether we will be able to get it through. We are

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

making the argument very strongly that if you've otherwise got to find $2 billion in the

forward estimates, what does that mean, you have to move or what does it mean you

can't do, the opportunity that's lost if you don't make that saving? And this is a very

targeted means test. It only has an impact on the highest income earners who we think

can well afford to pay for their private health insurance. I don't need secretaries and

nurses, you know, subsidising my private health insurance as I'm sure you don't for

yours, and I just think this is something that is not sustainable. The fairness argument

is strong and I hope that ultimately that will win the day with the Independents, but we

don't have their votes in the bag and it's going to be a difficult one to get through.



Paul Kelly:

Of course the Government's looked after these Independents when it's come to

supporting health facilities in their own electorates; presumably the Government would

expect a bit of support from them on this particular measure.



Nicola Roxon:

We work very well with them as you know, it's been a very stable Parliament despite

the numbers. We've had all of our important pieces of legislation passed and we do

believe that we're working well with them. The truth is the insurers are running a pretty

aggressive campaign. Last time round they ran a pretty misleading campaign which

was proved to be wrong. But that of course makes people focus on, you know, what

damage that can be done and there's only so many things you can expect individual

Independents or the community to deal with at once. So we're being - we understand

all of those pressures but ultimately I believe there's a very clear argument of fairness.

In a lot of those rural communities private health insurance doesn't deliver the benefits

because there simply aren't facilities that they can use their insurance at in many

places. So I am hopeful but I'm not overly confident because this is a measure that has

had difficulty twice before so you can never be a hundred-per-cent sure on that.



Paul Kelly:

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

You'll negotiate yourself with the Independents on this?



Nicola Roxon:

I have already been having extensive discussions with them. But so have a number of

other people. The Prime Minister obviously talks with them on a regular basis. The

Finance Minister talks with them. This is - it does have serious consequences financially

and I am concerned if we can't make a change which is a fairly modest means test in

this area that will actually have an impact that's worse on the community elsewhere,

and no-one wants that.



Peter van Onselen:

Minister, can I ask you about plain packaging for cigarettes. Now, that legislation, I

notice it's not on the information for what's going to go before Parliament when

Parliament resumes in the next fortnight I believe. Why is that? Is there any chance

that it's going to come in? I noticed you had a press release a while back where you

said that the proposed implementation date of July may need to be pushed back

because of some of the shenanigans in the Senate. If it's not going to go before the

Parliament in the next couple of weeks that date of July implementation is surely

looking a little shaky.



Nicola Roxon:

I don't agree with the tobacco industry about very much, as you probably know. We

have very publicly disagreed about almost everything, including that I don't believe

there's any value in their product at all which benefits the community. However, they

are a legal business and like any business they are entitled to some proper lead time to

implement new measures. If we aren't able to get the legislation through I think we're

already now at a time where I have to actively reconsider that implementation date

because it is a big change, it is a world first, they do need to retool all of their

machinery.



Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

Peter van Onselen:

So your view is that implementation date is probably, in all likelihood, already going to

have to be pushed back.



Nicola Roxon:

I'm actively considering that. I'm very keen for the Senate to pass this legislation. We

have commitments from everyone in the Senate that they're voting for this measure.

I'm very frustrated by a whole lot of the procedural debates on other matters that have

just pushed every bit of legislation further out. This is time sensitive and we should get

it through.



Peter van Onselen:

But if it's time sensitive why isn't it tabled for the next sitting period?



Nicola Roxon:

It has been tabled. There's been an opportunity for it to be debated twice over the last

sitting periods. There have been all sorts of procedural debates that can be sometimes

mysterious for Ministers in the House that happen in the Senate that have meant that

the legislation hasn't been reached. Obviously the first things that are coming up in the

Senate for debate are all of the package of climate change measures and we are

pushing very hard and I think we're getting a pretty positive response from all

concerned in the Senate that the tobacco legislation would then be - tried to be fitted

in after that.



Peter van Onselen:

So before - this side of the new year?



Nicola Roxon:

Well look, that's absolutely what I'm pushing for. I don't control the timing in the

Senate but I think everyone agrees that this is an important measure. I'm worried, and

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

if you'd listen to the debate in the House although the Liberal Party said they support

this measure you could not have known that from the debate. I mean, they were the

most unwilling, begrudging, negative speeches I have heard for a long time and this is

a good thing that we can do that will help reduce the, you know, dramatic losses that

we suffer, 15,000 people every year from tobacco-related diseases die in Australia and

it's millions, millions internationally. We can do something about it and I'd like us to get

on with it.



Paul Kelly:

In that context what's your response to some of the critics who say that you're really

the Minister for the nanny state?



Nicola Roxon:

Well, I think it's a silly and lazy comment really. If you're in my position as the Health

Minister and you can do something to limit the harm that is caused to so many

thousands of people why would you not do it? This is about what is on a packet, if

you're a smoker you don't buy a packet of cigarettes and throw away the packet. You

take it in and out of your pocket 20 or 30 times a day, you show your children, you

show your colleagues, you show everyone else who sees you. It is an advertising - the

last remaining bit of advertising that is used in Australia. We'd like to stop that. All the

rest of the advertising has already been restricted, and I think it will have a good

impact particularly on making it less attractive for new smokers and that means we get

a lot less suffering down the track. If that means someone's going to call me a nanny,

well I'm prepared to wear that.



Peter van Onselen:

Minister, one final question on a completely different topic. You would have seen the

news overnight about the deaths of Australian soldiers in Afghanistan. I don't mean to

politicise the issue but I'm interested on the back of that what you think if any impact

that that has about Australia's ongoing commitments to Afghanistan. It does seem that

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

there have been increasing calls that this is a war that may be too costly, the price may

be too high. I wonder whether the Government is likely to look at any reconsideration

of its position in the coming months?



Nicola Roxon:

Obviously any of these bits of news that you get overnight or at any time are tragic

pieces of news, and I know that the Defence Minister will be making some comments

later today so obviously I think we should leave that to him. The Government's been

very firm in our view that you need to see through the job in Afghanistan that we have

committed to. I think it's healthy for there to be debate in the community. The Prime

Minister's been very open that this can be debated. But our views and the Opposition's

views have been very firm that this is a job that needs to be done. There can be a

terrible personal price, and obviously we're seeing that today.



Paul Kelly:

Just given the Government's ratings in the polls, particularly the primary vote, the low

primary vote which has been under 30 for a long period of time, to what extent do you

think the party must consider the leadership over the coming several months if polls

stay at this level?



Nicola Roxon:

Look, I don't believe that we should. I don't believe there's a leadership issue.  I'm a

very strong supporter of Julia's, she's the Prime Minister, she has got guts and

determination and resolve like I have never seen, and ultimately there are difficult

issues that governments have to deal with and seeing them through is what people

expect from us. And I think everybody should hold their nerve. If there is any concern

the job for government is to do the things that are right in the national interest and to

get on and persist with delivering.



Paul Kelly:

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

Do you think that's where the cabinet and the caucus is, that is hold your nerve at the

moment, do you think that's where they are?



Nicola Roxon:

Absolutely. I think this is a ridiculous bit of speculation. I think it's foolish if people are

talking about leadership changes. Julia is doing a fantastic job in incredibly challenging

circumstances. She's never run away from a difficult issue. She says "The public expect

us to fix this and we're going to try". And sometimes that's really, really hard but she is

determined to do that. She has my absolute support and I believe that she has the

cabinet and the caucus's support too.



Peter van Onselen:

Minister, it may well be foolish and it equally may well be right that the speculation

shouldn't go anywhere, but in fairness and this is a serious question, the reason I think

that it is so strong is not just because the media love leadership speculation, it's more

than that. It's because the Government did in its first term knock off a first term Prime

Minister. My serious question is what is different now to then, because as a party you

decided to do something pretty significant then. The reason we all talk about it now is

because it happened then. What's different?



Nicola Roxon:

Well, I'm not sure if that's the reason everybody talks about it. I think people talk about

it because they like it, you know they think it's interesting and they think it's a game.

This isn't a game. This is actually about whether or not we can deliver properly to the

community. The Government has had a plan which we set. We knew we were going to

have a difficult period dealing with climate change, we know that the thorny issue of

asylum seekers is always a difficult one. We've made clear that we need to persuade

the public about that. We've known that will take this period of time. Once that's

bedded down I think there will be more air time for a whole range of things which have

been being methodically worked and delivered in the community. And one of the things

Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon

that's very different is Julia is a very ordered person, she understands how you run

Government, she understands how you run cabinet. She lets her Ministers get on with

the jobs of delivering properly and I think...



Peter van Onselen:

That's different to Kevin Rudd, is it?



Nicola Roxon:

I'm just saying that's a good strong thing about the way Julia runs Government and I

think that it's appreciated and I think it means we've been able to deliver more. We

had a very, very busy agenda, some people might say too busy in our first term, but

now four years on we're seeing the fruits of that busy work because people have been

able to consistently, persistently dedicate themselves to those jobs in health and in

elsewhere and I think that will turn around, people will see that. And the caucus in

particular sees that starting to roll out in their electorates. So I think you can't

underestimate the value of that.



Peter van Onselen:

Alright, Nicola Roxon, Health Minister, we appreciate you joining us on Australian

Agenda, thank you.



Nicola Roxon:

It's a pleasure.



Peter van Onselen:

When we come back from the break we'll be focussing in on the Qantas issue. We'll be

playing the interview with Alan Joyce that Paul Kelly and I conducted earlier and we'll

also be talking to the vice President Richard Woodward from the Pilots Association.

Back in a moment.



Australian Agenda31 October 2011 Nicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola RoxonNicola Roxon







