













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS 24



6 MARCH 2011



Subjects:  Libya

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

NEWSREADER:  The Foreign Minister, Kevin Rudd, has been pushing for a no-fly zone over  Libya during his recent overseas visit and he joins me on the phone now from Jerusalem.

Foreign Minister, thank you for joining us.

Before we move onto the no-fly zone, we just heard our correspondent, Ben Knight, talking  about the Libyan National Council. Is that something that Australia will recognise?

KEVIN RUDD:  Well, we'll continue to work with our friends and partners in the region on an  appropriate response to this formation of a new representative authority in Libya itself.  We  discussed this at considerable length with foreign ministers in both Jordan and the  Palestinian Authority in the last 24 hours.

We'll also be looking for the lead taken by the Arab League itself.

The Arab League has been strongly supportive of actions against the Qaddafi regime,  including the imposition of sanctions and including the suspension of Libya from the Arab  League. So, we'll be watching carefully what the Arab League itself does on that.  It is far  better in general diplomacy within the region if the Arab League is seen to be taking the first  step and the international community reinforcing them, as they have done so far and done  so successfully.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

2



NEWSREADER:  And you have met with Britain Foreign Secretary William Hague, as well as  the US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton. What was on the agenda? Obviously, Libya on the  agenda there.

KEVIN RUDD: What was on the agenda was Libya, Libya and Libya.

This is of profound significance, not just in terms of it humanitarian implications for six  million Libyan civilians, but also in terms of the wider strategic stability of the Middle East.  Then, of course, there is the wider question again in terms of long-term energy prices as  well.

This, therefore, is significant on multiple fronts and multiple national interests, which  Australia shares. That's why we're deeply engaged with the Americans, the British and  others, including the Secretary General of the Arab League, with whom I discussed this  matter in Cairo several days ago.

NEWSREADER:  So, what support have you had from the international community to impose  this no-fly zone, which I know you've been pushing heavily?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, the reason why we are pushing it is because we believe that the assets  still available from Libyan air force are significant under Qaddafi's control, and his ability,  therefore, to use it in perpetrating further acts of mass violence against the civilian  population is large. Therefore, what we have done has been actively working with our  friends and partners in NATO and elsewhere to gain support for this.

I note today, and I appreciate the comments by the French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe,  who has indicated in a statement that I have seen, that he is currently working with the  British on the preparation of a fresh UN Security Council resolution covering the question of  authority for a no-fly zone in Libya.

This, of course, is still a matter of some debate and some differing views within NATO and  various western countries. Our view is that, despite all those complications, that it is the  best course of action if we are to maximise the protections to the Libyan people, particularly  as they seem to be in the face now of a protracted civil war.

NEWSREADER:  And, Foreign Minister, there was confusion in Libya.  As we heard earlier,  heavy gunfire was being heard in the capital, Tripoli. What sort of reports have you been  receiving tonight.  I know you're in Jerusalem, but what was your information?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, here in Jerusalem, I remain in contact with all of our embassies in the  region and all of our diplomatic reporting, including what we share with friends, and  partners and allies on the situation on the ground. The situation on the ground is that we  have vast areas of contested space between those seeking to remove the Qaddafi regime  and Qaddafi's loyal military unit seeking to defend the regime.

Of course, there is violence within Tripoli itself, violence within towns to the immediate  west of Tripoli, and violence elsewhere, including in the areas approaching Sirte, Qaddafi's  home town.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

3



This, therefore, is a very murky, difficult and unclear military situation on the ground, and  that's why the international community has, I believe, at this stage two further sets of  responsibilities.

One, to work on the completion of the necessary diplomacy to get a no-fly zone going, and  secondly, to maximise our humanitarian support for both Egypt and Tunisia as they deal  with this very large-scale outflow of people across both borders.

On the latter point, what we in Australia have done - I think, we're one of the first countries  to put our best foot forward and provide the international humanitarian agencies, such as  the Red Cross and the High Commission of Refugees with five to $6 million dollars worth of  emergency funding to do the job they need to do on the ground now.

NEWSREADER: Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd, thank you very much for joining us from  Jerusalem this evening.  We'll have to leave it there.

KEVIN RUDD: Thanks for having me on your program.

ENDS

