



Transcript of ABC Radio National interview with Fran Kelly

24 June 2011  SCT042/2011

TOPIC: Discussion on Julia Gillard's first year as Prime Minister and Mr Crean's focus on  regional Australia.

FRAN KELLY: Well, on this first anniversary of Julia Gillard taking over from Kevin Rudd  as the Labor leader and Prime Minister, we're joined now by Simon Crean, himself a former  Labor leader and currently a Cabinet minister.

He's also a fellow Victorian and he helped mentor Julia Gillard's political career. Simon  Crean, good morning. One year on, was it worth it, this leadership change?

SIMON CREAN: It's always worth it when you're in politics, Fran, and you've got an  agenda ahead of you. Our task is to look forward, not back.

FRAN KELLY: But what's been achieved in terms of - you know, for this change of  leadership, what has Labor achieved here?

SIMON CREAN: I think, significant achievement in the most recent budget, a commitment  to understanding the pressures of skill shortages in an economy that is growing incredibly  strongly. An economy that's the envy of the rest of the western world, an economy that has a  strong future in front of it, but as the budget recognises, is in transition, because those strong  terms of trade from the resources boom are having impacts on the dollar.

That's impacting upon manufacturing. It means that we end up with this patchwork approach  and it's the reason why we have to look at the patches through the prism of localism. The  patches are the regions, Fran. And so, getting out amongst the regions and challenging them  to be their best, that's what it's all about, with a budget that resources them to do so.

FRAN KELLY: Okay. But to be fair, Australia's strong budgetary position, in terms of low  unemployment and relatively strong growth, is - was a product of - under Kevin Rudd's prime  ministership.  What has been achieved for Labor under the leadership of Julia Gillard apart  from Labor's primary vote going backwards?

SIMON CREAN: See, I disagree with your premise, Fran. I mean, I think the stimulus  spending that was undertaken under Kevin's prime ministership was terribly important. But  where was the bulk of it? It was in the area that Julia drove, and that was education, skills. It  was in building the infrastructure of our school system. Not just to keep people in work.

FRAN KELLY: So, you don't give the Prime Minister credit for getting Australia out of the  woods?

SIMON CREAN: Let me finish the point. I do give him credit for the stimulus spending and  acting decisively. But look at where the bulk of the funding was spent, and that was with the  education portfolio. But I think there are two other reasons, Fran, as to why we withstood the  recession where other countries didn't. And it wasn't just the stimulus. It was the structural  change that Labor, and only Labor, undertook in the '80s, and it was also the engagement  with Asia that it was Labor governments that embraced in a more fulsome way than our  counterparts.

Now, they continued the reforms and continued the engagement, but it was Labor that made  the big shift. It's Labor and only Labor that has shown the capacity historically to deal with  the big structural changes in the economy. And that's what this budget underpins. Now, yes,  the last term was important in ensuring we didn't slip into recession, but we are now dealing  with the circumstances of a growth economy, how to manage growth and how to manage the  diversity within that economy, and that's what the budget that Wayne, and Julia's prime  ministership brought down.

Now, you can talk about the past as much as you like, Fran, and given the date, no wonder  people are talking about it. But I'll tell you what, I'm interested in talking about the future.

I agreed to come on the program not to talk about the past, but to give the opportunity for us  to talk about the future because it is bright.

FRAN KELLY: All right, let's talk about the future because the Prime Minister, when she  took over the leadership, she said the government - Labor had lost its way on asylum seekers,  climate change and the mining tax, and one year on, you'd have to say none of these problem  areas have been fixed yet. Are you disappointed in that?

SIMON CREAN: Look, these are hard decisions. The mining tax is necessary because the  mining companies don't own the resources; the nation does. We've got to make the - certain  out of this resources boom, not only do we address the skill shortage, not only do we address  the infrastructure dividend, we've got to lay the foundations from that resources boom for a  more diversified economy going forward.

You can't do that unless you take the proceeds of the wealth generator, if you like, and  distribute them. We're not taking the mining tax for government; we're taking it for cutting  company taxes, for increasing superannuation, for investing in infrastructure.

Now, on asylum seekers, for the first time we've got a minister in a government engaging  with the UNHCR, the United Nations. This is a global problem. Australia is being impacted,  but so are many other countries in the world. If we're to solve it, we need regional  agreements. We need the UNHCR imprimatur, and that's exactly the strategy that Chris  Bowen and Julia have been driving. And that is different...

FRAN KELLY: It's taking a long time though, isn't it? I mean, it was announced more than  six weeks ago, it's taking a long time. We still don't have a price on carbon, we've been  talking about that for years now. All of this - we still don't have a mining tax, announced over  a year ago. All of this - Labor's policy drive seems to be very slow.

SIMON CREAN: Fran, it does take time when the years before have not been put to this  productive, creative use. And they weren't with asylum seekers. I mean, John Howard, and  then with Kevin, it was the turning back of the boat. That's what focused attention. That is not  going to solve the asylum seekers problem. We need an international solution.

So far as the mining tax is concerned, I made the point there could have been better  consultation, there should have been, and the process can often bring you undone in this  game. You engage people, you involve them, and you explain what you're going to do. They  may not like it. But if you explain it properly to them, they have to either come along with  you or you need to compromise.

Now, I've been doing this one way or another, negotiating with groups, engaging with groups  for over 40 years. There's only one way, that's to engage them, to confront them with the  challenge that's ahead, because it's in the interests of the mining sector as well that we sustain  the infrastructure and the skills essential to their future and their positioning in a global  economy that is demanding their resource, well, the nation's resource but them processing -  mining and processing it.

FRAN KELLY: It's 12 minutes to eight on Radio National Breakfast. Our guest this  morning is Simon Crean, the Minister for Regional Australia and former Labor Leader.  Simon Crean, I know you want to talk about the future. What's Labor's future when the latest  polls have you in the political death zone of 27 per cent, and how do you explain such poor  polling? I mean, you've been here before, not quite this bad. How does Labor get out of this?

SIMON CREAN: You get out of it by going on the front foot, Fran. You get out of it by  understanding that you are not a government that's judged by the week to week, but you are  judged by what you do over your term.  Now, the one thing that I am convinced about is that  we will go the full distance in our term.

We will last the distance.

Julia has taken on these tough decisions in the first year, because that's when you have to  make the tough decisions, because you need the time for the public to understand the  significance of them and how they're going to play out.

Now, that's what we're doing, and I'm confident that provided we stick to our guns, provided  we get the strategy out, get the narrative out and tell the narrative in a way that demonstrates  it's about securing our future, jobs.

I mean, you talked about jobs, don't dismiss that. Seven hundred and forty thousand jobs have  been created in our first term with the prospect of another half million jobs over the course of  the next two to three years. That is the envy of the rest of the world and we are managing  that. What we've got to do is to ensure that those jobs that we're talking about fit properly  with the skills required by employers.

That's why the budget made such a big investment in the productivity agenda. It's why our  investment in schools, in universities is all - and innovation is all about investing in the  drivers of economic growth.

FRAN KELLY: If there's such a good message to sell, why then the poor polls? And Labor  research leak this week shows that the public, via some focus groups, view Julia Gillard as  untrustworthy. Is your head saleswoman the problem?

SIMON CREAN: Because I think that we've got to bed down the initiatives and get on with  the task of not the internal navel gazing or the leaking, but to get on with the task of selling a  positive message. And we have a positive message, because the economy and the nation has a  positive future. That's what we believe in, that's what we are determined to fight for. And in  the tradition of great Labor governments of the past, we will deliver upon it.

FRAN KELLY: So, why don't you think the public are trusting Julia Gillard or not warming  to Julia Gillard? And if you had a chance to - well, you do have a chance right now to talk to  people. What would you say about why they should prefer Julia Gillard?

SIMON CREAN: You know, I think it's interesting Fran that - I travel a lot in the regions  because of the portfolio. They're not debating whether we should have an NBN Co or not.  They want it. They want to know when they're going to get it.

We've got regions out there that are not worried about a growing population. They want more  people. And they're asking, how can we use the programs to help us get that. And we're  developing programs for it. Out there in the regions, people are embracing far more positively  the need to come to grips with climate change. They want healthy living environments. They  want re... they want renewable energy. They see opportunities for green jobs.

And, I must say, it's a pleasure to get out in the regions because they're not bothered by the  Canberra speak. They're not focused on the polls - they're focused on their future.  Our task is  to work with them to secure that future. Realise their potential, enable them to be the best  they can. That's what we're about and that's the message we will keep going out talking to  them about.

FRAN KELLY: Simon Crean, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.

SIMON CREAN: My pleasure, Fran.

ENDS

