Julie Bishop

MTR 1377, Drive with Luke Grant

Monday, 19 September 2011

Subjects: Migration Act amendments

E&OE…

LUKE GRANT    Let’s get to the meat of the issue, that is where are we with this Malaysian deal. As  you know the Opposition Leader had a chat to the Prime Minister at about midday, it went for 15  minutes. Let’s get to Julie Bishop who is the Deputy Leader of the Opposition who joins us on the line.  Hi Julie, good to talk to you again.

JULIE BISHOP    Good afternoon Luke.

LUKE GRANT    Can you give us an idea about what the considered position of the Opposition is in  relation to what the Prime Minister offered Tony Abbott at midday?

JULIE BISHOP    Well what the Prime Minister offered Tony Abbott was utter confusion over the  Government’s border protection laws.

The Government gave us its draft amendments that it was proposing to the laws last Friday and today  the Government has given us a completely different draft with substantial changes in it, so they  couldn’t even keep to the same position for just three days, and arguably this latest draft is even  worse than the one they gave us on Friday.

LUKE GRANT    How is it that it did change in three days? They’ve obviously got advice from  someone saying that it was not going to work either, did they?

JULIE BISHOP    We raised a number of concerns in our meeting last Friday. And you will have  heard Tony Abbott say over the weekend that there were some deeply troubling aspects of the  Government’s proposal.

Well the Government have now tried to cobble together the concerns we had into some sort of  arrangement, but it won’t work. The draft that they have presented now is arguably even worse than  the one of Friday.

The problem Luke for the Government is the Malaysia arrangement expires after 800 asylum seekers  are sent to Malaysia and as we know already 1,000 people have turned up by boat since this policy  was announced, 400 have turned up since the arrangement was actually signed. So at this rate the  Malaysia swap deal will be exhausted within weeks and there will be no more asylum seekers to  Malaysia.

Today in Question Time Julia Gillard was asked, and she’s been asked repeatedly, what happens  when the 800 limit is reached and she refused to answer, or she couldn’t answer. So this is no  solution at all.

LUKE GRANT    That’s just a mess. Look I think most Australians, whether they voted for the  Government at the last election or they voted for your side of politics, would say whatever you say  about John Howard and the policies left behind this thing worked. I think there were six people in  detention when you left office.

JULIE BISHOP    That’s right.

LUKE GRANT    Now we’ve got thousands and thousands. You’ve got your side and the  Government, at least some of them, prepared to look at offshore processing, you could get your  heads together and get this fixed in a day or two surely if Nauru was back on the table. It can’t surely  only be political ego, ego of the Prime Minister that prevents her from saying let’s do a deal on Nauru?

JULIE BISHOP    I am afraid it is.

LUKE GRANT    Is that all it is?

JULIE BISHOP    It is. We have proven that there is a solution, and that is the Coalition policy -  offshore processing on Nauru plus temporary protection visas plus working with Indonesia to return  the boats if it is safe to do so.

Now Julia Gillard refuses to accept that as it would be the final humiliating back down for her, that she  has got it wrong on border protection all along.

It was her policy to weaken the Howard Government border protection laws in the first place. She  ruled out sending asylum seekers to a country that was not a signatory to the 1951 Refugee  Convention and now she wants to send them to a country that is not a signatory to the Convention.  She came up with the failed East Timor solution, then the Manus Island solution, now the failed  Malaysian solution.

So if she had to accept that we had it right all along, that it is Nauru plus temporary protection visas  plus working with Indonesia to turn the boats back, she would have to acknowledge that she’s got it  wrong all the way along, and it would be a humiliating back down for her but it would be in the national  interest for her to do so.

LUKE GRANT    Of course it would be. Look and I do take that point, I understand that. What about,  and I don’t know how you have responded directly to the Prime Minister, but I think there is a risk, and  I could be wrong Julie, but I just think there is a risk that if the Opposition is seen continually as saying  “no, why are you opposing everything” then that vuvuzela sound that Albanese makes and others  carry on about as much and all your side offers is a negative and not the positive, I think there is a risk  that that might cut through. Have you thrown back a proposal to the Prime Minister saying “look we  won’t take that but we will consider this”?

JULIE BISHOP    Luke what we have said is that we have our proven policy that has been in place for  10 years ,that worked until the Government unwound it. So we have put to her time and time again  that there is a solution.

In relation to her insistence that it be Malaysia or nothing, you know she is refusing to even  acknowledge Nauru even though Nauru has now signed the Convention on Refugees, and has  agreed to make whatever changes it has to in its domestic laws to enter into a binding agreement, all  the things that you could possibly as a country to do Nauru has offered to do.

Julia Gillard keeps ignoring them, refusing to speak to them, treating them very badly and insisting  that we have to go ahead with deal with Malaysia, but it is not legally binding.

So if Malaysia were to renege or there was some breakdown in the arrangement there is no way  Australia could even enforce it, and we think there should be a basic protection in our laws relating to  asylum seekers that we send offshore to another country for their claims to be processed.

Julia Gillard’s amendments strip away all of the protections that the Howard Government thought  were necessary and that we had put into the Migration Act.

LUKE GRANT    Would you cop any offshore processing as long as the UNHCR Convention was  secure in as much as all of those refugees that were sent overseas were promised or guaranteed the  protections of the Convention?

JULIE BISHOP    Well that is the whole point Luke, that is the whole point of the difficulty that we’ve  got with the Government. They want to send asylum seekers to a country that is not a signatory to the  Convention on Refugees; we want asylum seekers to be processed offshore in countries that are  signatories to the Convention of Refugees. It gives that basic protection and I believe that most  Australians would agree with that.

Why else did we sign up to the 1951 Convention if we weren’t going to abide by it?

What Julia Gillard is trying to do is avoid our obligations under the Convention and send asylum  seekers to a country that is not a signatory.

LUKE GRANT    So it seems like we now have no national policy and we would have to have a  Government, oh perhaps crisis is going too far, but the left and the right would have to be, if they are  fair dinkum at each other. What is the way forward here?

JULIE BISHOP    Well we have said to the Prime Minister that we’ll look at her proposed  amendments and we are seeking advice on it. As you and I talk Tony Abbott is giving a press  conference to the Canberra Press Gallery now and we are consulting with the former Solicitor-General David Bennett QC, we are getting advice from him, and my understanding is that he says the  Government’s draft amendments will not work and that there is nothing at all to stop Nauru being the  option.

Now the Prime Minister inferred last week that the current Solicitor-General ruled out Nauru as an  option, we met with the Solicitor-General on Friday and he confirmed that he didn’t rule out Nauru. So  the Government has an answer staring it in the face.

LUKE GRANT    Well and also the Prime Minister clearly lied. If she told you he ruled it out and he  told you that he hadn’t we’ve got another big problem there haven’t we? The Prime Minister can’t tell  you the truth.

JULIE BISHOP    Absolutely, and she was asked about it in Question Time today and she just  refused to answer, or couldn’t answer.

So this Prime Minister, she can’t be trusted on so many levels and we are just seeing it again now  with border protection laws, and this is so important.

We should be putting in place offshore processing on Nauru. The Australian taxpayers have already  paid for the processing centre there and the Nauruan Government have said that they are willing and  able to do it immediately. That offer has been on the table for 12 months and Julia Gillard won’t even  speak to the President of Nauru about the offer he’s made to help Australia out.

LUKE GRANT    And they had dinner just a week or two back. Julie, great to talk to you as always,  appreciate your time I know it is a busy time in the nation’s capital. Thank you so much.



