Chris Bowen, MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship  Federal Member for McMahon

Sky News

Australian Agenda

31st July 2011

Interview



Peter Van Onselen:   We’re joined now by the Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen.  Thanks  very much for your company.



Chris Bowen:  Thanks, Peter.  Good morning.



Peter Van Onselen:  There’s breaking news today.  A boat has been intercepted northwest  of Scott Reef, 54 asylum seekers on it, two crew.  What is going to happen to that boat?



Chris Bowen:  Well what happens now is that new arrangements are in place, which means  the boat obviously gets taken to Christmas Island.  That can take some days for that to  happen.  Then we begin our pre-transfer arrangements, which is assessing the vulnerability  of people and assessing fitness to fly, and we begin the process of transferring people to  Malaysia.  Now what the arrangement makes clear is that that turnaround time will  eventually be three days from arrival at Christmas Island to Malaysia.  As I said earlier in the  week, you can expect that to ramp up over coming weeks; it will take some time for that to  be fully operational, for that three days to be operational.  But nevertheless this is an  important signal to send to people.  As Paul correctly said in his introduction, Australia is  more than happy to take refugees; I’m more than happy to take more refugees as  Immigration Minister - I think we can and should.  But there needs to be an orderly process  and what we want to do is stop people making the very risky journey to get on a boat and  come to Australia.



Peter Van Onselen:  And that’s part of the toughing up of the policy I guess to make it  tougher like that.  I just want to play something that Kevin Rudd said a little while ago.  Let’s  take a look.



Kevin Rudd:  This party and government will not be lurching to the right on the question of  asylum seekers, as some have counselled us to do.



Peter Van Onselen:  That was him on the night of the coups.  Is that what’s happened?



Chris Bowen:  What we’ve got is a regional solution, with the involvement of the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who very heavily shaped this arrangement in  terms of their feedback and consultation.  And as I’ve said, we are taking an increase in net  refugees, taking 4,000 souls and giving them a better life in Australia, people who either  can’t afford in most cases to take the dangerous boat journey to Australia or are not inclined  to risk their lives and their families’ lives, and I don’t think they should be disadvantaged.



Paul Kelly:  But Minister, this is a much tougher policy than what we saw under the Rudd  government.



Chris Bowen:  It clearly is a tough message.  It is no question that if you take that boat  journey to Australia we’re going to take you back to Malaysia.  As you said in your  introduction, 80% or 90% of boat arrivals in Australia come via Malaysia.  People tend to fly  to Malaysia and then get on a boat from Malaysia to Indonesia, Indonesia to Australia.  This  is a very clear message - we’re going to take you back to where you started that boat  journey.  You’ll have nothing to gain out of that boat journey.  The people who have  something to gain are the people who’ve been patiently awaiting resettlement, but haven’t  been able to afford that boat journey.



Paul Kelly:  So you now recognise that pull factors were far more important than what the  Labor Party thought during the Rudd government?



Chris Bowen:  Well what we recognise, Paul, is that we need a regional solution, and that’s  what we’ve been working on for some time.  I can recall you saying on this program a little  while ago for example that Julia Gillard and Chris Bowen want a regional solution, the  problem is nobody else in the region wants one.  With respect, I think we’ve shown that we  can do that.  We have struck an agreement with a key regional partner, and that a regional  solution is the most sustainable way of dealing with this.  One country alone trying to make  its regime more punitive, harsher, offshore detention, doesn’t make the difference that you  require.  I think a regional solution, which is what we said very clearly before the last election  was the sustainable way forward, is what we’ve delivered on.



Peter Van Onselen:  I want to get into the details of that in a moment, but I just want to play  one more clip, because Kevin Rudd was pretty strong on this on the night of the coups.   Let’s just take another look at what he had to say.



Kevin Rudd:  I believe it is absolutely wrong for this country and absolutely wrong in terms of  the values which we hold dear to get engaged in some sort of a race to the right in this  country on the question of asylum seekers.  I don’t think that’s the right thing to do.  That’s  the direction the Liberal Party would like to take us.  Under my leadership we will not be  going in that direction.



Peter Van Onselen:  This is very different though, isn’t it, Minister Bowen?  I mean at the end  of the day, before we get into the details of the Malaysian solution, what Kevin Rudd was  trying to pitch to there, ultimately unsuccessfully to maintain his Labor leadership, was quite  different to the direction that Labor has gone since then.



Chris Bowen:  As I say, we made it clear before the last election we wanted a regional  solution with UNHCR involvement; that’s what we’ve delivered on.  And I think the benefits  are there for all to see: a) an increase in our humanitarian intake; b) also working with a key  regional nation, a key transit nation on getting more consistent protection outcomes.  We’re  working with the UNHCR and the IOM to have more consistent outcomes across the region,  starting with that key partner of Malaysia.  So I think there’s a lot in this arrangement.   There’s the tough message, that’s very true.  But there’s also the more holistic approach to  what is an international problem, and actually delivering on that and achieving outcomes  which many people said we wouldn’t be able to achieve, with respect, and many doubters  said look, this is all very fine, but Labor’s just not going to be able to get there.  We’ve gotten  there.  We’ve got this arrangement, it’s an important arrangement, and it means frankly that  less people will risk their lives and that people who otherwise would’ve died on that boat  journey will live.



Paul Kelly:  Well if we just look at how this will work, because we’ve had this boat arriving  with about 54 people in it.  So what does this mean?  First of all, does it mean that all 54  people will be sent to Malaysia?



Chris Bowen:  What we’ve said is that people should work on the assumption they will be  sent to Malaysia.  Also, and appropriately, we’ll have pre-transfer vulnerability assessments  in place.  Now we can’t send blanket messages or blanket exemptions, because I know how  people smugglers work and they will use those loopholes.  They will say look, if they’re not  going to send children, we’ll send boatloads of children, and then we’ll be dealing with  another boatload of children being lost.  But what we’ve said is no blanket exemptions, but  we will have a pre-assessment in place, which means that we will look at each individual and  assess whether it’s the appropriate thing to transfer them to Malaysia, or if they are to be

transferred to Malaysia, what extra care and protection needs to be put in place at the other  end.  Now that’s the arrangements in place, that’s what will work in terms of this boat arrival  and in future boat arrivals.



Paul Kelly:  So what you’re basically saying is that if there are children among these 54,  because there are no blanket exemptions we could assume that those children will be sent  to Malaysia as well?



Chris Bowen:  Nobody should assume and people smugglers should not assume that there’s  a blanket exemption in place.  But we will assess, in terms of our obligations, the needs of  each individual.  Now individuals cover a wide range, Paul, as you’d understand.  We may  get very young children and occasionally we get a young child who is unaccompanied.  We  get many people who tell us they’re minors, but there’s a fair degree of scepticism on behalf  of the people in my Department who talk to them most whether they are actually under 18.   They could be well into their 20s, but they are telling us they’re minors because they are-



Paul Kelly:  But just say we had a child who was unaccompanied, would the assumption be,  unless there were other circumstances at work, they would be sent to Malaysia as well?



Chris Bowen:  As I say, Paul, and I’m only going to stick to what I’ve said to you, no blanket  exemptions and a case by case approach.  Each person’s vulnerabilities, and each person is  different, each vulnerability will be different; we’ll make an assessment.



Paul Kelly:  Sure.  Now just say these people don’t want to go to Malaysia, just say they  don’t want to get on the aeroplane, what happens?



Chris Bowen:  It’s not a voluntarily arrangement; it’s an arrangement which sees people  returned to Malaysia.  We’ve got appropriate staff now on Christmas Island, we’ve got  counsellors, we’ve got assessment staff and we also have Federal Police and security  presence to make sure that all the appropriate arrangements are in place, and that’s what  will apply.



Paul Kelly:  So at the end of the day we may see the police enforcing these people to get on  the plane?



Chris Bowen:  The Federal Police will play a role in the transfer, and I think that’s well  understood and well accepted.



Paul Kelly:  So this could get quite ugly?



Chris Bowen:  Well look, these are difficult circumstances and we’ve seen this in the past.   We’ve seen this in the past in Australia.  New Zealand is going through this at the moment,  where people are refusing to get off the boat in Indonesia.  It happens, but we have  appropriate arrangements in place.  We have, as I say, counselling staff, support staff,  assessment staff, vulnerability assessment staff, and we have security staff, yes.



Peter Van Onselen:  How much is it going to cost?



Chris Bowen:  The total arrangement is well known, $292 million.  The vast majority of that is  the cost of transferring those 4,000 people and resettling those 4,000 people into Australia.   The other costs are involved in the transfer to Malaysia and the appropriate support that  goes into place in Malaysia.



Peter Van Onselen:  I’m not worried about the cost of the ones coming here, I’d be happy to  bear whatever cost on that one as a taxpayer.



Chris Bowen:  We strongly agree on that.



Peter Van Onselen:  I’m interested in the 800 going there.  What’s the specific cost for that?



Chris Bowen:  The cost there is around $70 million over four years, and that goes to all the  costs.  That goes to the transfer costs, the transport costs, it goes to the transit centre which  is being established for the first 45 days, so people will go to Malaysia for 45 days.  They’ll  be in a transit centre that’s not one of the existing detention centres, unlike Mr. Morrison’s  false claims.  It is a centre which is appropriate, low to medium security, where those people  can have their initial checks before they move into the community.  It also includes  supplementation from us, the UNHCR and the IOM.



Peter Van Onselen:  What sort of amounts are we talking about?



Chris Bowen:  For the UNHCR you’re looking at about say $10 million over the four years,  and for the IOM we’re looking at about $25 million over four years.  That’s included in that  total cost.



Peter Van Onselen:  Was that important to bring them on board, to be able to sort of get this  deal struck as it was this week that those kind of payments to the UNHCR to be able to  create goodwill?



Chris Bowen:  No, we asked them to be involved.  We said we wanted their help in  processing these people, both the 800 and the 4,000 and the management of them.  And of  course it’s appropriate then that we pay the costs of that involvement.



Paul Kelly:  How certain can we be that anyone who is returned to Malaysia can’t end up  some way or another back in Australia?



Chris Bowen:  Well, we’ve made it very clear that they will get no special treatment in terms  of resettlement, so that anybody who gets returned from Australia to Malaysia would not be  part of the 4,000 that get returned.  But of course Australia has an existing resettlement  quota from Malaysia, and if the UNHCR assesses those cases as being worthy of  resettlement, they would then refer them either to us or other resettlement countries.  In  effect there are three resettlement countries around the world - the United States, Canada  and Australia.  About 90% of people who get resettled get resettled to one of those  countries.  If the UNHCR makes the decision that somebody in Malaysia who’s been  transferred by us is a compelling case for resettlement and it’s appropriate to be resettled,  then we would consider that in the normal course of events, but there’d be no special  treatment for those people.



Paul Kelly:  Okay, so they could in the normal course of events end up back in this country  though?



Chris Bowen:  In the normal course of events, yes, if they were dealt with by the UNHCR.  If  the UNHCR had decided that now was the time to seek resettlement, in line with the other  90,000 people in Malaysia awaiting processing and resettlement, then they would be  resettled into a resettlement country, one of which might be Australia.  But there are certainly  no special deals and no preferential treatment for those people to be resettled into Australia.



Paul Kelly:  I’d just like to ask you about the nature of this model.  I mean would you see this  model being extended either in terms of Malaysia, that is with more than 800 people being

taken as we go further down the track with some sort of new agreement with Malaysia?  And  would you also be interested in extending this model to other countries in the region?



Chris Bowen:  Two points there.  The Malaysian Minister is said let’s see how this works; the  Malaysian government treats this, if you like, as a pilot project, let’s see how it works, and  the Malaysian government has indicated that if it’s successful from their point of view they’d  be happy to look at extending it, and that reflects my views.  Secondly, we have a regional  framework now, negotiated very clearly by this government, by the Foreign Minister and I, in  terms of engagement between regional countries, in terms of breaking the people  smugglers’ business model.  But I want to say this, Paul.  I think we’re getting a little bit  ahead of ourselves.  We’ve only just inked this agreement.  Let’s see how it works.  If it  fundamentally changes the decision of people as to whether to make that boat journey to  Australia, it means they have nothing to gain out of coming to Australia in terms of  resettlement into Australia.  So I think it fundamentally changes that.  Let’s see that have  some impact.  Let’s see it work, and then we can assess further down the road.



Peter Van Onselen:  Can I just take a step back on this and try to understand what has  changed in the mind of the government since being elected in 2007?  I mean Chris Evans  brought quite a different approach initially.  What in your eyes or in the government’s eyes  have you either conceded you got wrong or noticed adjusting over the last few years in the  nature of this particular issue?



Chris Bowen:  Well, when we came to office there was a regime in place which involved  temporary protection visas.  We had the view they didn’t work, because the number of  people who arrived in Australia after the introduction of temporary protection visas went up,  the number of women and children on boats went up because there was no family reunion.   So we abolished those - the right thing to do.  The previous government had Nauru in place.   We abolished that as a place of detention - the right thing to do.



Peter Van Onselen:  Is it just political posturing not to open that back up again?



Chris Bowen:  No, not at all.



Peter Van Onselen:  The opposition continually calls for it.



Chris Bowen:  Yes, they do.  If you ask Mr. Morrison any question at all, he’ll say the answer  is Nauru.  Well, the question is how does Nauru work?  Because the majority of people  assessed as refugees in Nauru came to Australia.  Now Mr. Morrison has to answer that and

he might take the opportunity even today to say, for the people who get sent to Nauru under  his model, where will they go?  Will they be resettled in another country?  What is it?  Tell us  what it is, what arrangements do they have in place?  Or will they come to Australia?  If they  come to Australia, then where is the disincentive to get on the boat?  It means you get on a  boat, you come to Australia, you get taken to Nauru and then you come to Australia again -  no disincentive whatsoever, and that is the-



Paul Kelly:  But what you’re actually saying here is that Nauru is too soft, that the coalition’s  policy is too soft?



Chris Bowen:  Well what I’m saying is that it’s an inappropriate policy, because what it did is  broke the people . . .



Paul Kelly:   . . . No, what you’re saying is the policy is too soft.



Chris Bowen:  I’m saying the policy did not break the people smugglers’ business model, it  did not break the people smugglers’ business model, but it did break some people along the  way by putting them in Nauru and leaving them there for five years.  Yes, it did break some  people, but it did not break the model.



Peter Van Onselen:  But Minister, what has happened in this debate, you are effectively  saying, as Paul says, that Nauru is too soft.  We’ve now got Mr. Morrison effectively saying  that Malaysia is too tough and too inhumane.  It’s almost like you’ve flipped in this debate.



Chris Bowen:  Well, it’s quite clear the Liberal Party will go to any lengths, any lengths to try  and break this agreement, because I suspect they think it will work.  I suspect they can see  their business model with cheap slogans going out the window, because they know that this  model has the potential to work.  And I notice Mr. Morrison has started positioning for that by  saying oh look, it doesn’t matter if this works in the end, it doesn’t matter now, what’s  important is the past.  Well the key is that this does break the people smugglers’ business  model and it delivers on our commitment of regional engagement for a regional solution to a  regional problem.



Paul Kelly:  Do you agree in terms of the design of this model that this is tougher than  anything the Howard government did?



Chris Bowen:  Well I agree that it breaks the people smugglers’ business model more  effectively than anything the Howard government did, but it doesn’t put people in Nauru for  five years, leave them there and forget about them.  We still have people in Australia who  were resettled from Nauru who still have considerable emotional difficulties about the time  they spent in Nauru.



Paul Kelly:  Sure.



Chris Bowen:  So it’s a very different approach, but it does send a very tough and strong  message that if you come to Australia by boat, you will be returned to Malaysia and you will  have no preferential treatment in your processing.  I agree with you, that is a tough  message.



Paul Kelly:  Just how confident are you that you can keep the Labor Party behind this policy?



Chris Bowen:  I’ve had a strong degree of feedback from my colleagues that they recognise  that a regional solution is necessary.  They certainly appreciated the way the cabinet has  handled this.  There’s been a strong degree of consultation with the caucus.  I’ve spent a lot  of time-



Paul Kelly:  So you can keep them locked in, you think?



Chris Bowen:  The federal caucus has been very supportive.  They’ve had appropriate  questions to ask about the protections in place, and certainly the feedback I’ve had is that  they’ve been a strong degree of support for the safeguards and measures that have been  put in place in terms of this arrangement, yes.



Paul Kelly:  But I mean there’s a trap for you here, isn’t there?  Because once people are  returned to Malaysia, then there will be an effort to look at the actual conditions they’re living  in, in terms of the educational and employment opportunities.  And aren’t you concerned that  when we actually look at the situation on the ground there will be very significant reasons to  be concerned about the deal?



Chris Bowen:  Look, as I say, I think the protections and safeguards we built into this  arrangement are ones which many people thought we would never achieve.  The  commitment that people would be able to remain lawfully in Malaysia, which means all the  nonsense, the Morrison myths about caning in detention centres, have just been shown to

be patently false.  People will have the right to remain lawfully, be treated with dignity and  respect in accordance with human rights standards, have work rights and have access to  health and education.  Now it’s basic health and education, it’s not a land of milk and honey  in Malaysia, I agree with you.  But what we have done is said that people will be treated in  accordance with those basic protections.  But I do not envisage, for example I’ve seen  sometimes that people will come to Australia so that they could return to Malaysia and get  these better protections - I don’t envisage that being the case.  Why would you pay the  $10,000 to a people smuggler to come to Australia, to go back to get work rights, to get  money to pay back that $10,000?  The economic equation doesn’t make sense.  But what is  important is that we’ve built in those protections.



Peter Van Onselen:  But it’s not just the Liberal Party that has raised concerns here.  Your  alliance partner in government if you like, the Greens, have also raised some concerns.  So  it’s almost brought a uniting of concern over Malaysia to both the Liberal Party and the  Greens.  Let’s just take a look at some comments.



Scott Morrison:  Human rights protections simply aren’t there.  The UNHCR, I note, is not a  signatory to this agreement.  The UNHCR have only signed up to take what will be tens of  millions of dollars from the Australian taxpayer to add to their overwhelmed resources in  Malaysia.



Sarah Hanson-Young:  How can we guarantee that 800 people that Australia expels to  Malaysia, very vulnerable people, will be treated any differently than the 94,000 others in  Malaysia?



Peter Van Onselen:  Let’s start with Senator Hanson-Young, the Greens’ concerns.  I mean  the guarantees about these 800, you mentioned before that in Nauru people had mental  problems as a result of being there.  What about the 800 people that are going to find  themselves in Malaysia?



Chris Bowen:  Look, we have a different approach to the Greens on these issues.  Yes, we  agree on some things, we disagree on others.  We disagree fundamentally on this, that’s  accurate.  The Greens would have the view that there’s no problem with people getting on a  boat and coming to Australia.  They have the view that it is morally superior to provide an  advantage to people who get on that boat, come to Australia to give them a better chance of  resettlement.  I respectfully disagree.  These are complex issues, but I respectfully disagree  with that view.  I think it’s better to have a better outcome for the 4,000 people who are  waiting for resettlement in Malaysia and to provide for those 800 people to return with those  basic protections in place.  I think holistically anybody looking at this arrangement would see  that the benefits of the 4,000 people being resettled and the improved arrangements, the  improved engagement of the UNHCR in Malaysia, this is an opportunity for the UNHCR to

engage much more closely with this country, Malaysia, which has had a very large increase  in asylum seekers over the last four years, and have been dealing with that.  And it’s also  been an opportunity for us to talk to Malaysia and the UNHCR about these issues, and  Malaysia has indicated they are examining how they approach these issues.  They’ve also  indicated for example they are examining work rights for all asylum seekers, and I think our  engagement with the UNHCR has been a useful step in that process.



Peter Van Onselen:  Let me ask something quite specific.  Section 198A of the Act, now  that’s the part that stipulates whether a country affords protection or not to asylum seekers,  now the Liberal Party when they sent asylum seekers to both Nauru and Papua New  Guinea, they had that in place.  At senate estimates your Department said that that was not  the case and you were seeking legal advice about whether or not it was necessary; instead  you’d look to do it under the general removal provisions in the Act.  Why do it differently?   Why not just go straight to section 198A?



Chris Bowen:  Well, the advice I have is that you can use both clauses to remove people to  Malaysia, and that’s what we’ll do.



Peter Van Onselen:  There’s no reason for jumping one to the other? . . .



Chris Bowen:  . . . No, not at all, and I’ve signed the declaration under 198A as an  appropriate removal country, but also we have other powers of removal under the  Immigration Act.



Paul Kelly:  Minister, can you tell us as far as you’re concerned what is the test for success  of this policy?



Chris Bowen:  Well, I think the test is that it breaks the people smugglers’ business model.   We see a reduction . . .



Paul Kelly:  . . . But what does that mean?



Chris Bowen:  Well we see a reduction in boat arrivals.  And look, we’ve already seen some  impact of this, Paul.  I don’t overstate this.  But the fact of the matter is that June was the  second lowest month for boat arrivals since 2009 and July was the third lowest month for  boat arrivals since 2009.  Now Mr. Abbott can say look, there’s been arrivals.  Yes, there

have been, but arrivals are significantly down.  I think we’ve seen some announcement  effect.  Again there’s a range of factors.



Paul Kelly:  So you think the policy is working already due to the announcement effect?



Chris Bowen:  Yes, I think it’s had an impact.  I don’t say all the reduction is due to the  announcement.  Of course not, there is a range of factors, there always is.  The situation in  Sri Lanka has improved for example over the last year.  That means we’ve seen a reduction  in the people arriving from Sri Lanka for a period.  There’s always a range of measures.  But  I think when you look at the clear fact, June the second lowest month, July the third lowest  month, and more than 1,000 less arrivals than in the same time period last year, then you  have to say something has changed and the thing that’s changed in more recent times is the  announcement that people will be returned to Malaysia.



Peter Van Onselen:  But even if you accept that things have changed and the numbers are  lower, there have still been nearly 600 arrivals since the announcement in May.  Now that’s  close to the 800 cap, so if that happens over the next three or four months you are going to  need another arrangement beyond the cap of 800.



Chris Bowen:  As I said before, let’s just see this operate.



Peter Van Onselen:  We’re only talking three months here.  I’m not asking you to speculate  three years ahead.  We’re talking months.



Chris Bowen:  Let’s see it operate, and I think obviously people smugglers will sell anything,  and they will say, and they’re already out there saying, I’ve got no doubt, this doesn’t apply  to you, I’ll get you on a boat, or look Australia won’t be able to deliver this, this is all talk, this  is what the people smugglers will be selling.  Now I think people in Indonesia and Malaysia  and elsewhere in all source countries, in transit countries, will be watching this arrangement  closely and seeing it implemented and we need to . . .



Peter Van Onselen:  . . . With respect, I don’t think that the wait and see approach can fit in  the timeframe that we’re talking about.  It’s taken months to get this deal.  This has been an  issue for years, and we’re only talking about it needing a matter of months even on the  reduced figures to hit the 800 cap.  I mean it’s not good enough, surely?



Chris Bowen:  Well, as I’ve said, let’s see it operate, let’s see the impact that it has.  The  Malaysian government has said that they’re open to talk about further extensions, I’ve said  we’re open to talk to other countries.  It’s well known, for example, we’ve been in discussions  with Papua New Guinea as one example under the regional framework.  We negotiated that  regional framework back in March.  Again, people said a regional framework will never  happen - we actually got one.  Negotiations . . .



Peter Van Onselen:  . . . So you think this is going to make it easier to get them again,  essentially, breaking into the first time of having a regional framework . . .



Chris Bowen:  . . . Obviously this is new territory for the region, and obviously having  negotiated the arrangement there’s been a lot of effort go into it.  Now you say rightly it’s  taken some time - yes, of course it has.  I first discussed this with my Malaysian counterpart,  Minister Hishammuddin, last December.  I mean I struggle to find any arrangement or any  agreement of this complexity and importance around the world that had been settled in that  short a time period from December to July, and then those operational details settled  between May and July.  I think that was a significant achievement for the government.



Paul Kelly:  Minister, is it your hope that the 800 numbers are never filled?



Chris Bowen:  Yes.



Paul Kelly:  And do you think that’s realistic?



Chris Bowen:  Look, as I say, I’m not going to overstate, we’re all in new territory, we need to  see the impact this has.  Some people have criticised us because we’ve said, look, if we  don’t end up sending the 800 we’ll still take the 4,000.  Well if we don’t end up sending 800  because 800 people haven’t arrived, but we can still increase our humanitarian intake, I think  that’s a pretty good outcome.



Paul Kelly:  So the real effect of this policy is that the boat people who arrive now are really  going to be the bunnies, aren’t they?  I mean they are going to be subject to this punitive  policy as a disincentive to ensure that others don’t come?



Chris Bowen:  They’re going to be subject to return to Malaysia as a disincentive to get on  the boat.  That’s the language I would use, Paul.



Paul Kelly:  And when they are returned to Malaysia, we know there are 90,000 asylum  seekers and refugees in Malaysia now, how long will they have to remain in Malaysia before  their cases are settled?



Chris Bowen:  They’ll be settled in line with the UNHCR guidelines and mandates, and there  is, as I said before, no particular special treatment . . .



Paul Kelly:  . . . There’s no special treatment, but what does that mean in terms of the  number of years they might have to wait?



Chris Bowen:  It depends on their individual circumstances.  The UNHCR assesses each  case.  Now the UNHCR looks at the potential for integration into the local community, and in  many senses they see that for many people as a sustainable outcome, for others they look  at resettlement.  It depends.  They look at all sorts of factors to go into whether to  recommend resettlement, and that includes vulnerabilities, links, if they have people with  family links in other countries whether it be Australia, the United States, Canada, they’d look  at that, and then they make an assessment about whether to refer that person and they look  at that person’s needs in line with the needs of other people waiting for resettlement.  So  some get resettled relatively quickly, others have to wait a substantial period of time.



Paul Kelly:  Now we know the UNHCR had reservations about this bilateral deal.  What sort  of assurances did you have to give them?  And how difficult was it to get their support?



Chris Bowen:  They have a particular job, and their job in many senses is the guardian of  refugees around the world, and that’s an appropriate job for them to take.  They took an  appropriately strong view in these discussions that there needed to be important safeguards  put in place.  Their feedback very much shaped this arrangement.  Their feedback shaped  the terms of those clauses that you see in terms of protections and support.  They indicated  that that would be appropriate for them if they were going to be involved, and that’s what  we’ve been able to deliver with the Malaysian government.



Paul Kelly:  And they will have an ongoing role in supervising these arrangements, so  presumably their ongoing support will be essential for you?



Chris Bowen:  They’re involved in the implementation taskforce, that’s right, which is the  monitoring and implementation group.  They’re involved in the processing of the 800 and the

4,000.  So yes, and the Malaysian government agrees with this.  I’ve seen some speculation  that Malaysia wouldn’t want the UNHCR involved - that’s nonsense.  Right from December  the Malaysian Minister and I agreed that if this were to work we would need UNHCR  involvement and IOM involvement.  Yes, sure, would it have been quicker if we just had a  bilateral agreement with Malaysia with no consultation with the UNHCR?  Yes, it probably  would’ve been.  But it wouldn’t have been the outcome that we got, which is a proper  regional arrangement with UNHCR involvement and very much their feedback influencing  the arrangement.



Peter Van Onselen:  Minister Bowen, you have to know that the media will be over there  when the first set of asylum seekers are sent over, that there will be people following these  individuals that get sent over, checking on their treatment, on their living standards, how  they’re going, potentially interviewing them through the course of all of this.



Chris Bowen:  Sure.



Peter Van Onselen:  There’s a lot of political risk in all of that, you realise?



Chris Bowen:  Yes.  I recognise that there will be interest and there will be transparency.   Unlike Nauru, by the way, where journalists weren’t allowed to go and lawyers weren’t  allowed to go because they were denied visas, people will be able to go to Malaysia, they  will be able to check on this arrangement.  We’ll have an implementation taskforce and we’ll  also have an advisory group of non-government organisations as well helping us with this  arrangement.  Will life be perfect and easy for everybody sent to Malaysia?  Of course it  won’t be, of course it won’t be.  But have we built in important protections and safeguards?   Yes, we have.



Paul Kelly:  We’re taking an extra 4,000 refugees of course under this arrangement, and this  is important in terms of the model and also in terms of the domestic politics here.  Are you a  bit disappointed that there hasn’t been all that much emphasis on the fact that we are taking  an extra 4,000 refugees?



Chris Bowen:  I think some people have ignored that conveniently, Paul, I think that’s right.  I  think some people very much focus on the 800, and that’s fine, I accept and understand the  focus on the 800.  But there are 4,000 souls who are going to get a better life, resettlement  in Australia, which they wouldn’t have otherwise had.  I was very keen to make sure that was  part of this arrangement, and I’m very glad of the fact that we’ve been able to do that.



Paul Kelly:  To what extent in the future are you prepared to advance this model and take  more refugees offshore in terms of getting fresh disincentives to stop boats coming here?



Chris Bowen:  Well I think the Australian people understand and welcome refugees and  accept that we should welcome refugees as a developed, compassionate nation.  The  Australian people, rightly in my view, expect an orderly process to that.  They expect people  who have been waiting for resettlement through the UNHCR to have a better chance at  resettlement, and they expect that people who take that dangerous journey should not have  the opportunity for advanced or preferential treatment.  I think this model shows that that can  be delivered, and as I’ve said we’ll continue under the regional framework to engage with  other nations, including Malaysia.  But we’ve been working pretty hard at inking this  arrangement, making sure that all the appropriate standards and protections and  arrangements are in place.  I’m glad we’ve been able to do that.  Now just let us get on with  the job of . . .



Paul Kelly:  . . . Now do you concede the point that your job as Immigration Minister is  effectively on the line with this deal, that this deal will make or break you as Minister?



Chris Bowen:  Well, as Minister I’m responsible for getting this this far, I’m responsible for  the arrangements put in place, and I’ll be responsible for its ongoing implementation.



Peter Van Onselen:  Alright, Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your company joining us  on Australian Agenda.  I’d hoped that we were going to go a little bit wider in your portfolio,  but this is the issue of the week, so unsurprisingly we got bogged down on it.



Chris Bowen:  Let’s take the opportunity next time as well to talk about school migration and  all the other important issues.



Peter Van Onselen:  We will do that.  Next time we will talk about something other than the  Malaysian solution, I promise you.  Thanks very much for your company.



Chris Bowen:  Thanks.



