













Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555





MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH ALI MOORE

LATELINE - ABC TELEVISION

3 MAY 2011



Subjects:  Osama bin Laden, Pakistan

E & O E DRAFT ONLY

ALI MOORE: Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd is currently in Washington for a series of high-level  meetings on security issues and he spoke to me from there just a few minutes ago.

Kevin Rudd, thanks for joining us

KEVIN RUDD, FOREIGN MINISTER: Thanks for having me on the program.

ALI MOORE: This was a major counter-terrorism operation against the world's most wanted  man. Australia's been a very staunch ally of the US and the fight against terrorism. We've  got a significant commitment to Afghanistan at a time when other countries are winding  back. How much did we know about what the Americans were planning?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, we would not expect to be informed of an operation like this, involving  high levels of confidentiality and secrecy. In my discussions with senior administration  officials yesterday it was quite plain that this was tightly held within the most senior  agencies of the United States Government.

We had no "Need to know" about this operation. The more people you tell about any such  operations in advance the more potentially you compromise the effectiveness of the  operation. So the short answer to your question, Ali, is that we were not advised of the  detail and we are perfectly comfortable about that because it's a highly secret operation.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

2



ALI MOORE: As you say you've been meeting with the administration, with Hillary Clinton,  you've been speaking with the Pentagon. Is it inconceivable that the Pakistani intelligence  agencies did not know that Osama bin Laden was in their country?

KEVIN RUDD: A couple of things to say about that. Remember, of course, that the  administration itself has thanked the government of Pakistan for its assistance in this overall  operation, that's the first point.

But secondly it's equally plain that there are a bunch of open questions there that need to  be answered. These are legitimate questions and I know from my discussions yesterday the  administration will be prosecuting those questions with its engagement with the  government in Islamabad.

ALI MOORE: As Foreign Minister you get far better intelligence than most if not all of our  audience, what's your view?

KEVIN RUDD: The more you are around in this sort of business the more you can be  surprised by what might appear to be the case and what might not appear to be the case. I  have just learnt through long and bitter experience that you wait until the jury's in on these  questions and I'd much rather do that, and therefore there is obviously questions to be  asked, questions to be answered, that will occur between the US and Pakistan.  I'm sure we  will be briefed in due course about the outcome of all that.

The other thing I'd say is that Pakistan itself is an extraordinarily difficult, complex operating  environment. Anyone familiar with the politics of Pakistan, the role of the military, the role  of the intelligence services, the porous nature of the border with Afghanistan, this is a very  tough place to operate from and with and in cooperation with. So let's just wait until the  jury's in. That's the safest thing to do.

ALI MOORE: In your view what is the key question that that jury has to look at?

KEVIN RUDD: Well again, I'd defer to the Americans on that question but let's just call a  spade a spade. The question is whether anyone in Pakistan was aware or not of the  presence of Osama bin Laden at this location in Pakistan prior to the operation being  initiated. That's an open question. I don't say that with any value-laden tone attached to it.  Let's just see what the authorities produce by way of their response to legitimate questions  from the US and from others.

ALI MOORE: Clearly though you are prepared to countenance that possibility by accepting it  as an open question and would you also acknowledge that of course accusations or  allegations of links between the Taliban or insurgents and high level intelligence on the  Pakistani side are not new?

KEVIN RUDD: Those accusations have been flying around for a long, long time.

I said before Pakistan is a highly difficult, complex operating environment. The operations of  arms of the Pakistani intelligence services, the military, the relationship with the civilian  government in Islamabad, these are highly complex and sometimes opaque questions.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

3



Let's just, as I said, take a deep breath, wait for the answers to be delivered. The key thing  though, however, is that this mission has succeeded in its objective.

ALI MOORE: Minister, do you trust the Pakistani security forces and the Pakistani  government and indeed do you take that as two separate questions?

KEVIN RUDD: I think the bottom line, Ali, is that we deal with governments around the world  of varying types, of varying calibres.

We deal with governments as they are and therefore we've been engaged with Pakistan  over a long period of time to assist with humanitarian challenges within their country, for  example, most recently the devastating floods which spread right up and down the river  system within the centre of the country.

We've also dealt with the Pakistanis in terms of big education programs and some of the  poorest parts of the country, assisting huge numbers of girls get education materials for the  first time as well as the training of midwives in order that the infant and maternal mortality  rates can be brought down. So we have a deep and broad engagement with Pakistan. As I  said, we deal with governments as they are, not as we would perhaps prefer them always to  be.

ALI MOORE: But in fact I suppose it goes further than those programs that you've just  mentioned. Australia is a significant provider of military training to Pakistan, much of which  happens on our soil. Some say we're the biggest provider of military training outside the US,  doesn't that make the question of trust rather more significant for this particular  relationship?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, we make no apology for the fact that we are significant trainers of parts  of the Pakistani military and for one explicit purpose - so much of the traditional training of  the Pakistan military has gone towards scenarios associated with open conflict with India, as  opposed to training of the Pakistan armed forces in what's called a counterinsurgency  operations dealing with the Taliban threat which comes from across the border in  Afghanistan and also home grown threats as well.

So what are we doing? We're training Pakistan military officers and have been doing for  some years in counterinsurgency capabilities in order for them to have a new skills craft for  dealing with internal security threats as opposed to their traditional training, which has  dealt with scenarios associated with open field conflict with India. We regard that as a  positive contribution. We've done so in the closest collaboration also with our friends and  allies.

ALI MOORE: Let me go back to that question that I asked you. Do you trust the Pakistani  intelligence agencies?

KEVIN RUDD: As I said before, Ali, we deal with governments as they are and therefore we  will work openly and cooperatively with the Pakistan administration, the Pakistan  government, the armed forces and the intelligence agencies and we do so as practically as  possible.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

4



But as I said, none of these relationships are ever perfect but we seek to maximise the  benefit which we can deliver against the overall objective which is to reduce the terrorist  threat. We are part of a combined operation by friends and allies.

We're also a member of what is called friends of democratic Pakistan on the economic  front. We are working and have worked consistently along these lines for several years.  Nothing's perfect. The idea is to make the best of what you've got.

ALI MOORE: Let me perhaps phrase the question in a different way. Should the American  investigation find or manage to prove that Pakistan did know that Osama bin Laden was in  their country, what then? How does that change the game from Australia's perspective and  also America's perspective?

KEVIN RUDD: Well you are building some hypotheticals on hypotheticals there and good on  you for trying but I'm not going down that road until we start to get some answers on these  questions.

Let's also concentrate on the core point, is that this mission, long anticipated over the last  10 years to remove Osama bin Laden from the scene, has been executed and completely  successfully.

That's where our focus should be right now. The rest will be sorted out through the proper  investigatory processes and discussions between the US and Pakistani authorities and we'll  wait for that to be concluded before we consider any associated actions ourselves.

ALI MOORE: In essence though are we being asked to believe that really as one of two  things, either Pakistan is duplicitous or it's incompetent because if they didn't know should  they have known?

KEVIN RUDD: Pakistan is a population of 170-180 million people. It's one of poorest  countries in the world. It has an inhospitable geography. For those reasons dealing with the  country is physically complex and challenging before you go to the politics of the country.

ALI MOORE: Isn't that the great irony that he was actually found in a very highly populated  area, a garrison town full of military personnel. So in that sense if they didn't know should  they have?

KEVIN RUDD: Can I just make this point in passing by way of reference. I think it took the  United States some 17 years to track down the Unabomber. With the formidable assets in  this country tracking down an individual, we should not just leap to conclusions in one  direction or another.

I would much prefer to wait for the jury to come back with its conclusions on this. I think  that's the right and responsible course of action and if you stand back from the immediacy  of this operation, our overall challenge is this, given we have substantial military  commitments in Afghanistan, is to work as positively and constructively with the Pakistani  military, the civilian government and their intelligence services to maximise our efforts  against the Taliban in Afghanistan so that we can conclude our mission there.



Minister’s Office: 02 6277 7500 or 0466 745 615                                       Department: 02 6261 1555

5



ALI MOORE: Well indeed, just a final question, does the killing of bin Laden make it more  difficult now to prosecute the case for the ongoing war in Afghanistan because of course  Australia's stated aim is to be there to ensure it never again becomes a safe haven for  terrorists and yet as we now know the biggest terrorist of them all wasn't even there, he  was across the border?

KEVIN RUDD: Yes, but the bottom line is we've become completely transfixed by geography  here. The Taliban move backwards and forwards and have done for a long period of time.  I've been to this part of western Pakistan in years past, there are massive refugee camps  there, some of which host considerable numbers of let's call them questionable elements  and there has been over time considerable movements across the border.

So the fact that a leading Taliban operative, or a leading Al Qaeda operative, might be found  on one side of the border or the other is not ultimately material here. The key question is  denying the operating space within Afghanistan so it doesn't again become the free-range  training ground for Al Qaeda to operate unimpeded worldwide.

ALI MOORE: My question is more that he was the pin up boy for terrorism, if you like, he  was the face of the public campaign in the public's mind very much part of the reason for  being there, does it make it harder to prosecute the case now that he's dead?

KEVIN RUDD: Well, there are two parts to this. One is bringing to justice those who are  responsible for mass murder and remember this individual is responsible for the planning  that led to September 11 and also a whole series of terrorist attacks around the world  including the training of Jemaah Islamiah operatives in South East Asia, who contributed to  the Bali bombings which murdered nearly 100 of our own.  So bringing people to justice is  our legal requirement under our international and national obligations to track down  terrorists and bring them to justice, that's one part.

The other part is this. Intelligently and successfully prosecuting a campaign against terrorism  on the ground, that's at multiple levels too. I mentioned before our humanitarian and  economic engagement with Pakistan. Similarly in Afghanistan where we're building schools,  we're building health clinics, roads, mosques to support local community development and  economic vibrancy as well as doing the hard-edged stuff which is working against Taliban  operatives on the ground and Al Qaeda operatives, that's what we're doing in a multi-tiered  strategy and I believe our troops and personnel are doing it effectively.

ALI MOORE: Alright Minister, thank you so much for joining us from Washington this  morning.

KEVIN RUDD: Thanks for having me on the program.

END

