MINISTERS

Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and  Energy Efficiency Minister Home  Â» Mark Dreyfus  Â» 2011  Â» Transcript  Â»  October

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR CLIMATE  CHANGE AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY

Sky News: The Nation with David Speers, Mark  Dreyfus, Peter Dutton, Frank Sartor and Chris  Kenny

Transcript  Sky News: The Nation with David Speers  13 October 2011  MD 70/11

David Speers: Welcome to the program. It's been a rollcoaster ride for the  Gillard Government this week, from the highs of passing the carbon tax, to the  lows of conceding defeat on asylum seekers. Both issues Julia Gillard vowed to  fix when she took over as Prime Minister. Joining us this week the  Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change, Mark Dreyfus, Sky News  contributor and host of Saturday Agenda, Chris Kenny. Former NSW Labor  Minister and the author of the Fog on the Hill, Frank Sartor and also the  Shadow Health Minister, Peter Dutton, welcome to you all.

I want to start with what has been a developing story and that is the mess that  we have been left with on asylum seekers, after neither of your parties was able  to reach agreement on how to proceed with off-shore processing.

The Government wants Malaysia, the Opposition wants Nauru, why can't you  come to some form of accommodation, Mark Dreyfus?

Page 1 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Mark Dreyfus: We don't just want Malaysia, we want to restore the Migration  Act to the position it was understood to be before the recent High Court  decision. As the Prime Minister said in her press conference this evening, we  want to pursue that Malaysia agreement and we will continue with that. We are  hoping eventually Tony Abbott comes to his senses and begins to act in the  national interest, because we think it is in the national interest to pursue that  arrangement with Malaysia.

It offers, really, a first step in building a regional architecture, building  arrangements with what you could call transit countries trying to get regional  burden sharing, if you like. We are being prevented from proceeding with that at  the moment because the amendments are not able to go through the House of  Representatives.

David Speers: Peter Dutton what's your view on the same question?

Peter Dutton: Well David I think there is a complete lack of leadership and I  think there has been a lack of leadership on this issue since Kevin Rudd was  Prime Minister. The Government had in place a formula which worked, it  stopped the boats. We didn't have the rioting going on in detention centres. We  didn't have the uncertainty, we didn't have the green light for people smugglers  to continue to push people onto these boats and the Government dismantled  what was a good system.

Kevin Rudd did it and Julia Gillard has only compounded now into what is a  national joke and as I understand it, and as you say, it is a developing story, but  I believe the Prime Minister was rolled in caucus this afternoon on this very  issue and I think that is a major development. I guess that story will develop  tonight and over the weekend.

David Speers: What's your understanding of…

Peter Dutton: Well my understanding is that the Prime Minister went in there  with a discussion about Malaysia being on the offer for caucus and they went to  this ridiculous arrangement of allowing bridging visas and basically just raising a  white flag and saying to people smugglers “come on down!”

David Speers: But she remains very much in favour of proceeding with the  Malaysia agreement. She is saying that it is up to Tony Abbott, it is up to the  Opposition now to come on board.

Page 2 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Peter Dutton: But this is developing into a national joke. I mean does this  Government have a list of policy options and feel compelled each and every  occasion to choose the worst possible option? I mean is anybody seriously  suggesting that Tony Abbott is the cause for the Labor debacle, in terms of their  policy on Malaysia and you know, weakening our border protection? I mean this  is really, I think a serious joke and a lack of national leadership. She is  completely undermining the office of the Prime Minister at the moment. And I  think Julia Gillard's position has become more tenuous.

David Speers: Okay, in fact we did hear the Opposition calling for her to  resign…

Peter Dutton: Well if Chris Bowen doesn't feel the need to resign now, I am not  sure when he would.

David Speers: Alright, Chris Kenny, do you think there should be some sort  middle ground between the two parties on this?

Chris Kenny: Well I think there is middle ground being put up. The Opposition  has put up this amendment to the Government's amendment, which would  allow off-shore processing in countries that are signatories to the UN  Convention on refugees.

David Speers: But how is that middle ground? Because it knocks out Malaysia  and it wasn't the Opposition's policy under John Howard.

Chris Kenny: Sure, there is a bit of political opportunism in here as well. But  Julia Gillard has said previously that she wanted to deal with countries that are  signatories the UN Convention. Well here's an option to do that. We have seen  Nauru and Manus Island work in the past, we can try them again and Julia  Gillard has been too stubborn to adopt this position.

So what's she has done now is after years and years of saying that off-shore  processing was wrong and that on-shore processing would not be an incentive  for people smuggling. She is now saying that on-shore processing will attract  more boats, it is an incentive and what she needs to fix the problem is off-shore  processing. It is a complete turnaround.

David Speers: Frank Sartor, there have been twists and turns in Labor's  position on asylum seekers over the years from completely opposed to off-shore processing to saying there is no such thing as pull factors, to then

Page 3 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

embracing off-shore processing. Trying to get East Timor, trying to get  Malaysia, now back to on-shore processing under some duress, it has been a  circuitous route.

Frank Sartor: I think it is fair to say that they had some false starts and that has  done them some political damage, but if we go to where we are now, the reality  is that what was bluff, the Howard bluff, which worked well for a couple of years,  may not work again. So what you actually want in immigration policy and  thankfully I am not in the Federal Parliament to deal with this, but you do  actually need policy flexibility. You absolutely have to have it because there is  some significant doubt.

Whether the public servants are right or not is another matter. But there is doubt  that Nauru will work. I think you actually do need policy flexibility and I think the  Opposition, with the greatest respect, are being very opportunistic about this.  The other thing that is also obviously very important is to engage the transit  countries more. I would like to see and I know they are doing a lot and I would  like to see a lot more work on actually “on the ground work” and stopping  people smugglers on the ground in Indonesia, in Malaysia or wherever.

David Speers: A lot of that requires cooperation from Indonesia.

Frank Sartor: But we have done it with terrorism and we have done with a lot  of other things. I think we did a lot more of that as well.

Chris Kenny: It's not there problem though Frank this is the issue. You know,  Indonesia, Malaysia, we do all we can to involve them in the issue because of  course they are transit countries. But they know, as we know, that the objective  is to get to Australia. The asylum seekers are not trying to get into Indonesia or  Malaysia to stay there. They are going there en route to Australia.

No you should try and work with them, but in the end they know it is Australia's  problem.

David Speers: Successive governments have done this. The Howard  Government, the Labor Government. Mark Dreyfus, what's so bad about  Nauru? Why won't Nauru work?

Mark Dreyfus: Well just to pick up Chris' point, it's not a transit country. It  doesn't offer any prospect of resettlement. It was a barbarous solution as  implemented by the Howard Government.

Page 4 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

David Speers: And Malaysia's not?

Mark Dreyfus: And to pick up the point that Frank made, it was a bluff. A lot of  what the Howard Government did was a bluff and the advice that we are getting  from the Department, in the clearest possible terms…

Chris Kenny: Was it too tough or a bluff?

Mark Dreyfus: Is that Nauru will not produce anything like the effect that is  desired, which is to disrupt the people smuggling business.

David Speers: But just explain to me how it is barbarous?

Mark Dreyfus: Well it was barbarous to keep people there, years after they had  been classified as refugees, which occurred in a number of cases…

David Speers: But you have got people who are kept for years on Christmas  Island.

Mark Dreyfus: Not for the same time that people were on Nauru, causing  lasting psychiatric harm to a number of people. Many of them now living in  Australia as citizens and that's something we have got to avoid. We want to  have humane treatment of people seeking asylum and humane treatment of  people who are refugees.

David Speers: But if we are so barbarous surely it would therefore be a  deterrent to have that on the table as a threat to send people there?

Mark Dreyfus: The deterrent was said to be that you did not get to end up in  Australia and that has now been made absolutely clear it was not the case that  you did end up in Australia or New Zealand…

David Speers: But is that the point Peter Dutton, it worked once, but now the  people know that if you go to Nauru that you will end up in Australia?

Peter Dutton: No because we don't talk about Nauru in isolation, it was a  policy, which was one element, one plank if you like. We insisted on temporary  protection visas as well so that people knew that there was essentially no  prospect of settlement. That they could go back to their own country.

Mark Dreyfus: And that didn't prove to be the case either.

Frank Sartor: Didn't 90% of those become citizens?

Page 5 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Peter Dutton: Well let's look at the facts Frank. I mean the fact is, when Mr  Rudd changed this policy the boats started to come. Now part of the reason  why you're not striking any luck in Indonesia at the moment is because you  completely trashed the relationship with the Indonesian Government.

Mark Dreyfus: Well I don't accept that for a moment. We have got very, very  good work going on now with Indonesia and you should not be speaking in this  way.

Peter Dutton: I think it is quite regrettable that you have Mark, but the live  cattle export…

Mark Dreyfus: You need to be very cautious here, just as your colleagues  need to cautious about the way they speak about Malaysia and Chris will back  me up on this. He has been to Malaysia recently. There is a need for care in the  way we speak about our regional neighbours. I can tell you, and David has  adverted to this, that we are working very closely with Indonesia on a whole

range of counter-terrorism measures and we are working closely with Indonesia  in relation to people smuggling.

I cannot say more than that and you would understand why. But to suggest that  we have trashed the relationship is a nonsense.

Peter Dutton: Well look Mark, you can throw all the red herrings in you like.  The fact is, the way in which we conduct relations with Indonesia is absolutely  vital to our countries.

David Speers: Are you giving some sort of assurance that under the Coalition  that you would be able to strike a deal with Indonesia to send boats back?

Peter Dutton: No I am just saying that when we were in Government…

David Speers: But that's the point though. You can't give that guarantee.

Peter Dutton: No David, but if talk to people like Phillip Ruddock… Well hang  on, just let me finish the sentence… they were able to have quiet behind the  scenes discussions with the Indonesians and they were able to do that because  the Indonesians were not scornful about domestic policy approach.

David Speers: So you reckon you will be able to do that again?

Page 6 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Peter Dutton: Well I think the Indonesians look at this current Government,  they don't know which direction they are headed in. The Live Cattle export was  damaging to our relationship, there is no question about that.

David Speers: But are you saying that you would be able to do a better job of  striking some deal with Indonesia to send boats back?

Peter Dutton: Well I think we would be able to talk to the Indonesians about  their own factors within their domestic situation, the way in which their law  enforcement agencies conduct their business, in terms of the people smugglers  in Indonesia. I think they're the sort of private discussions that governments can  have if there is a mutual respect between the governments and I think at the  moment that mutual respect, certainly from Indonesia's perspective, is not  there.

David Speers: Let me ask you the flip side of the question I was asking Mark  Dreyfus. What's so wrong with Malaysia? Why don't you think that's a good  idea?

Peter Dutton: Well David I am pretty conservative, on the right politician if you  like, and Mark is on the left and I respect that. But I can tell you that Malaysia  even offends me because I think of the options and I look at Malaysia and I see  the prospect of, you know, teenage boys and girls going to Malaysia. I think  there are real risks integrating those people into the Malaysian society. I think  there are real people smuggling and sex trade issues that operate across Asia,

but I think it is an issue across Malaysia as well.

David Speers: So you are worried that asylum seekers, unaccompanied  minors that we send there, could end up being trafficked?

Peter Dutton: Well I just don't know and that worries me and I am offended by  it…

David Speers: What assurances can you give Mark Dreyfus?

Mark Dreyfus: Well if I can answer David's question…

David Speers: Just on this point, what assurances can you give?

Mark Dreyfus: We are prepared to accept the assurances that we have  received from the Government of Malaysia because as our regional neighbour,  we need to have, and you I think accept this, very sound relations with

Page 7 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Malaysia, just as we do with Singapore, with East Timor, with Indonesia, with  our closest neighbours.

We want to work with them. I find it odd that you suggest that somehow  magically a Liberal Government, were there to be one, could enter into side  deals or backroom deals with Indonesia and that's all right. But to suggest that  we cannot openly enter into an agreement as the Government of Australia with  the Government of Malaysia I just think is wrong. We accept the assurances  that we are given, government to government, by the Government of Malaysia  and I think that is an appropriate way to proceed.

David Speers: Chris is that good enough? That we accept Malaysia's word that  these people will be okay?

Chris Kenny: Well I wouldn't malign the Malaysian Government's word but I  think there are a couple of problems with this and that is Malaysia is a country  that doesn't have a perfect human rights record, it is not a signatory to the UN  Convention. I think in the Nauru solution, what most people understand or I  hope they understand is that the Australian Government had responsibility for  those people. They were on Nauru but they were under the care and guidance,  for health and education, processing of the Australian Government. They didn't  just fob them off to another country, be it Nauru or Malaysia or any other  country. So I think that is part of the issue is that Australia needs to take  responsibility for people that come into its care.

David Speers: Frank Sartor, the situation now is that Julia Gillard is going to be  trying to blame Tony Abbott for every boat that arrives and Tony Abbott is going  to be trying to blame Julia Gillard for every boat that arrives. Who is going to  win that political contest?

Frank Sartor: Well I think it is rather sad because I actually think immigration  ought to actually be bipartisan. It really ought to be bipartisan.

David Speers: It is never going to be is it?

Frank Sartor: Well it was for a long time till I think it was about, I think 2001,  when they tried to make it a political issue…

David Speers: It is now an issue with so much politics…

Page 8 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Mark Dreyfus: We had a period of bipartisanship at the time of the ending of  the Vietnam War. Tens of thousands of Vietnamese, many of whom have made  a wonderful contribution to our country, came…

David Speers: Sure but in the last decade…

Mark Dreyfus: When the Fraser Government was in power, with the agreement  of the Labor Party and then when in Government, 1983 onwards, the Hawke  Government assisted with a massive amount of family reunion. And I didn't take  that…

Peter Dutton: And what was Paul Keating's approach after that in terms of  detention?

Mark Dreyfus: Well we can get to periods of…

David Speers: Let's get to what's happening now. I want to look…

Mark Dreyfus: Don't assume that it is impossible, picking up Frank's point, to  reach bipartisanship…

David Speers: Well I think a lot has changed in the last 10 years…

Frank Sartor: Can I say that, I am an ordinary citizen now, thank god, I am no  longer elevated like you guys. Look, we just want this matter resolved. I think  Abbott has to be very careful. He has been very sort of ruthless and he has  scored a lot of points, but I think he has really got to be very careful here. We  want, the citizens of this country, want this matter resolved in a reasonable way  and the fact is we have got to engage Malaysia, we have got to engage  Indonesia, we have got to try and prevent people dying at sea. So I think it is  important to try…

David Speers: And some off-shore processing… but do people blame the  Government for not being able to do that?

Frank Sartor: Well I actually think that it has moved on and it does need some  flexibility Chris, I don't think anyone of these solutions is going to solve the  whole problem. And when it comes to kids, that was mentioned earlier, my  understanding was that the Minister said that they would be dealt with  individually on their merits, in terms of his responsibility to children…

Mark Dreyfus: And very clearly, no blanket rules.

Page 9 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy Effi...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Frank Sartor: No blanket rules. So they will actually be dealt with. The thing is  you can't say, no Minister can go out and say, well we will do something  different with kids. You have got to be very careful in your language, but the  simple fact is that I think those issues would be addressed.

Chris Kenny: There is a complex range of measures, as Peter mentioned,  there is temporary protection visas, off-shore processing, there is ways you deal  with countries in the region. Especially Indonesia, the cooperation you have.

The issue here is, and I think the Australian public are on to this, the voters are  on to this, this is the point, is that up until three years ago this was fixed.

Tough measures that some people thought were too tough. Mark has just  referred to them as barbaric, barbarous, but they were tough measures and  they worked and they stopped people taking dangerous journeys and when the

Labor Party took government, there were only six people in left in detention. We  now have 6,000 people in detention, more boats ready to come because all of  this was unpicked.

Frank Sartor: My point is that it wouldn't work today though. Well all the advice  that bureaucratics have been giving us and the fact that a lot of people who  went to Nauru were able to come here.

Chris Kenny: They only know that because Julia Gillard and Chris Bowen have  been out there pumping out misinformation about 40% of those…

Frank Sartor: Well is it true or untrue?

Chris Kenny: Well the numbers… they have been saying that 90% of the  people there came to Australia.

Frank Sartor: My understanding is…

Chris Kenny: 40% came to Australia.

Frank Sartor: My understanding is that close to half came to Australia, but a lot  of those were resettled as refugees. So it was successful for them. They got to  be resettled as refugees.

Chris Kenny: But some were repatriated at the time and some went to other  countries. So it worked as a deterrent.

Page 10 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Frank Sartor: But at the time they weren't signatories to the UN Convention  were they?

Chris Kenny: Sure, but isn't that a good thing if they still came to Australia and  a deterrent as well?

Frank Sartor: But the Coalition has completely shifted ground. At the time they  were happy to send them to a country that was not a signatory, but now you  have got to be a country that has to be a signatory. I mean you guys are  running the risk that sooner or later you will fall over the hill on this issue. You  have been doing well because the Labor Party did have a few misstarts during  the election and so on this issue, but I think it is reaching a point now where  there is going to be a stark, there is going to be a much clearer picture out  there.

David Speers: Just to get back to the situation we are in now, Mark Dreyfus,  what's so wrong? If the Government is so worried about the dangers, the risks  people are taking, getting on these boats. There is no doubt there is a big risk.

Mark Dreyfus: There certainly is.

David Speers: What's wrong with trying Nauru and Manus Island again?

Mark Dreyfus: Because Nauru is a very, very expensive option. It is a small  rock of an island, and I mean small I have actually been there, right in the  middle of the Pacific. It doesn't have any refugees there, it doesn't have any  asylum seekers…

David Speers: But it is very expensive to…

Mark Dreyfus: As Chris has, correctly, pointed out, it is effectively the notion of  doing something on Nauru as practiced by the Howard Government, that  appears to be being suggested again. That Australia will build a detention  facility on Nauru. So it is not really anything to do with Nauru. By contrast, we  are wanting to engage with countries in the region, that is the point.

David Speers: By with Nauru, if it is an Australia run centre, you don't have  those concerns about what happens to the kids, what happens with caning.

Mark Dreyfus: What is the point of sending anyone to an Australian run centre  total is just the same as a detention…

Page 11 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

David Speers: Because is a rock in the middle of the ocean…

Mark Dreyfus: Well to torture people? To cause harm? To send someone for  five years with an uncertain future to a rock in the middle of the Pacific I say, at  a humanitarian level, something amounting to torture and I don't think that  Australia…

David Speers: Mark Dreyfus you are a lawyer, a QC, are you accusing the  Howard Government of torturing these people?

Mark Dreyfus: In certain circumstances, when someone has been given  refugee status and is still continued in detention, as occurred in a number of  cases on Nauru, then I say that is not a humane way to behave and could  amount in effect to torturing someone because they have been given status as  a refugee and are still being detained.

David Speers: The Howard Government tortured these people?

Mark Dreyfus: I am not going to inflame it, if you want that inflamed. I am not  going to say that…

Chris Kenny: This is just the ridiculous level of debate. On one level you are  saying Nauru is bad because it amounted to torture of people.

Mark Dreyfus: It could.

Chris Kenny: On the other hand you are saying that Nauru won't work because  it is too soft, they all know they are going to get in.

Mark Dreyfus: No, it is about end outcomes. That is the advice we have had  from the Department is that the reason why it might have been that detaining  people for a lengthy period was seen to be a deterrent to people getting on  leaky wooden boats in Indonesia. It is because there was some doubt whether  they would end up in Australia.

David Speers: A final question…

Mark Dreyfus: With Malaysia it is a start of the potential to enter arrangements  with countries in the region, to build on the Bali framework. And we need to  have Tony Abbott starting to take the national interest into account, instead of  just the rank politics that he is practicing.

Page 12 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

David Speers: A final question on this issue Peter Dutton. The Prime Minister's  argument is this legislative change is about giving governments now, and in the  future, the ability to choose what they do. So this Government wants Malaysia,  you may want Nauru in the future. You don't have to back Malaysia to simply  give the Government of the day the power to decide what to do.

Peter Dutton: No, but as the point was made before David, I mean the halfway  point really is to say, well, yes we both agree with off-shore processing, but only  to those countries that are signatories to the process.

David Speers: But you didn't used to say that though.

Peter Dutton: No but that is the reasonable…

Mark Dreyfus: Up until the 21st of June this year you weren't saying it.

Peter Dutton: But that's the reasonable middle ground. If you are asking for  middle ground, yes we have moved. But to you know, a more, I think,  acceptable approach than the Labor Party…

Frank Sartor: A crafty approach.

Peter Dutton: But no, I think it is a sensible approach Frank. I mean the other  problem of course that we haven't spoken about is that Malaysia is one part of  today's discussion, but the bridging visa is the other part, which is the same two  people who come on boats, now they will processed on-shore, which is another  green light for people smugglers. And secondly, the people on bridging visas  will be accessing social security, they will be accessing employment, they will  be accessing hospital services. Now if you want to see a flood of people coming  then you couldn't have ticked anymore boxes.

David Speers: Well here are the other option is to have overcrowded detention  centres.

Mark Dreyfus: And I have to just point out, that Peter's described the situation  that all of the people that arrive by air and claim asylum. Who in almost all  cases have come on some kind of visa but then have converted to a bridging  visa and are in the community.

David Speers: Let me see if I can finish on this issue on a point of agreement.  No one seems to think that on-shore processing if a good thing? Is going to  work? Is going to be effective?

Page 13 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Chris Kenny: I think the only thing we will all agree on is that what you want to  do is stop people taking these perilous journeys and prevent so many people  from being stuck in detention.

David Speers: We will take a break and then move on to another area where I  am sure there is going to be so much agreement, the carbon tax. Stay with us.

[Cuts to advertisement break]

David Speers: Welcome back. We're joined this week by the Parliamentary  Secretary for Climate Change, Mark Dreyfus, Sky News contributor Chris  Kenny, former NSW Labor Minister Frank Sartor, and the Shadow Health  Minister Peter Dutton. I want to move onto the carbon tax. The Government did  have a significant victory in the Parliament at least this week in passing the  carbon tax bills through the lower house. It's a policy that still remains deeply  unpopular in the community, but getting it through the Parliament - Chris  Kenny, first to you, was something that a lot of people would have doubted  could ever happen.   Chris Kenny: I thought it was always going to get through the lower house, and  I think what's a bit amusing about this is that we've been here three times  before, I think, where an ETS at least or a carbon price has been through the  lower house. What Julia Gillard really needs to do to claim her place in history is  to get it through the Senate and get it implemented and there are a few weeks  yet before it gets through the Senate.

David Speers: Are you saying that there's some doubt that it will go through the  Senate?

Chris Kenny: Unlike Paul Howse, I wouldn't bet my house on it.

David Speers: Well of course you were there amongst it last time around  working with Malcolm Turnbull…

Chris Kenny: Indeed, indeed, I saw how close it could get then, and I think that  we're looking at a leadership change in the Labor Party, and I think the most  likely new…

David Speers: In the next few weeks?

Chris Kenny: In the next while. The timing is hard to pick and that's the point I  want to go to, if you were Kevin Rudd, what's the best thing to do? To have the

Page 14 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

carbon tax implemented and out of the way when you take over, when you  reclaim the Prime Ministership, or is the best thing to come in and scrap it and  say, “sorry, this is something we have completely messed up, the people have  never really had a proper say on this, I'll take it to another election.”

David Speers: Frank Sartor, would you be advising Kevin Rudd to do any such  bold move?

Frank Sartor: Well, I think Kevin Rudd will be Minister for Foreign Affairs for a  good while yet, so I don't think that we need to have the conversation. But I'm  not so sure that there'll be a leadership change, I'm not in the federal caucus  but I think after our experience in New South Wales and so on I think the  federal colleagues would be very aware.

David Speers: We might actually talk about the issue of the leadership later on.

Frank Sartor: We actually had a carbon trading scheme in New South Wales  called the GGAS Scheme, and the price peaked at one point at about $40 a  tonne, no-one even felt it. My son is in Paris, he's about to do a PhD. He's an  expert on carbon trading. In my phone, which I was forced to turn off, I've got all  the stats, what the carbon taxes are in Europe at the moment. Now,

David Speers: It's currently running at about the equivalent of $14.

Frank Sartor: Yes, that's the ETS for the EU, but Sweden is well over $100.  Norway is partly part of the ETS and partly some other streams are about $50  Australian per tonne. The UK is part of the ETS but it's putting a floor on its  carbon price which is going to escalate way above Australia's. I am told the ETS  will probably, depending on economic conditions, between $14 - $15 and $40…

David Speers: the point is that we're not acting alone here, and you're…

Frank Sartor: We're not. California is about to do something, New Zealand's  done something, while there's was very cautious and slow, other countries are  doing different things. The simple fact is that I was in the oil industry in the  1970s. I saw the first oil shock where oil prices went up by about a factor of ten  and the second oil shock where they doubled. The second oil shock the  economies absorbed reasonably well around the world. This impact on the  Australian economy is miniscule compared to some of those other impacts on  economies like the second oil shock, forget the first one because that was  massive, or for example the GST. I actually think it's an overblown issue, and  pricing carbon is important if you want to go to the “why we should and why we

Page 15 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

shouldn't be sceptics” that's a separate argument, but if you assume that we  need to do something, then I think we need to do it.

David Speers: Is it going to be, Peter Dutton, a miniscule impact? The  Coalition's been arguing the sky's going to fall in.

Peter Dutton: Well I don't think that the Coalition's been arguing that the sky's  going to fall in, but I think there are some incredible economists out there and I  think that there are, you know, millions of Australians who all agree that this is  going to have a big impact on their lives. I mean, the Prime Minister talks about  the 500 top emitters, but the fact is it's going to have a cascade effect onto  small businesses, it's not going to be like a GST where it can be a line item on  an invoice, it's going to penetrate every input in a small business and those  costs are going to be passed on.

David Speers: And then people will get compensated.

Peter Dutton: Well some people will get compensated, and in the end, after all  of that big money wash, we're not going to have any environmental outcome,  and we're going to have the biggest system and the biggest carbon tax in the  world. And my favourite moment of this week in Parliament was the great kiss,  of course, of congratulations from Kevin Rudd onto the cheek of an awkward

Prime Minister.

David Speers: We could see you guys enjoying it. Mark Dreyfus, you are the  Parliamentary Secretary for this.

Mark Dreyfus: I am.

David Speers: So presumably you know more about this than the rest of us.  But at $23 a tonne, it's an economy-wide scheme, notwithstanding the sort of  figures that Frank Sartor's mentioned there, aren't we the only country that's  going to have an economy-wide carbon price at $23 a tonne?

Mark Dreyfus: No, there are many countries that have got economy-wide…

Peter Dutton: Economy-wide, what are they, what are they?

Mark Dreyfus: I don't accept that we are economy-wide, but Frank is going to  have a go at this too. We have exempted agriculture for example. What is  missing from the Liberal lines, which Peter has very faithfully and loyally  repeated here, is, as you pointed out, is most households getting assistance. It

Page 16 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

is actually nine in 10 Australian households getting assistance. And everybody  on the pension, everybody on a Government benefit is going to get some  assistance. There are nearly 30,000 people in Peter's electorate who are going  to receive assistance.

That is benefit recipients and pensioners, and everybody under $80,000 a year  income is going to receive a tax cut. We have got a million Australians who will  not be paying tax at all, and will not be filing a tax return when the carbon price

comes in because of the rise in the threshold. The Liberals always leave that  out.

Peter Dutton: I'm keen to hear about these countries where there's an  economy-wide carbon tax.

Frank Sartor: I'll explain that.

Peter Dutton: Well I'm asking Mark. He says that there's a number.

Mark Dreyfus: I'll have a go first. All countries have got different settings, just  as we've determined that there shouldn't be a carbon price on fuel, there  shouldn't be a carbon price on fuel for light commercial vehicles and there  shouldn't be a carbon price on agricultural activities. So too every other country,  New Zealand being among them, they've got variations on where they put the  settings because everyone's economy is a little bit different and in order to get  emissions down you should concentrate. I'd say the European schemes are  also economy-wide, even though they've got exemptions for various parts of  their economy for various industries.

David Speers: The European price though, which is most often compared to,  the price is at the moment only $14.

Mark Dreyfus: But if you had asked that two or three months ago, it was up a  lot higher, and we have got a temporary downturn in economic conditions in  Europe, I think we are all too well aware of that…

David Speers: We hope it's temporary, we don't know.

Mark Dreyfus: Okay a present downturn, nothing's forever!

Peter Dutton: You'd be following the European template for economic  management at the moment, wouldn't you?

David Speers: The difference is we're fixing ours for a few years at least.

Page 17 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Mark Dreyfus: For three years.

David Speers: $23 going up by 5% a year for those first three years. So for  three years, Australian industry could well be paying a lot more than its  competitors.

Mark Dreyfus: Well it could be, but we think that the European price is going to  return because this is something that…

David Speers: Because the economic science is so strong, or?

Mark Dreyfus: There are a declining number of permits so the trajectory for the  price and what this is all about is predictability of price. The trajectory, the  predicted trajectory, what everyone is working on in Europe, is that the price is  going to return to higher levels.

Frank Sartor: The EU scheme covers 50% of emissions in the EU. The  Australian scheme is going to cover about 60%. The Swedish scheme, I  understand, covers closer to 70 or 80%. So in terms of the coverage of  emissions in the economy, the Australian scheme is quite comparable to the  other schemes.

Peter Dutton: The coverage of emissions is a different definition from the  coverage of the economy, though, Frank. That's quite cute but that's quite  deceptive at the same time.

Frank Sartor: Well when you look at the actual sectors they're similar except  the intensity of our emissions is greater. We're the highest emitting country per  capita, second only to Luxembourg which is not a comparable country. That's  why we need to be in a position to be doing something about it. Now you can  argue about the merits but I mean, look, whether it's the carbon trading scheme  or an interim carbon tax, the fact is it's about pricing carbon. And that's always  been the issue.

David Speers: Barring any extraordinary political developments this will go  through the Senate next month and then come into force mid-next year. It  raises the question how can you guys really get rid of it, and particularly the  compensation that Mark Dreyfus talks about, the tax cuts, the pension rising,  are you really going to unwind all that?

Page 18 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Peter Dutton: Well absolutely. And you referred to some of Chris Kenny's  mental scarring from a couple of years ago when we lived through the first  years of opposition, and look, whether it's a level of pragmatism that strikes or  just a realisation that you're at odds with the Australian people as we were at  that time off the back of Work Choices in the 2007 election, we took a decision  to step back and walk away from that policy.

David Speers: You're investing a lot of faith in Labor suddenly changing their  entire position.

Peter Dutton: Well if Labor went to an election today, I think that they would  lose scores of seats.

Frank Sartor: That's not rocket science.

David Speers: Few would doubt that.

Peter Dutton: I don't want to be presumptuous but well…

Mark Dreyfus: That is why we get these desperate calls for an election all the  time from Tony Abbott.

David Speers: Labor's made it pretty clear, correct me if I'm wrong, Labor is  going to stand by the carbon tax, that's the point Wayne Swan made this week,  and even if you're in Opposition you're not going to budge.

Mark Dreyfus: We have just legislated something that is an incredibly  significant achievement for Australia.

David Speers: It's been very politically painful; you're not about to…

Mark Dreyfus: It certainly has been politically painful. It is something that is  going to be of lasting value to our children, our children's children. It is going to  put Australia on the trajectory that other countries are already on of declining  emissions. Australia is going to do its fair share.

David Speers: If you're thumped at an election and you're decimated, you get a  new leader, are you going to change and say…

Mark Dreyfus: I would go back a step and say I do not believe that Tony  Abbott, even if he is still leader and I think he needs to be watching his back  because at least half of his party, seriously, support an emissions trading

Page 19 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

scheme and we know this. If Tony Abbott were to win an election in two years'  time, I do not think he will carry out this supposed blood oath, he likes to use  this sort of colourful language, to repeal the carbon price that we have put in  place. Because it will be already in. People around Australia will have seen the  minimal effect, it is about a 0.7 per cent rise in the CPI, will understand that all  of this scare campaign, the misinformation that the Liberals have been putting  out was basically nothing. And they will say what on earth were you banging on  about? There will not be the kind of Liberal-induced hysteria that is the current  climate and I think that very much in two years' time, after the carbon price has  come in, we will have a very different political system.

David Speers: So back to this of how you get rid of it. If Labor is going to stick  to their guns on the carbon price, even in Opposition that means a double  dissolution is required. That would take a lot of time, probably 2015 before you  can do that.

Peter Dutton: Well if it needs a double dissolution then that's what we'll do.  And I think presumably we'd have the numbers in the lower house in that  scenario of course, and I think if people are serious in their belief and I think  that will continue in the public's mind, to honour our word which we absolutely  will, then that means a double dissolution election. If the Labor party in the

Senate decide that they hold their ground and effectively cause a double  dissolution election. If that's the ground that they want to fight…

Frank Sartor: Peter, what if it's working well, what if the tax is in, it's working  well and the industries are adjusting…

Chris Kenny: What, the planet's cooling down?

Frank Sartor: No, no, not the planet, that's completely misleading and you  know better.

Chris Kenny: How silly of me to suggest that the carbon tax might be about  cooling the planet. This is all hypothetical.

Frank Sartor: You want to debate the science of it, I'm happy to do that. But  that's a misleading statement. No-one's claiming that the carbon tax is going to  cool the planet. It's about slowing down the growth and influencing the world to  do its bit as well.

Chris Kenny: How will we know it's working then?

Page 20 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Frank Sartor: I'm talking about it working in terms of the economy absorbing it  without significant problems…

Chris Kenny: By working you mean not wrecking the joint.

Frank Sartor: Not wrecking the joint, in other words is it operating smoothly,  new industries are happening, it's reducing… we're reducing emissions,  industry is starting to substitute, you know there are, for example, solar panels  that soon might reach grid parity and this will help give…

David Speers: And the polls aren't as diabolical as they are right now.

Frank Sartor: All I'm saying is that if the system is working in terms of the  mechanics in the Australian economy shifting industry and those sorts of  issues, then why on earth would you want to wreck that certainty for purely  ideological reasons.

David Speers: Chris Kenny you must acknowledge that trying to get rid of this  thing is going to be messy, messy, messy.

Chris Kenny: It could be messy. On that scenario you outlined it could be  messy, but I don't expect we're going to see that scenario. With due respect to  Mark I don't think the Government's going to go full term. I don't think you're  going to be waiting around for another two years and then beyond that. It may  have to go to a double dissolution, but look I think the importance for now… this  Government will be defeated quite soundly sometime in the next two years and  if they are it's going to be largely on the carbon tax, it'll be like a referendum on

the carbon tax.

This issue has dominated politics now for five years, as if Australia's actions on  climate change are going to save the planet. Strangely enough we seem to be  tying ourselves in knots over it. The point is if Labor loses soundly on the  carbon tax issue, it will be largely because they broke an election promise this  time round on the carbon tax. They're hardly going to sit there in Opposition and  block Tony Abbott's mandate in the Senate. They're just not going to do that  again. Now of course they're going to say now that they will but they won't do it.  It will be like Kim Beazley and the GST, they'll just forget about it.

David Speers: Or the Liberal party and Work Choices.

Page 21 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Chris Kenny: Exactly, Liberal party and Work Choices. When you've been  hammered as a political party for your handling of an issue, you're not going to  sit up there in Opposition and asked to be hammered again.

Peter Dutton: It's pretty sobering, David, I can tell you. Through bitter  experience of having sat through a shadow Cabinet since 2007, there is a level  of pragmatism that strikes and believe me, if you've been thrashed in an  election, the last thing in Opposition you want to do is line up for another  second thrashing at the next election. I think we were right in doing that off '07  in relation to Work Choices and these guys would be absolute fools to block it in  the Senate after the upcoming election.

Frank Sartor: It depends on the politics of the issue at the time and that could  change dramatically.

David Speers: I'm keen on the issue you raised about how do we know  whether it's worked and at what point we know it's worked. Mark Dreyfus, is that  going to be the test? How will we know…

Mark Dreyfus: That is why part of this package, and it is in the legislation that  just passed through the Parliament, is a Climate Change Authority, modelled on  the British Climate Change Committee which makes public recommendations to  the Government on whether or not the scheme needs to be altered in any way.  It reports on reducing emissions. In our case it will be reporting on bringing  down the present rising trajectory of Australia's emissions.

David Speers: So that will be the test, whether emissions are coming down?

Mark Dreyfus: Of course! Not whether they are in some kind of absolute terms  lower next year, but whether we are beginning, because that is what it is  about…

David Speers: Lower than what they otherwise would have been…

Mark Dreyfus: Lower than business as usual.

Peter Dutton: You mean our domestic emissions?

Mark Dreyfus: That is why some countries actually measure their targets not in  terms of a base year but as against business as usual, and that is the objective.  The moment we have got Australian emissions rising, and we want to bring

Page 22 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

down those emissions, and eventually get to a position where we have got  overall declining emissions, which will not happen for some years yet.

David Speers: The point that Dutton's about to make, I'm sure, is that it doesn't  mean that Australia's domestic emissions are necessarily lowering.

Mark Dreyfus: Well that is why you have international trading so that  companies which bear the liability for the carbon price have got the opportunity  to seek the lowest cost.

Chris Kenny: So we're buying Bulgarian carbon permits.

Mark Dreyfus: No, not “we”, the companies that have the liability. This is a  fudge that the Liberals like to engage in, pretending it is taxpayers' money. It is  not “we”…

Chris Kenny: Not “we”, but Australia buys some Bulgarian carbon credit, you're  confident about the checks and balances in the system, no rorts…

Mark Dreyfus: That is why a great deal of work that has happened in the  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is about  measurement and reporting…

Peter Dutton: Is one of the tests that our domestic consumption drops off?  Does there have to be an abatement of…

Mark Dreyfus: It is Australia's contribution to reducing emissions because the  planet, and I would have thought you would understand this by now, the planet  is not making a distinction between the source of emissions. It's a global  problem.

Peter Dutton: I understand that but we're not responsible for emissions in  Bulgaria or the United States or India or China. We are responsible for our  emissions here, and so I'm asking you is one of the tests as to whether or not  this has been a success, a drop-off in our emissions in Australia?

Frank Sartor: No, it is a…

Mark Dreyfus: No, it is global emissions that we are concerned with. Australia,  and this has been often pointed out, is responsible for around 1.5% of global  emissions and we need to make a start on our own domestic emissions and we  need to contribute in whatever way we can to a reduction in world emissions.

Page 23 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Other ways we are doing so is helping the Indonesians, for example, in  reducing their rate of deforestation. That is a great contribution.

David Speers: Let me ask you just a final question on this issue, what will be  your test, Mr Peter Dutton, whether the carbon tax, emissions trading scheme,  has worked, or is there no chance that you will ever contemplate giving the  Government that sort of tick?

Peter Dutton: We have given the Australian public an absolute guarantee that  we will abolish this legislation. That is what we'll do.

Frank Sartor: Even if it's working.

Peter Dutton: It has no prospect of working because as Mark, in a convoluted  way, explained that, in quite a demeaning fashion, this is a debacle. It's a  debacle of a scheme, our competitors don't have it, it's the only system in the  world where it operates on an economy-wide basis. There's no prospect of it  succeeding. So I think we're on pretty safe ground.

Mark Dreyfus: I am looking forward to seeing Peter Dutton explaining to the  12,000 pensioners in his electorate that that the $510 that is coming to  pensioner couples, and the $338 that is coming to single pensioners, is being  taken away from them.

Peter Dutton: All I'm saying is we're not going to harm the pensioners therefore  and we're not going to compensate them..

David Speers: We're going to have to take a quick break, we'll be back.

[Cuts to advertisement break]

David Speers: Welcome back, we're joined this week by Mark Dreyfus the  Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change, Chris Kenny, Sky News  contributor and the host of Saturday Agenda, Frank Sartor is a former New  South Wales Labor Minister and author of The Fog on the Hill, and Peter  Dutton, is the Shadow Health Minister.

Now, I guess it's been raised a couple of times over the last hour but the  leadership issue on the Labor side. Frank Sartor, you write in your book about  the chopping and changing of leadership at the New South Wales level. What is  the experience there, what has Labor learnt from that or what should it learn  from that?

Page 24 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Frank Sartor: I think that the fundamental issue for governments is to focus on  the principle of good government, which is chapter two in my book. But really  it's about focussing on policies and consistency and winning back and being  authentic. And I think the people of Australia desperately want authenticity at  the moment because there's a lot of uncertainty around in all sorts of areas. So  I think the critical issue for the federal government is to pursue consistent and  solid policies and get them resolved.

David Speers: And are we seeing that?

Frank Sartor: Well I think we are starting to certainly see an improvement in  that area. I think some of the missteps before the election did them a lot of  harm. I think you've got to be really careful. I don't think, I think they should drop  this ‘announcables' nonsense and think things through before they are  announced. And I think certainly in the last six months I've seen a lot less rash,  in fact I probably haven't seen any rash announcements.

David Speers: And what about the leadership? The change…

Frank Sartor: Well look, I am too removed to be able to make serious comment  on that although commentators know less about it than I do will makes lots of  comments about it.   But firstly let me say, the personal attacks on Gillard are appalling. And even  the other day, the sort of language is just appalling. Whether you agree with her  or whether you don't, I just think it's disgraceful. And if they made those attacks  on Howard they shouldn't either. The simple fact is that we should be a civilised  democratic country I wonder whether the leadership change is the big issue that  people think it will be. I think we need to win back more credibility, authenticity  and engage with the community. And I've got a lot of other observations about  the party and how it should reform itself. But to me, solidness, being a frame of  reference for the community and providing them with hope is a lot more  important, probably, than changing the leader.

David Speers: Mark Dreyfus, how safe is Julia Gillard?

Mark Dreyfus: Very safe. I say that with absolute confidence and I agree with  Frank. There has been far too much concentration on this leadership story.  Journalists love to write it. We saw it for years with Howard and Costello. We  saw it right through the first bit of opposition where there was constant

Page 25 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

speculation about when Malcolm, your boss, was going to make his run then  whether there was going to be a run made against him.

Chris Kenny: Journalists just make this stuff up…

Mark Dreyfus: No I do not mean to say that, I am just saying…

David Speers: In defence of the media you've given a bit of fuel to the fire by  changing leaders, how many times in New South Wales?

Frank Sartor: Well we learnt from the Liberal Party, they had eight leaders  while Level Neville was leader of the Labor Party the Liberal Party had eight  leaders, we learnt it from them. But unfortunately we did it when we were in  government, they only changed a couple when they were in government.

David Speers: And so did these guys.

Mark Dreyfus: I think you would have to accept it is an easy story to write, and  I am confident…

David Speers: The problem is, we have MPs, such as yourself, saying this and  then five minutes later Kevin Rudd gets knocked off by Julia Gillard. And every  one points to the media and says, why didn't you see that coming?

Mark Dreyfus: Well, I see that other people are out there, fuelling this imagined  fire and I can only tell you what it feels like to me, as Cabinet Secretary in the  Gillard Government, that Julia Gillard is doing a fine job as Prime Minister. She  is providing orderly and good government, and I think it is about good  government, and we are going to go on governing and building on the  achievements of the term that we have had so far.

David Speers: While ever your primary vote is in the twenties, you must  acknowledge that some of your colleagues, perhaps not you but some of your  colleagues, are going to scratch their heads and at least wonder whether a  change in leadership might save their own skin.

Mark Dreyfus: Well, government is not one long opinion poll as some people  seem to think. It is about, and I am very much agreeing with Frank, it is about  solid good government. And for us it is about building on achievements like  there being 750,000 jobs that have been created since Labor has been in  government. There are 140, 000 people more in work than there were twelve  months ago. That our national debt levels are a fraction of the debt levels we

Page 26 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

have been reading about in Europe. All of those things are the things that  matter to me. They are the important things. And it is about looking at the solid  achievements of increased pension rises of in fact getting this carbon price in  place those are the things that are going to matter in the long term.

David Speers: Peter Dutton, you guys had a hell of a ride on the leadership  front in the last term you through from John Howard, to Brendan Nelson, to  Malcolm Turnbull to Tony Abbott eventually, given that experience, do you  really think it would be a smart move for Labor to change again?

Peter Dutton: Well I think it's a big difference being in opposition and changing  leaders than to depose a sitting Prime Minister. I think that's what really  annoyed the Australian public, they were sick of Kevin Rudd and the move  against him wasn't because the people were happy with him the public had, you  know, lost confidence in him and so they dumped him in government and I think  there's a big difference between changing leaders in opposition and in  government.

Now Mark's read from the Government script which is fair enough you'd expect  him to do that, and he'll back his leader which is fine but as he's doing that his  colleagues in caucus are texting and phoning journalists saying, you know, it's  game on or Rudd's out there doing photo opportunities on Julia Gillard's  birthday to try and infect the story and the programs on the news that night.  He's giving the kiss of death to Julia at the end of the carbon tax debate which  completely overshadows what the Prime Minister saw as a crowning moment  so he's playing games so it is game on. She's been a terrible disappointment,  as Frank says the Prime Minister should be treated with the utmost respect but I  do think the office, I do think the office has been demeaned I do think this has  been a bad government and I think the Australian public believes the same.

David Speers: Chris Kenny, what do you see happening here?

Chris Kenny: Well, I just think that Julia Gillard is finished. You know, it's sad  for those who expected greater things from her, Australia's first female Prime  Minister, and all of that. But I do agree with Mark and Frank in that the problem  isn't just leadership, the problem for the Labor party of course is substance and  authenticity. But the trouble is that that hasn't been delivered by Julia Gillard.  The public don't know what she stands for in the key policy areas, she's flip  flopped on the carbon tax and climate change, she's identified border protection  as one of the three key policy areas she had to fix up, and it's now an absolute

Page 27 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

shambles with she's basically today just declared open borders we're back to  on shore processing.

David Speers: Isn't this the problem that any change isn't going to fix those  problems.

Chris Kenny: No I wasn't… I was being a bit flippant about the carbon tax, but  not entirely, and a Kevin Rudd return. And that is right, it's not going to be good  enough just to change leaders like the New South Wales Labor Party…

Frank Sartor: That didn't work for us.

Chris Kenny: And that's why Kevin Rudd is actually an alternative for the Labor  party because it's a plausible story to tell voters that is, we're sorry we knifed  the Prime Minister you elected. We shouldn't have been so presumptuous we…  he has learnt from his time on the sin bin of Foreign Affairs. He's coming back  and we are going to reconnect with voters around our core values. And one of  the keys he could do if he comes back in time is say, saying to voters that he'll  give them a chance to actually cast a vote on the carbon tax, ETS whatever we  want to call it.

David Speers: Frank Sartor, you've seen this whole leadership, and Mark's  absolutely right, the stories that are constantly written, the speculation does  them no good at all. You've seen this happen at the state level, is there  anything that can be done by the Party, by the two players here, Julia Gillard  and Kevin Rudd to put this to bed. I mean, they've kissed and hugged this week  and still the front pages scream leadership turmoil.

Frank Sartor: I think it's the sort of thing you've just got to see through. You've  just got to hold the line and see it through and over time it'll disappear. Because  you guys were bitten because you didn't see it coming last time and you'll  speculate every day of the week that there's going to be a leadership change

just in case one happens. I think they've just go to keep their cool and see it  through, focus, get some wins on the board some of the issues that Tony  Abbott has exaggerated in terms of problems will disappear. So you need some  clear air and see how it goes. I mean the prospects are still very difficult for the  Labor Party at the next Federal election because the brand nationally at the  moment we're just going through one of those cycles and it's very difficult and if  they can keep Mark Arbib in his cupboard and focus on good policy they'll  recover to some extent.

Page 28 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

Chris Kenny: Do you really see them staying with Julia Gillard though with a  primary vote below 30% I mean it's been there for months now.

Frank Sartor: The problem is Chris that in New South Wales they dumped  Iemma when he hit 33% and we dropped to 29, 26%, and Richo used slightly  different stats here but I don't think he's right really and I disagree on that, and  then he then climbed up to 31% and then we went to Keneally and she fell  down to 25%.

Chris Kenny: She's got some political tin here though, she had her win  yesterday and has completely obliterated that win yesterday by mishandling the  politics of border protection.

David Speers: Well it has been a remarkable week but we are out of time for  this week's show. I'd like to thank Mark Dreyfus, Chris Kenny, Frank Sartor and  Peter Dutton. Good to have you all here this week.

Accessibility | Disclaimer | Privacy | Â© Commonwealth of Australia

Page 29 of 29 Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and Energy E...

27/03/2012 http://www.climatechange.gov.au/minister/mark-dreyfus/201...

