Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Malaysia transfer arrangement,  Papua New Guinea Tuesday, 02 August 2011

Interview with Phil Kafcaloudes, ABC Radio  Australia

Phil Kafcaloudes: We're joined now by the Immigration  Minister, Chris Bowen. Thanks very much for joining us,  minister.

Chris Bowen: Pleasure, Phil; good morning.

Kafcaloudes: Now, let's go to the beginning of this: why do  you think that posting this footage will stop people from  making the boat trip?

Bowen: Well look, we know that people smugglers tell lies,  we know that people smugglers will be out there saying,  'Look, this won't apply to you', or, 'People aren't being  transferred back to Malaysia', or, 'This doesn't work',  because they are desperate to make money off desperate  people.

And we think it's only fair to show very clearly the  government's new policies in operation. Now, of course  we'll have peoples identities respected and we'll have  appropriate videos posted, but it will be very clear that  measures have been taken and this new policy is in  operation.

Kafcaloudes: Now, we're talking here about asylum  seekers: people who are probably, as far as the world goes,  these are people who don't have very much resources. Do  you expect that they'll have access to YouTube and  Facebook?

Bowen: Well we know that many asylum seekers  throughout the region do follow closely what's happening in

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169419.htm

Australia; they follow closely announcements of policy  changes and they are watching this arrangement quite  closely. So yes, I do think that many people would have  access to that sort of social media and word-of-mouth will  spread quickly from those who do have that access to those  who don't.

So look, will everybody in the region see it? Of course not.  But I think we need to take every reasonable and  responsible step to inform people thinking about making  that dangerous boat journey to Australia that you should  not, because it's dangerous and won't achieve you the  outcome you're after, which is resettlement into Australia.

Kafcaloudes: But what it will show is people checking into  hostels in Kuala Lumpur. Again, considering who these  people are and what they've gone through, could that be an  inducement, an attraction? You come to Australia; you're  not going to be treated badly?

Bowen: Well, look, it'll show that people are being  transferred to Malaysia. In terms of the conditions in  Malaysia, we've negotiated with Malaysia, and with the  feedback of the UNHCR, some basic protections:  protections that people can remain lawfully in Malaysia and  have access to basic health and education.

Look, I don't think people - and I don't think people should  - and I don't think people will pay the money to a people  smuggler, risk their life, come to Australia, only to be  returned to Malaysia to get what are those basic  protections. They are basic and appropriate protections. But  people who come to Australia are coming to be resettled in  Australia and that is no longer a feasible option for people,  to pay that money to the people smuggler and come and  expect resettlement in Australia.

Kafcaloudes: Now, children: you have said you've always  left the option open and it will be up to you whether children  do go. In that first batch that are going, will there be any  children?

Bowen: Well, look, we'll be making further statements  about that. What we've said is that there'll be no blanket  exemptions for anybody. People coming to Australia by  boat should work on the assumption that they'll be sent  back.

Page 2 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169419.htm

Now, we will have appropriate measures in place to make  sure that individuals are treated appropriately, but if people  are thinking about putting their children on a boat, or if  there's people under 18 thinking about getting on a boat,  thinking that they might be able to skirt around this new  arrangement, that's not the case. There's no blanket  exemptions in place.

Kafcaloudes: Now we've got on the front pages of many of  the papers images of riot police getting up and training on  Christmas Island for any possible problems. Was this  something that the government wanted to see on the front  pages of the papers for that reason, as a publicity thing to  show asylum seekers that really there is no choice for  them?

Bowen: No, look, I think people can read too much into  this. The Australian Federal Police does their drills and  practises all the time. It's well known we've had issues on  Christmas Island where the Federal Police have had to be  put into place and they've had to use force. And the Federal  Police do practise and do go through their drills.

We will have Federal Police involvement in the transfer and  they will deal with any matters that arise in accordance with  their guidelines. It's not a voluntary arrangement; people will

need to be returned to Malaysia, and if there's any issues  that need Federal Police response the Federal Police will  respond accordingly. But I think we can read too much into  one photograph. The Federal Police do practise their drills

and their procedures very regularly, just to make sure  they're fully across what their operational response is.

Kafcaloudes: But they will be called on if there is any  trouble?

Bowen: Look, the Federal Police will be involved in the  transfer, the Federal Police will be providing security for the  transfer back to Malaysia. And I hope, of course, that those  transfers go smoothly and there's no need for the Federal  Police to use any force whatsoever, but they will be there  and they will be appropriately resourced should they need

to respond to any incidents.

Kafcaloudes: Now that the Malaysia plan is under way,  things are travelling ahead with that one, will there be

Page 3 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169419.htm

further negotiations for a regional solution to this, or is this  basically going to be it for you right now?

Bowen: We've negotiated the regional framework with all  the countries in the region, which enables countries to talk  to each other about measures that can break the people  smugglers' business model. Let's see how this one works. I  think it will have a big impact, I don't think people can or will  make easily the decision to pay the money to people  smugglers, to risk their lives to come to Australia simply to  be returned to Malaysia. So I think it will smash the people  smugglers' business model.

Of course, under that framework, we continue to have  discussions not only with Malaysia and also other countries  about other things that can be done. But our focus at the  moment is on making this arrangement work.

Kafcaloudes: So Manus Island is not a priority anymore?

Bowen: Look, we've been in discussions with Papua New  Guinea about Manus Island, that's well known, about things  we can do together. Those discussions would continue -

Kafcaloudes: But if you're stopping the people smugglers,  if this does work, if the Malaysia Solution does work, then  there would be no need for Manus Island, would there?

Bowen: Look, we continue to talk to countries around the  region about potential options, including Papua New  Guinea. It's well known that those discussions have been  ongoing with Papua New Guinea for a little while now. We  continue to talk to Papua New Guinea about that, but I am

confident that the Malaysian agreement will make a big  difference to the number of people arriving in Australia by  boat.

Kafcaloudes: Did you get any word at all from Malaysia  that they would be willing to sign on to the Convention on  Refugees?

Bowen: Malaysia is clearly not a signatory to the Refugee  Convention; that's well known. I think Malaysia has said that  they are looking at the whole issue of asylum seekers.  Minister Hishammuddin said the other day that he was  examining the issue of work rights across the board for  asylum seekers. I don't think we're going to see a signature

Page 4 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169419.htm

on the Refugee Convention any time soon from Malaysia.  They have their own way of dealing with these issues.

They have said that they will abide by what is an important  part of the Refugee Convention in terms of the 800 people  that Australia sends to Malaysia, which is not to return them  to a country where they may face persecution. They'll  remain in Malaysia while the UNHCR considers their  claims, but those claims will need to be considered  alongside those other 90 000 asylum seekers and refugees  in Malaysia who are waiting for resettlement.

Kafcaloudes: Now, I don't know if it was actually  something that Julia Gillard suggested but it was something  she hinted at, that she wanted to work with countries that  were signatories and that was one of the reasons why she  wasn't going for the Nauru solution again. So that - at some  stage - that obviously did not become a requirement any  more?

Bowen: There's a whole range of reasons that we wouldn't  engage with Nauru. In relation to the Refugee Convention,  the majority of the world's asylum seekers are in countries  that aren't signatories to the Refugee Convention. I don't  think that means you don't work with those countries.

We work very closely with Malaysia. Malaysia is a very  good friend of Australia and we work very closely on these  people smuggling issues. We thought it was appropriate to  work with Malaysia on this and I'm very glad that Malaysia  has responded so positively. It shows how good the  relationship is between Malaysia and Australia, how keen  we are to work together on these issues, and I think that it  shows that a regional approach, countries like Australia and  Malaysia working together, is much more effective that any  country trying to deal with it by themselves.

Kafcaloudes: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, it's been  good to speak to you. Thanks very much for giving us your  time.

Bowen: And you, Phil.

See: Index of Speeches

Page 5 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169419.htm

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169419.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 02 August 2011 at 13:12 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 6 of 6 Malaysia transfer arrangement, Papua New Guinea

30/09/2011 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb169419.htm

