







THE HON DR CRAIG EMERSON MP  MINISTER FOR TRADE





Transcript

ABC 612 Mornings with Madonna King

4 May 2011



E&OE

Subjects: Osama bin Laden, Pakistan, carbon pricing, teenager support payment.



MADONNA KING: US President Barack Obama's Homeland Security

Adviser, his name is John Brennan, said yesterday it  was inconceivable that bin Laden did not have a  support system in Pakistan.

You heard our expert just after 8.30, but where does

this go politically now? It's one of the issues we'll look  at now, when we go inside Canberra. Deputy  Opposition Leader in the Senate, George Brandis,  good morning.

GEORGE BRANDIS: Good morning, Madonna.

KING: Good to have you back, and Dr Craig Emerson,

Minister in Julia Gillard's Government - always a  pleasure to talk to you too.

CRAIG EMERSON: And to you too, Madonna, and hello, George.





BRANDIS: Good morning, Craig.

KING: Let's start with Pakistan. So much to get through in

such a short time. Craig Emerson, how do we navigate  this one?

EMERSON: Well, I think we need to acknowledge that this is a very

important milestone in the war on terror. That is that  Osama bin Laden was - if not the day-to-day  commander - certainly, in a sense, the spiritual leader  of Al Qaeda.

And his removal, while not ending the war on terror, is

a blow to Al Qaeda and it's certainly a strong message  that from the US perspective and the broader  perspective that if these acts of terror are committed,  there will be a reprisal.

KING: Sorry, you misunderstand my question. I don't mean

Barack - sorry Osama bin Laden - I mean Pakistan and  whether there was a support system operating there.  How do we now deal with Pakistan? Friend or foe?

EMERSON: I think we need to deal with them at face value, which

is that they, too, were subject to attacks by Al Qaeda;  they are allies in the war on terror. There are questions  obviously being asked as to how Osama bin Laden  was able to be accommodated in a large place, not  very far from Islamabad.

But the Government of Pakistan has been an ally and

that has been acknowledged by President Obama.

KING: All right. Senator George Brandis, on the same issue,

because this is what America is talking about this  morning. This is what Julia Gillard was referring to





yesterday. I mean, how do we navigate or how do  authorities navigate whether Pakistan is a friend or a  foe?

BRANDIS: Well, I think that plainly Pakistan is a necessary ally of

the West in the war against terrorism and is an  important ally, in particular, in relation to the military  operations in the adjacent nation of Afghanistan.

Now that having been said - and allowing for the fact

that I don't profess to be a specialist in Pakistani  politics - but I think most people who do follow  international affairs are aware that Pakistan is an  extremely complex country.

There is no doubt at all that there is a proportion of the

Pakistani population who are not in sympathy with their  Government’s support for the United States. To the  extent to which that might propagate into the military or  the intelligence community in Pakistan, is a matter  which people, I think, will have endless debates over.

But nevertheless, it's important that President Zardari

did, the day after Osama bin Laden had been  eliminated, actually go into print in the - I think it was in  the New York Times  - and made it very clear that his  Administration strongly supported the United States'  decision to take out bin Laden.

KING: And you make an interesting point about the difficulty

of his job in looking after that country and the people of  the country. There was a story in one of the papers, I  think, The Australian this morning of the local baker  who's been giving naan bread to the people in the  compound each afternoon and each evening.





And when confronted, saying, well, ‘how do you feel -

you've been the baker to Osama bin Laden?’, he says,  well, he'll tell his grandchildren to be proud, it was the  Americans that got him not…

BRANDIS: Well, there is a body of opinion in the Muslim world that

saw bin Laden as an heroic figure. There's no doubt  about that. But there was no Muslim Government that  had that view and certainly that wasn't the policy of the  Pakistani Government.

KING: All right. And Craig Emerson, just guide us on

procedure here. How does the Australian Government  decide what we think about this? Is it a Cabinet sub-committee, Cabinet as a whole. Is the Opposition  consulted on something this big?

EMERSON: Well, I think, to finish off the conversation, Madonna, in

answering your question. As George is really alluding  to, the relationship of the Australian Government is  with the Government of Pakistan. We can't have a  relationship with every person in Pakistan, and I think  that on the evidence they've been … done absolutely  the right thing.

In terms of ways forward, obviously, there are Cabinets

and Cabinet committees and I can't go into all of  those…

KING: No, but I just want to know what's the procedure?

EMERSON: … internal processes.

KING: I'm not asking you to ... I'm asking you what is the

procedure by which Julia Gillard comes out and says,  ‘this is what Australia believes on this issue’?





EMERSON: Well, she takes advice from the relevant Cabinet

colleagues, and that would include the Minister for  Foreign Affairs, the Minister for Defence, the Attorney  General. She takes advice from our intelligence  agencies, as she should. Then she weighs up that  advice.

And so that's the process. And insofar as the

Opposition is concerned, I think there has been a  general practice over decades of the Opposition  parties in Australia, whether Labor or Coalition, being  consulted on this sort of information.

KING: All right. Can I just move on slightly from this topic, and

something that my listeners are interested in this  morning. White House officials say it's likely a  photograph of Osama bin Laden's body will be  released to prove that he has been killed. But they've  warned it's gruesome. It's potentially inflammatory.

They haven't given a timeframe in which they'll make a

decision on whether to do it, but sources have told the  ABC the White House is also considering releasing a  photograph of his burial at sea, which may be less  controversial.

People calling this morning and saying, ‘well, you

know, the photographic evidence could stoke anti-American sentiment. It could also be, ‘how do you  actually trust that it is the photograph the Americans  say it is’?.

George Brandis?

BRANDIS: Well, I think it's a difficult decision for them and I,

frankly, aren't sufficiently close to this to have a strong





view one way or another. I was watching on Fox News  this morning one of those crazy extreme Right shock  jocks who was already raising doubts about whether, in  fact, bin Laden had been killed.

And just as some people on the fringes of American

politics spend a long time whipping up rumours about  whether President Obama was, in fact, a natural born  American citizen.

So I think there is a deep vein of irrationalism in

America, particularly on the extreme Right, and I think  one thing that would be factoring into President  Obama's thinking is the need to close that down and  prevent the emergence of these silly conspiracy  theories early… straight away.

KING: Well, you say silly conspiracy theorists. Several people

this morning have called in saying, well, ‘look, the  weapons of mass destruction were a lie. On Monday  night, there was photograph on our television screens  that purported to be Osama bin Laden and was later  found to be a fake’.

How much can you trust and how much can't you?

Craig Emerson, do you want to comment on that  issue?

EMERSON: I agree with George that it's a really difficult call

because if you don't, then there will be further  conspiracy theories. If you do, then that would be  provocative. The burial at sea, I think, does fall into a  different category, but I'd have to say this: that  regardless of whether they do or don't release photos,  the conspiracy theories will continue …





BRANDIS: That's right.

EMERSON: They'll say the photos were fabricated; it's not really

him. We still have people to this day saying that the  Americans faked the moon landing. I think Donald  Trump was the one who said that Obama wasn't an  American citizen and they had to produce a certificate.

So it's not going to end this conspiracy theory.

KING: All right. Well, let's move onto another topic that is big

in Australia and this is the carbon tax. Business  leaders have been invited to a shindig at Kirribilli  House tonight  -  dinner with Julia Gillard to discuss the  carbon tax.

Is this an attempt to win them over, Craig Emerson?

EMERSON: Of course, it's an attempt to share information with

them; to discuss the issues as they have been with our  Minister, Greg Combet, who has been doing a fine job  on this. There have been lots of consultations …

KING: All right, you're saying …

EMERSON:                                       We don't necessarily believe that as a result of a dinner

or consultations that everyone will then be converted to  the argument.

KING: No, no, all right. But Greg Combet, you're saying he's

doing a fine job on this. I see the latest news poll  survey reveals 60 per cent of voters are opposed to the  Government carbon tax plan. Only 30 per cent in  favour. Is it the policy that's flawed or is it the sell job.





You're saying Greg Combet is doing a great job selling

it.

EMERSON: I think one of the challenges is that more information

will come out in time. But we do need to go through the  sorts of consultations that we've just been discussing.  So there are calls for all of the detail to be released  yesterday; to do so would pre-empt the consultations  that are going on now.

So it's just one of those situations where if you do put

the information out, you've pre-empted the  consultations; if you don't, then people aren't fully  aware of this basic fact that all of the revenue raised  will go in the form of compensation to households and  to assist businesses that are exposed to exports.

KING: So why are 60 per cent of voters opposed to your

plan?

EMERSON: I think, in part, because of the absence of a fully

detailed plan, including the very point that I just made. I  think there may be a perception that this is a tax that  goes into general revenue. It's not.

It actually is designed to reduce carbon emissions - a

very important environmental challenge  - and all of the  funds go  either back to households for compensation  or to industry to assist them make the transition to a  lower-carbon economy.

KING: All right, George Brandis. Is the government damned if

it does and damned if it doesn't? If it releases all the  detail, it's ‘you haven't consulted’. They're not releasing  all the detail, and so ‘what are you hiding?’





BRANDIS: Look, the Government has damned itself because this

policy is based on a lie. It's based on a decision which  has basically double-crossed the Australian public.  Julia Gillard went to the last election, and five days  before the election she said ‘there will be no carbon tax  under the government I lead’.

Wayne Swan, the next day said, ‘it is not possible that

there will be a carbon tax under a re-elected Labor  Government’. So the entire debate is, in a sense, a  phony debate. Because it is based on an outright lie.

KING: So this 60 per cent of those - if that figure is right - that

are opposed, who are opposed to the Government's  tax plan. Are they genuinely opposed to the plan or are  ... do you believe they think the Government's being  deceptive and they're not going to give the

Government the support on this issue whatever it is?

BRANDIS: I think fundamentally most Australians don't want to be

hit with yet another great big tax by this Government  that has such an appetite for inventing new taxes like  the flood tax and the mining tax and the carbon tax  because they know it is going to put upward pressure  on their cost of living.

Now, the fact that the Prime Minister lied about it

probably makes a bad situation worse for this  Government.

KING: Do you agree with that, that you have made a bad

situation worse, Craig Emerson?

EMERSON: I think that this is one of those important reforms, like

many reforms during the 1980s that were not popular  at the time but were very important to Australia's





economic future. And I reckon this - that after 1 July  2012, when this price on carbon comes in and Tony  Abbott says that he will remove it - and if we do provide  compensation through the tax system and age  pensions and other pensions - when he says he will cut  the age pension and increase taxes he'll have a lot of  explaining to do.

KING: But aren't you the ones that still have a lot of explaining

to do on the carbon tax, though? You didn't want what  your leaders said before the last election. Is that a  problem for you?

EMERSON: And what our leader said before the last election time

and time again is that we do not rule out putting a price  on carbon. We tried to do so…

BRANDIS: ‘There will be no carbon tax under the Government I

lead.’

EMERSON: … we tried to do so three times in the last Parliament -

blocked by the coalition - and we said that we would  not rule out, in fact wanted to put a price on carbon.  We're starting with a fixed price. It will then after three  to five years go to a variable price.

KING: Yes, but that is a matter of semantics and that's

something that your leader has essentially admitted to,  too.

EMERSON: Yeah, I'm just saying that when further detail comes

out, when people appreciate how this will operate and  when it is implemented I believe the tables will turn…

KING: All right.





EMERSON: …because Tony Abbott will have to explain why he's

creating…

BRANDIS: Just one quick one…

EMERSON: …more business uncertainty.

KING: All right. Let me ask you this, Craig Emerson: Bernie

from Auchenflower has called in to take you to task. He  feels that no one believes the Government takes the  money and sets it aside for one fund, that the  Australian public are disbelieving that you will do that  but they think that it will all go in the big pool and end  up being spent in whatever way the Government  chooses.

That ... is that a genuine concern you have to fight?

EMERSON: Well, it will be absolutely clear from the Budget papers

and all of the other objectives statements, beyond any  statement that any politician makes. And I can tell you  this:  if it were hypothetically the case that we weren't  doing that, that would be brought to public attention.

Now George, if you want to say after 1 July 2012 that

this money is not going to households, is not going to  businesses, you can say it but it will not be true.

BRANDIS: Look, I think Madonna, if I may say so, Bernie from

Auchenflower is a very good constitutional lawyer  because he's aware of the provision in the Constitution  that says that all revenue collected by the

Commonwealth shall be paid into a consolidated  revenue fund.





KING: All right. Guide me through this, are you saying what

the Government is planning to do is unconstitutional?

BRANDIS: What? No, no, no, no, no. I'm not saying that at all.

What I'm saying is that Bernie is basically right - all  moneys collected by the Commonwealth are paid into  a fund called the consolidated revenue fund.

Now, the Government might then earmark parts of that

fund for particular purposes, but it's not right to say that  this doesn't come into the general revenues of the  Government. It does.

KING: All right. Back to you, Craig Emerson. Will it go into the

general reserves before being then earmarked  specifically for something else?

EMERSON: Well, I'll accept George's advice on that without

evidence to the contrary, but so would the case have  been with John Howard's gun levy.

Now, we did not assert that the proceeds of the gun

levy were diverted to other purposes. We didn't assert  that the proceeds of the sugar levy were diverted away  from the sugar industry.

What ... it will be absolutely clear from the Government

accounts through Senate estimates and in every other  forum that is available that this money will be used  exclusively for the purposes of compensating  households for higher electricity costs and any other  cost of living increases …

KING: All right.





EMERSON: … and to assist businesses to make the transition to a

lower carbon economy, which is the point of the  exercise.

BRANDIS: Well, we know that must be true because Julie Gillard

says so and she'd never lie to you, would she?

KING: Is this a problem, Craig Emerson? I am getting a

steady stream of emails and Twitters. Let's just take  the last one in. Jackie says ‘we don't want a tax; I won't  listen to anything about the carbon tax from Labor.  They lied, we can't trust them’  .

Is that something you need? No matter what people

think of climate change  - and perhaps even want the  carbon tax,  who think it's a good thing - that you've got  to get over that view that you've changed your mind;  you've said one thing and did another?

EMERSON: Well, I think Julia Gillard's been very clear and frank

about that. She said she did change her position on it.  Tony Abbott, I might point out, said that it was an iron-clad, rock solid guarantee that he would not change  the Medicare safety net.

John Howard said ... even the famous children

overboard affair, when he actually knew that children  had not been thrown overboard by their by asylum  seekers…

BRANDIS: We're getting a bit into ancient history.

KING: No, let Craig Emerson make his own point about the

Government misleading…





EMERSON: Well, I'm just saying, I'm just saying that Coalition

leaders…

BRANDIS: Well I think there's a very big difference, both

practically and morally in fact, between a Government  changing its policy and a Prime Minister five days  before an election saying ‘there will be no carbon tax  under the Government I lead’; just ruling it out and then  a matter of months later, in order to oblige Senator  Brown and the Greens and scramble back into power,  to abandon that commitment.

KING: All right. All right. You've made your point on that,

George Brandis. But Craig Emerson, just ... can I just  check this? Alistair from West End says ‘is any part of  the carbon tax and money raised from the carbon tax  going to the United Nations or all of it is going to  compensate lower-income households?’.

EMERSON: All of it is going to compensate lower- and middle-

income earners.

KING: All right. That was my understanding.

BRANDIS: I'm sure that's true because Julia Gillard said so …

KING: All right.

BRANDIS: … and she wouldn't lie, would she?

EMERSON: It's a solid, iron-clad promise from Tony Abbott.

KING: An iron-clad promise, okay. All right.

EMERSON: No, no, from Tony Abbott. They were his words.





BRANDIS: An iron-clad promise from Julia Gillard is an oxymoron

…

EMERSON: No, no, no. George you mishear me.

BRANDIS: I'm sorry.

EMERSON: Tony Abbott made a rock-solid, iron-clad promise -  his

words - that he wouldn't tamper with the Medicare  safety net after the 2004 election, and as soon as the  Coalition was returned he changed it.

KING: But two wrongs - to both of you - don't make a right, do

they?

EMERSON: No, I'm saying nothing more, Madonna than George

saying ‘well Julia Gillard didn't tell the truth on this’.

KING: Yes, okay. Well let's move on to another issue and

possibly a good news story, Craig Emerson. We've  been told over and over again this budget is going to  be tough and now we hear thousands of low-income  families will be eligible for as much as $10,700 if your  teens are aged between 16 and 18.

Is this aimed at getting kids who are 16 to stay in

education until they're 18?

EMERSON: It certainly is. It's designed to allow parents to keep

their kids in school or in training rather than leaving  school early.

So it is very much designed as part of our overall

investment in skills in this country to make sure that at  the time when the unemployment rate is falling, and is





half that of the United States, we nevertheless give  every young person a good education and a great  opportunity in life and that's what this is all about.

KING: How much is it costing all up?

EMERSON: Well, there are figures of something like $772 million,

so it is a big investment in the talents of our young  people. But we fundamentally believe that if kids leave  school too early then they are behind the eight ball for  the rest of their lives.

This is -   I think you and I a long time ago, Madonna

had a discussion about this - this is an incentive to stay  in school or to go into accredited training, but not to  just drop out and go and start working at the age of 16,  because that might seem like a good idea to kids at the  time but often they will be disadvantaged by it.

KING: George Brandis, a good way to spend $772 million in

the Budget next week?

BRANDIS: I thought the purpose of this Budget was actually to

make some savings, to try and start repaying the  hundreds of billions of dollars of debt that this  Government has clocked up.

KING: But surely it should have some incentives, some good

news in the Budget?

BRANDIS: Look, I'm not going to comment sight unseen on a

proposal that is apparently going to be announced in  the Budget. But let me just make the general point, it's  all: you can talk about a tough budget or you can  actually have the character and the political courage to  deliver a tough budget.





KING: Can't you do both? Why can't you deliver a tough

budget and give low-income families something?

BRANDIS: Well, let us see. This Government has yet to deliver a

surplus budget and we know that this is going to be yet  another Labor deficit budget, the fourth in a row, and  we will be keeping a very close eye on the Budget to  see if tough decisions are in fact made rather than just  Wayne Swan talking about being tough.

KING: You can't bring yourself this morning to say ‘look, yes

it's in the Budget, it's a good thing’?

BRANDIS: I'm not going to comment on a measure I haven't seen.

KING: But next week are you prepared to say ‘good on you

Julia Gillard’ ...

BRANDIS: I'm not …

KING: …if there's something in the Budget next week after it's

been delivered that you think is good?

BRANDIS: … I'm not going to comment on a measure I haven't

seen, but this Budget will be tested on the extent to  which it starts to save money, not to spend new  money.

KING: But my question is, ‘are you prepared next week, post

the Budget, to be able to congratulate Julia Gillard if  there is something good in it?’

BRANDIS: I'm sure there'll be measures in the Budget which the

Opposition agrees with, but that's not the point. The





point is that this Government with such a track record  of waste and debt has got to start repaying the debt.

KING: And that's Senator George Brandis. Craig Emerson,

the last word to you this morning: you're not going to  get a possible pat on the back there.

EMERSON: The only advanced developed country in the world to

stay out of recession was Australia. Was Australia. And  it's because good initiatives like ...

BRANDIS: That's because the recession was largely a northern

hemisphere phenomenon.

EMERSON: Yes, yes that's right. It was one of those ... it was

faked; it was sort of like the moon landing, George,  yeah.

KING: All right. We're going to leave it there, not the happy

ending this morning. We'll try for one next week after  the Budget. Craig Emerson, thank you.

EMERSON: Thanks a lot, Madonna.

KING: And Senator George Brandis, thank you.

BRANDIS: Thank you, Madonna. Thank you, Craig.

KING: That's Inside Canberra for this week. Back next week

here on 612 ABC Brisbane. $772 million; households  eligible for as much as $10,700. The Government has  confirmed this. If your teens are aged between 16 and  18 and stay in education.





Only some families, low-income families. Something

you support or not? 1300222612.













