CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH SANDY ALOISI, ABC NEWSRADIO DRIVE

THURSDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2011

SUBJECTS: Immigration officials, High Court decision, asylum seeker  processing, Opposition briefing.

SANDY ALOISI: Minister, good afternoon.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good afternoon to you, Sandy.

ALOISI: The Greens claim the advice from the Immigration Department is a  hangover from the Howard era. What’s your response to that?

BOWEN: Well, I think the Greens’ statements have been irresponsible and  frankly, offensive. I think they have said things about some of this nation’s  most senior bureaucrats and people who, frankly, have dedicated their entire  working lives to supporting community harmony and multiculturalism. And I  think these are people who weren’t even in the briefing going off second-hand reports.

Now, let’s be clear: we made the advice that’s been available to the  Government yesterday available to the Opposition, and that advice is that the  most effective way of breaking the people smugglers’ business model is  arrangements like the Malaysia agreement. Secondly, that if we had onshore  processing that would be something which could be regarded as undermining  the good progress we’ve made in relation to the regional framework in recent  months, and also that over time it’s important for public acceptance of the  migration program, that that migration program be orderly. And I’ve said that  myself publicly on many occasions; it’s actually, I think, very hard to argue  with. So I find Mr Brown’s comments extremely disappointing an offensive.

ALOISI: Well, let’s go to Tony Abbott now. He says that Immigration  bureaucrats have clearly said to him that they favour offshore processing and  the Government should listen to that advice. Is that the case? Is that what  the advice has been to the Prime Minister?

BOWEN: Well, the advice that Mr Abbott got yesterday was the same advice  to the Prime Minister and I, and that is that offshore processing as part of a  regional framework can play an important role in providing a deterrent to  getting on the dangerous boat journey. And secondly, the type of offshore

processing is very important: the offshore processing on Nauru or Papua New  Guinea in and of itself, by itself, would not be a proper deterrent because  people would know that if they’re regarded as refugees after the processing

then in all likelihood they’d end up in Australia and that is the outcome that  they’re after.

The Malaysia agreement, on the other hand, provides a very different  outcome. It means if you come to Australia by boat, you get transferred back  to Malaysia and you get processed with the other 92,000 asylum seekers in  Malaysia. At the same time, we increase the humanitarian intake, increase the  refugee intake so those people in Malaysia and waiting for resettlement and  can’t afford a people smuggler, they get a better chance of resettlement.

Now, that’s the very clear advice to the Government and we made it available  yesterday to the Opposition so that clearly they know that Nauru by itself is  not an effective deterrent.

ALOISI: Is the Government still pursuing offshore processing?

BOWEN: Well, look, we’re pursuing a regional framework and we’ve achieved  one, and offshore processing is part of that. We think that is appropriate if it’s  part of a proper regional framework, working with our regional partners to  share more of the challenge of resettling asylum seekers, offshore processing  can be an appropriate part of that. We’ve been pursuing that now for 12  months and we do think it can be an appropriate policy.

ALOISI: Is this debate, though, Minister, redundant given we still don’t know  the advice from the Solicitor-General?

BOWEN: Well, no, with respect, Sandy, we’ve released the advice from the  Solicitor-General, and the advice of the Solicitor-General is the High Court  case not only struck out Malaysia but the same logic applied by that High  Court case would strike out Nauru and Papua New Guinea and in effect  almost any offshore processing; that it would be very difficult to achieve  offshore processing under that High Court judgement.

ALOISI: Sarah Hanson-Young says an inspection by a parliamentary  committee, of which she is a member, of our detention centres shows that  they’re like these terrible prisons. If we go down the path of accepting more  asylum seekers here in Australia, where will we house them?

BOWEN: Well, if we accept more asylum seekers who have been mandated  as genuine refugees, they wouldn’t be in detention. That’s the whole point,  Sandy. Nobody from Malaysia was going into detention, nobody who’s come  to Australia from Malaysia under this arrangement go into detention, they go  into the community because they have been processed: they’ve had the  security checks, they’ve had their health checks, they’ve had their identity  checks, they’ve had their documentation; genuinely mandated refugees.

That’s why we want a more orderly migration program. People who arrive by  boat, in the vast majority of circumstances, don’t have their paperwork, don’t  have passports, don’t have visas, haven’t been through their checks, and they

are detained while that occurs. But what we can do is have a more orderly  process, which means less people need to be in detention.

One of the reasons we have 2000 less people in detention centres and  facilities today than three months ago is because of the reduction in the  number of boat arrivals. I want to see less people in detention; I want to see  nobody in detention. And that’s why I’m pleased with the progress we’ve  made in having those big reductions in the number of people in detention.  But an important part of that is reducing the number of people who arrive by  boat.

ALOISI: So Minister, when do we know exactly what the Government’s policy  will be?

BOWEN: Well, look, we’ve been working methodically through the issues;  that’s well advanced. It’s appropriate that we do that carefully because it was  a big paradigm shift from the High Court last week; it not only, as I say,  changed the Government’s understanding of the law, but also has changed  what has been the Opposition’s understanding of the law in the last 10 years.  So we’ve taken our time and that’s well advanced, and we’ll have more to say  about that at an appropriate time.

ALOISI: Any idea when that appropriate time might be?

BOWEN: Well, it’s well advanced, Sandy. I’m not going to provide a  timetable today. We’ve been working through the issues; I’ve been working  through it with Cabinet colleagues, working through all the implications of the  High Court judgement and all the options.

ALOISI: Alright then, Minister, thank you for your time.

BOWEN: Thanks, Sandi. Cheers.

Ends





