Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



Network Ten, Morning News with Natarsha Belling and Finance  Minister Penny Wong

Friday, 24 June 2011

Subjects: Julia Gillard’s one year anniversary; budget cuts; Scott Morrison’s visit to  Malaysia; National Broadband Network

E&OE…

NATARSHA BELLING    Now to our political debate for this week and Julia Gillard marks  her first year as Prime Minister today but nobody in the Labor Party appears to be  celebrating. But the anniversary has been marked by a rare win for the Gillard Government  with the National Broadband Network signing crucial deals with Telstra and Optus.

For our political debate we are joined this morning by Finance Minister Penny Wong in our  Adelaide studio and Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop in Canberra. Thanks so much for  joining us both this morning.

JULIE BISHOP    Good morning

PENNY WONG    Good morning to you Natarsha, and to you Julie.

NATARSHA BELLING    Senator Wong if I can start with you. Given how badly Labor is  travelling in the polls and, gosh, Julia Gillard is under the pump, was it such a good idea to  get rid of Kevin Rudd?

PENNY WONG    Oh look there is always a lot of commentary on these sorts of days but I  am less interested in the commentary than what we are doing.

I am focussed on the announcement we made yesterday - a major breakthrough in terms of  the National Broadband Network, delivering faster broadband across Australia, delivering  better health services, better education services to Australians.

I am more focussed on ensuring that we continue to talk about the carbon price, talk about  why we need to act on climate change, and of course rolling out the investment and eduction  and skills that Julia Gillard announced in the budget. These are the big issues we’re focussed  on.

NATARSHA BELLING    Senator Wong if I could just interrupt there for a moment. You  said that your focussed now on what the Gillard Government is doing. Our political reporter

Amanda Hart said going into being Prime Minister Julia Gillard said she would addressed  three key issues being the mining tax, asylum seekers and climate change. Some may say she  hasn’t addressed one issue.

PENNY WONG    I don’t agree with that, and I think the point here is these are really big  issues. Nobody would suggest that climate change is not a tough reform. We’ve seen three  Opposition Leaders come and go primarily on that issue, we know that is a very big reform  but that doesn’t mean we should put it in the too hard basket.

This is the thing about Julia. She extraordinarily hard working, she is intelligent, she is highly  competent and she is importantly determined to do what is right for the nations future even if  the going is tough.

We know the going is tough at the moment but that doesn’t mean we don’t keep our eyes  very firmly fixed on the things that have to be done to build a stronger economy in the future  and a better future for our children.

NATARSHA BELLING    Julie Bishop if I could now ask you, Mr Abbott was claiming  this morning that this constant leadership tension between Julia Gillard and I guess even  Kevin Rudd is hurting ordinary Australians.

JULIE BISHOP    Well the Gillard Government has defined itself as untrustworthy and  incompetent. Untrustworthy because Julia Gillard is only Prime Minister today because she  betrayed Kevin Rudd after promising she wouldn’t challenge him for the leadership and she  did, and then she betrayed the Australian people when she promised that there would be no  carbon tax under the Government she lead and she is now trying to introduce one.

The Government is also seen as incompetent because Julia Gillard set three benchmarks for  taking Kevin Rudd’s job. She said she would fix the mining tax, she’d fix the climate change  issue and the asylum seeker issue, and 12 months later she’s fixed none of them. So she gets  an F for fail on all those issues.

And the incompetence extends even further. Today we hear that the solar panel scheme  introduced by the Government has all the hallmarks of the disastrous pink batts system so this  Government can’t get anything right. And what was a bad government under Kevin Rudd is  even worse under Julia Gillard, and the tension between the two people at the top of this  Government is causing great difficulties for Australia. It is not in Australia’s national interest  to have the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister refusing to speak to each other, they  can’t stand each other, and the people who suffer from that are the Australian public.

NATARSHA BELLING    Ms Bishop, you’re talking there about the Australian public and  Mr Abbott was talking about ordinary Australians. Why did Mr Abbott his week cave in on  the budget cuts to family benefits that he initially rallied against claiming it was class  warfare?

JULIE BISHOP    We are deeply concerned about the state of the budget. This Government  claims that it is going to return the budget to surplus but in its four consecutive budgets all the  Government has done is run up a cumulative deficit of $150 billion.

Now the budget is in strife and that is through the Government’s mismanagement and

wasteful spending. And we can’t govern from Opposition, all we can do is promise the  Australian people that we will do better and that we will deliver on strong economic  management which is what this country needs.

The cost of living is increasing, people are deeply concerned, there is a lack of confidence in  the Australian business and consumer community and that is because they don’t trust this  Government to run our economy properly.

NATARSHA BELLING    Senator Wong normally at this time you are debating with Scott  Morrison, why is the Shadow Immigration Minister in Malaysia and not the Foreign Minister  finalising details of your Malaysia solution proposal?

PENNY WONG    Well Natarsha the Shadow Minister is in Malaysia because he is engaging  in a political stunt, a bit of political theatre overseas. By his own admission he won’t change  his mind no matter what he sees and my understanding is he is not meeting anybody with any  seniority in the Malaysian Government or at official level.

It is regrettable that he chooses to take a political debate overseas, that is generally not the  convention in the national interest. Overseas we generally leave our domestic political debate  behind and Mr Morrison is obviously not interested in ensuring he watches the national  interest when he is abroad.

But there is a broader issue here which also goes to what you said, the question you asked  Julie about the family tax benefits. What we see is that the Opposition is interested in a lot of  stunts but not necessarily, sort of, on conviction politics.

Mr Abbott styles himself as a conviction politician yet he argues against the family tax  benefits, as you said, saying this was class warfare that the reforms the Government was  introducing. He argues for a plebiscite saying he wants people to have a vote but then he says  actually he wouldn’t pay any attention no matter what the result because his position is clear.  And then we see Scott Morrison saying I am going to Malaysia but I don’t care what I see,  I’ve still got a view.

The consistent thing here is an Opposition focussed on stunts and theatre, not on what is good  policy.

NATARSHA BELLING    Ms Bishop finally this morning , Telstra has now signed up and  Optus has signed up also to the controversial NBN. Is the Coalition really going to destroy  the NBN if you do win the next election because we are then in the difficult predicament of  paying out possible compensation if deals have already been signed?

JULIE BISHOP    Natarsha, this massive government monopoly means that taxpayers are  not going to get value for money, it means consumers will not get cheaper broadband and it  means that we are not getting the benefits of competition particularly competition between  technologies.

Part of this deal that the Government has done with Telstra means that Telstra is prevented  from promoting wireless as a competing technology for the next 20 years. So if wireless  technology advances and becomes a much more attractive product for the Australian people  Telstra is prevented from providing it to its customers. And I think that is an extraordinary

outcome because of course the world is going towards more mobility not less.

And so we are now going to be stuck with a $50 billion, and that is the conservative estimate,  $50 billion government monopoly that will be out of date before we know it and consumers  are not going to get the benefit of it.

I think the reflection of the public's concern about this was the Telstra share price yesterday.

NATARSHA BELLING    I am sorry, we’ve run out of time. Thanks both for joining us.  Senator Penny Wong and Julie Bishop.

JULIE BISHOP    Thank you.

PENNY WONG    Thanks very much Natarsha.

