CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT, SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

THURSDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Asylum seekers, proposal to increase the humanitarian  intake, ALP National Conference, conscience votes, same-sex  marriage, party reform, Remuneration Tribunal.

KIERAN GILBERT: Joining me this morning to discuss is the Immigration  Minister Chris Bowen. Minister, good morning to you.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you Kieran.

GILBERT: I want to ask you about this proposal, reported in this mornings  Fairfax press that you’re going to take to the ALP Conference: a substantial  increase, almost doubling the refugee intake to 20,000 refugees in Australia  per year. Is that conditional on the establishment of a regional framework to  deal with people smuggling?

BOWEN: Well Kieran, I’ve had the view for some time, I’ve expressed it for  some time, that Australia can and should take more refugees, and of course  the first stage in that was the increase of 1,000 per year under our Malaysia  arrangement. The Labor Party Conference is a good opportunity, the  appropriate opportunity every two years, for National Conference to agree on  Labor’s principles - a broad outline of our approach, and I am going to take  this opportunity to suggest to the party the aspiration over time of increasing  our refugee intake to 20,000 a year.

I’ll also be making the point that Labor should stand solidly and clearly for  regional arrangements which discourage dangerous boat journeys to Australia  and that for the reasons of fiscal discipline and public confidence that you can  have the conversation with the Australian people about increasing the refugee  intake if you have the appropriate steps in place to discourage people taking  that dangerous journey by boat.

GILBERT: So is the proposal to almost double the refugee intake conditional  on having that offshore policy, that regional framework, enshrined on the ALP  Platform?

BOWEN: Well I’ll be putting to National Conference that Labor should stand  for an increase in refugees if we do have regional agreements in place which  discourage the dangerous journey by boat to Australia. The reason for that is

twofold: one, it would be fiscally irresponsible just to increase the refugee  intake at the same time as having all the costs and expense which goes with  a high level of boat arrivals, and secondly, I’ve made the point many times  that it is important we have public confidence in our refugee program. If you  engender that public confidence through an orderly program then I think the  Australian people are very open to a conversation about increasing the  refugee intake.

Now the Liberal Party says that we already take enough refugees, that the  1,000 I proposed as part of the Malaysia arrangement was too many: I  fundamentally disagree. I think we can and should take more refugees, but I  also stand strongly for an orderly program, including regional arrangements  to discourage the dangerous boat journey to Australia.

GILBERT: You’ve said you expect the support of the Conference on this,  does that include the support of the Left?

BOWEN: No, I think we’ll have a robust debate, we always do. Every  National Conference I’ve ever been to has had a robust debate about asylum  seekers, I expect this one to be no different. I do expect though that there’ll  be many things we agree on: I think there’ll be a broad level of agreement  that we should acknowledge Labor’s strong record here and there’ll be

agreement that we should increase our intake over time as our aspiration. But  I don’t expect that this will be any different when it comes to a strong and  solid debate about offshore processing for example.

GILBERT: Yes, so the Left are not going to back this anyway, because they  remain opposed in principle -

BOWEN: Sure.

GILBERT: - fundamentally opposed to offshore processing.

BOWEN: There are people in the party with a strong view about that and I  have an equally strong view and many would agree with me that a proper  regional regime with offshore processing as a part of that, with a  discouragement to boat arrivals, is firmly in line with Labor principles, firmly in  line with the Labor tradition of discouraging people making that dangerous  boat journey, giving people in refugee camps around the world, whether they  be in the Middle East, in Africa, in Asia, a fair chance of resettlement into  Australia if they can’t afford a people smuggler, and stopping people making  that boat journey which we’ve seen, even in recent weeks, is highly  dangerous and risks lives.

GILBERT: Minister, it is unlikely to improve the prospects of this in  Parliament though, isn’t it? The Greens, also the Independent Andrew Wilkie  and others, very much oppose the fundamental proposal that you continue to  espouse and that is offshore processing. So the Malaysia deal through

Parliament is still, even if you do reintroduce it next year, looks very, very  unlikely to get through.

BOWEN: Well you’re quite right Kieran, unless the Liberal Party supports  offshore processing through our legislation then it won’t pass the Parliament.  The numbers have changed in the House of Representatives, that’s true, as  Mr Morrison has said, I acknowledge that, but they haven’t changed in the  Senate and the way this legislation can pass the Senate is by Tony Abbott  changing his position and supporting legislation for offshore processing.  Without that, the practical and legal reality is onshore processing and we will  continue to see high numbers of boats arriving and we’ll continue to see  people risking their lives.

GILBERT: Will you bring it back to the Parliament anyway?

BOWEN: We’ll be arguing for our policy, both inside and outside the  Parliament Kieran. As you can imagine, we’ll be progressing that in the way  that you would expect us to.



GILBERT: On a few other issues, you support a conscience vote on gay  marriage. If the Prime Minister is rolled, that would be a very bad look  wouldn’t it? It would undermine her leadership.

BOWEN: Well I do strongly support a conscience vote on gay marriage. I  think that is the only responsible and sustainable approach. Last night, as you  pointed out in your introduction, there was a vote in the Queensland

Parliament on civil unions, that was a conscience vote. I think we should have  more conscience votes in Australia, I said this when I was a backbencher that  it is good for the body-politic to have robust debates on the floor of  Parliament, with individual MP’s making their own mind up and justifying their  position to their electorates, and the Australian people being able to see that  debate on the floor of Parliament in a very open and transparent way; and I  think this is a prime candidate for a conscience vote.

I don’t think this is the sort of thing which should be rammed through a  National Conference. I think this is the sort of thing that the Australian people  would want to see debated on the floor of the Parliament, with every  individual MP making up their own mind. I think the Labor Party should adopt  a conscience vote on this, I think the Liberal Party should adopt a conscience  vote on this, and I think the Parliament should be able to have a proper  debate about it.

GILBERT: Will the factional leaders recognise the damage that would be  done to the Prime Minister if she was rolled on this and pull back at the  Conference?

BOWEN: Well look, I expect the National Conference to endorse the Prime  Minister’s position because it is the right thing to do, because it is the

responsible thing to do, because it is a perfectly appropriate thing for a  conscience vote - for a free vote - for MP’s to consult with their electorates,  to weigh up all the issues and to come to their own conclusions. I expect that

that is what the National Conference will do, but I don’t want to pre-empt the  debate. Again, no doubt there’ll be a robust debate, as there should be, but I  will be arguing for a conscience vote, I think the majority of delegates in the  end would support a conscience vote.

GILBERT: It would be a bad look if the Prime Minister was rolled.

BOWEN: Well clearly the Prime Minister has put a position out there and I  support a conscience vote, not just because it is the Prime Minister’s position  but because I believe strongly it’s the right thing to do, and I think that’s  what the majority of the National Conference would agree.

GILBERT: Some members of the Right say they’ll even cross the floor and  risk expulsion if there was a fundamental shift in policy on this.

BOWEN: Well look, there are people in the Caucus - in the Parliament - with  strong views. There are people who have given undertakings to their  electorate based on Labor policy at the time and I do think there will be MP’s  who would be very concerned about a National Conference vote which tried  to bind any particular position.

Now, I’ve not had that discussion with many colleagues, I simply make the  point that I think conscience votes are a good thing: I think they show the  Parliament as it should be. Whenever we have a conscience vote, the  community feedback is very positive about the quality of the debate: MP’s  researching the issue, thinking about it, questioning their conscience,  consulting with various people in their community and having a proper debate  about it on the floor of the Conference. And if we are to have a debate about  gay marriage in Australia, I think it would have a lot more community support  if the community understood and accepted that this was something being  debated on the floor of the national Parliament, not something just decided  on party lines, a typical Labor-Liberal agenda. As I say, I’ve said before that  conscience votes can and should be a more common feature of the Australian  body-politic and this is, I think, a very clear case of where a conscience vote  is appropriate, just as it was in Queensland last night.

GILBERT: Which way would you vote in any conscience vote?

BOWEN: Well I would take the same approach as I have with all other  conscience votes. I’d be talking to my electorate about it, I’d be considering  the legislation before the Parliament; but we don’t actually have legislation  before the Parliament. I’d be talking to people on both sides of the argument  in my electorate, as I’ve already done, and then I’d be releasing my decision  to my electorate and on the floor of the Parliament, I think the important  thing to do is actually agree, through the National Conference, this is an

appropriate thing for a conscience vote first.

GILBERT: On the broader argument about democratising the ALP, what do  you think about Kevin Rudd’s proposals to empower the rank-and-file, in  terms of direct elections for President, for National Secretary, even for  delegates? He’s even said that he’s open to debate on the idea of direct  election of the Parliamentary Leader. What’s your view on those suggestions?

BOWEN: Well look, I think this is the key debate and I think the National  Conference will take some steps, but I hope the debate continues after  National Conference, because I do think the Labor Party really needs to tackle  these issues. I think Kevin Rudd’s contribution has been a good one; I think  Sam Dastyari, the General Secretary of New South Wales party, has made  some very sensible suggestions and contributions; Bruce Hawker, a regular  commentator on your show, has likewise done the same.

I do think the Labor Party needs to assess the situation in relation to changes  over recent years. Other labour parties around the world have made this  change - these sorts of changes. This has been a contest in the Labor Party  since the time we were formed: the contest between the appropriate role of  the rank-and-file and the Caucus. The Labour Party in Britain thirty years ago  mad the change to a broader constituency for electing the Party Leader for

example, I think that’s a debate we should be having in Australia. I don’t  think it’s automatic that the Caucus should be the only constituency for  electing the party leader, that there’s a case for examining having a broader

election of the party leader for various reasons, including empowering the  party membership.

I think the Caucus should be able to implement its policy: the elected  representatives should be able to develop and implement policy and take it to  the people and argue it on the floor of the Parliament, but I also think there’s  a very strong case for examining broader party reform, to really ensure that  progressive Labor supporters across the country have a say in key decisions  and key personnel matters across the board. So I’m a very strong supporter  of having this debate and I hope that the National Conference we have on the  weekend is the beginning of that process, not the end of it.

GILBERT: So you want - you’re open to discussion on it or would you  advocate rank-and-file votes for the Parliamentary Leader?

BOWEN: Well look, I think there’s a strong case for examining having the  Caucus as one of the constituencies for electing a party leader into the future,  and having a broader feedback and process for party members generally. I  also support Julia Gillard’s call for primaries in preselections to be considered  and trialled. I think all those things need to be on the agenda.

And I make this point: if the Labor Party goes down this reform road, I think  it won’t be too long before other political parties, including the Liberal Party,

would be forced to examine similar things. I think all political parties need to  be examining the ways that they involve people in their decision-making  process. I think that in times past when union membership was high and  social media didn’t exist and people were prepared to go to branch meetings  that might have been an appropriate model, the Labor Party’s model might  have been the appropriate model. I don’t think that’s the case anymore.

I strongly support Sam Dastyari, Bruce Hawker, Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard  in the suggestions they’ve made about party reform. I think every generation  of senior party leaders: ministers and party executives; owes it to the great  Australian Labor Party to examine everything possible to leave the party in  stronger shape than we inherited: to reform the party, to grow the party and  leave it in stronger shape. I think that’s our primary responsibility as senior  people in the party, and that’s certainly a debate that I’d be looking forward  to being a part of.

GILBERT: Okay, one final question on politicians pay. I know it is  independent - the Independent Remuneration Tribunal makes the call, but  gees, it’s a bad look a couple of days after the mid-year budget update.



BOWEN: Well Kieran, the first I knew of this was when I read in the paper  this morning that apparently we’re all getting pay rises I read in the  Telegraph. I’m not aware of the Remuneration Tribunal’s recommendations,  I’m not even aware that they’ve concluded their report. If they have it hasn’t  been presented to ministers, so I really can’t comment on whether what’s in  the paper today is right or wrong. The Remuneration Tribunal is independent,  they do make these determinations, we’re just going to have to wait and see  what they determine. I would be singularly unsurprised if they recommend  that certain conditions be abolished or changed and reduced, and other  conditions, including salary, may be increased, but it’s a matter for them to  make their findings on. I’m not aware that they have made their findings and  I’m certainly not aware of what they are.

GILBERT: Chris Bowen, appreciate your time.

BOWEN: Thanks Kieran, nice talking to you.

ENDS





