



THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency

TRANSCRIPT

GC 293/11

10 October 2011

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH BARRIE CASSIDY - INSIDERS, ABC TV

SUBJECT: BALI; KEVIN RUDD; CARBON PRICING; CLEAN ENERGY LEGISLATION; STEEL  TRANSFORMATION PLAN; MIGRATION LEGISLATION

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

CASSIDY: This case of a 14 year old boy in Bali, do you think Kevin Rudd is helping or hindering  the situation?

COMBET: I think helping and in fact I appreciate his efforts very much because the boy and his  family are in fact from my own electorate near Newcastle. So, I spoke with Kevin about this on  Friday and I for one, and I am sure his family do to, appreciate the efforts that he is making.

CASSIDY: Because the criticism this morning is, well the suggestion is, that what the  Indonesians really respond to is quiet, behind the scenes, diplomacy and they don’t like  grandstanding.

COMBET: Well I think in these circumstances you can understand the terrible anxiety that his  family must be experiencing, let alone the boy himself, and so I think it is incumbent upon the  Government to provide all support we can. And I think Kevin Rudd’s doing the right thing in  mobilising the Ambassador to see the ways in which we can provide support and assist this  boy in this case.

CASSIDY: Now you said you had spoken to him on Friday, did you talk to him about the fact  that his name is everywhere, that seems to have taken some of the shine off what could have  been a good week?

COMBET: No not at all. We are concerned about the welfare of the boy involved and, to be  fair to Kevin Rudd, that’s all that we spoke about.

CASSIDY: Well what about this other issue though of the fact that his name is everywhere? It  does seem to be a core problem for the party, that because his name is constantly associated  with the media and leadership that you can’t shake this leadership speculation.

COMBET: Well of course it occupies a lot of media space but I have to say, to be a bit selfish  about it, I’ve been pretty single-mindedly focussed on what I have got ahead of me this week.  And when you look at it Parliament and the country has got some very important issues  before it in the Parliament during the course of this week. You referred to it earlier but, in

particular, we are due to vote on the carbon pricing and climate change legislation on Tuesday  and Wednesday and of course that is my responsibility and I’ve been pretty focussed on that.

CASSIDY: But don’t you accept though that this constant talk of the leadership speculation is  damaging, there is probably nothing more damaging to a party than constant talk about  leadership change?

COMBET: Well, yeah, but the media contributes to that a good deal, I’m not saying  exclusively, but really everyone should, I think, focus on what the major policy issues are that  we’ve got going and we do have two very important things before the Parliament this week in  the form of the clean energy legislation and the response to the High Court decision in  relation to asylum seekers. Those are extremely important issues.  The Government is doing a  lot of other things as well.

CASSIDY: I’ll come to that in a moment but the fact is the media will stay with this story, there  doesn’t seem to be any doubt about that, you can’t wish it away. Do you have a strategy to  deal with it?

COMBET: Well I don’t know what you expect me to add to it. I think the Government’s  strategy is to get on with the job that we’ve got. We are doing a lot of things. The economy is  travelling along but of course we have to watch very carefully, our unemployment is still low,  we’ve got good growth in the last quarter’s figures, we’ve got major health reforms, we are  still rolling out the NBN, of course. They are very important things that we have got on our  plate from a public policy point of view and the responsibility of Ministers and members of  the Government is to concentrate on those and make sure that we achieve things.

CASSIDY: OK, well a vote on Wednesday on the carbon tax, are you confident that the  numbers will hold up?

COMBET: Well I’ve spent a lot of time trying to make sure that’s the case, I can assure you  Barrie, so yes we are expecting the vote to successfully see the passage of the clean energy  legislation though the House of Reps on Wednesday. And of course there has also been a  significant period over the last few months of consultation with stakeholders throughout the  community and, of course, a Joint Select Committee inquiry over the last few weeks as well.  That has resulted in some amendments that the Government is bringing to the package that  we announced last July. One of them is a pretty interesting one and that is that we were  lobbied pretty strongly by some of the large fuel users in the economy and specifically the  airlines to allow them to actually be covered by the scheme, to be able to opt into the scheme  because it allows them to manage their fuel liability far more effectively and manage their  cash flow for fuel more effectively. So we have made a change to allow large fuel users to opt  into the scheme. And we are also proposing to make some changes to make things a bit easier  for local government in the operation of their landfill.

CASSIDY: Why would the airlines prefer a system where they can buy and sell the permits to  an increase in taxation?

COMBET: Well it allows them to manage their fuel liability and their carbon cost liability for  their fuel more efficiently and particularly from a cash flow standpoint. Airlines, of course, are  very large fuel consumers and have developed ways of hedging movements in price for their  fuel over many years. And the airlines have been very clear that they would rather be able to  be inside an emissions trading scheme than deal with their carbon price through the fuel tax  arrangements.



CASSIDY: And if they do it this way through buying and selling permits will that make any  difference one way or the other to the increase in air fares?

COMBET: The impact of the carbon price on air fares is very slight indeed, perhaps around a  couple of dollars per sector. So, you know, despite all the scare campaigning that we have  heard it is a very modest impact but an important one of course in providing the incentive to  reduce emissions. At the end of the day that is what this legislation is all about. The clean  energy legislation will provide very clear economic incentives for the largest polluters in the  economy to get their emissions down, to cut their pollution, and they will do that by  innovating and investing in clean energy.

CASSIDY: Now is the international trading system sophisticated enough for the airlines or  anybody else to be trading in permits at the moment?

COMBET: Well, of course, as is I think well known, the carbon price mechanism will start with  a three year fixed price period and it will become an emissions trading scheme with a flexible  price from the 1st of July 2015. That is when the linkage with international carbon markets  takes place. So over the next few years the relationships with international carbon markets, of  course, will be a point of key focus for the Government. And once this legislation is passed I  would say that is going to be my number one priority. But of course there is already very well-developed carbon markets in many areas internationally. The largest and most liquid carbon  market, of course, covers the European Union trading scheme and over the course of the next  couple of months I will be talking further, I expect, with the European Commissioners about  the potential for linkage of our scheme to theirs.

CASSIDY: You mentioned a couple of last minute amendments, are there any things that the  independents are holding out for, are there any last minute concessions that they are looking  for, or are they all done?

COMBET:  It’s really been a very constructive discussion in recent months, Barrie. Of course  there was a lot of argy bargy leading up to the release of the Government’s clean energy  package in July, but there has been continuing discussion, but a responsible position taken by  the independents in relation to the issue. I met with Messrs Windsor, Oakeshott and Wilkie  during the week just to make sure that we were on track. There are a couple of issues there  that we are continuing to discuss, but we anticipate the legislation being successfully voted  upon in the House of Representatives on Wednesday and passing to the Senate as soon as  possible so that the Senate debate can get under way and we can get on with implementing  this important reform.

CASSIDY: So even at this late stage there are a couple of concessions that they still want put  into the package?

COMBET: No, no, no, I am not suggesting that at all. There are regulations to be made in due  course, and there have been representations made by some parts of industry that we are still  discussing, but there is no concessions, last minute concessions, being sought. There is one  other very important Bill, though, I might mention to be voted upon on Wednesday as well  and that is the support for the steel industry and, of course, the Government has put forward  a $300 million package of support for the steel industry. It is facing very difficult times with  the higher value of the dollar and high commodity prices. And this is one area where Tony  Abbott can actually move away from all of the rhetorical garbage that he goes on with and  actually vote for something constructive to support jobs in the steel industry. But, of course,

with that piece of legislation he has indicated he is going to oppose it. That is going to be a  very difficult position to explain when he runs around all the time, you know, trying to terrify  people about their jobs. Here is a very practical way in which the Coalition can support jobs in  important areas like Whyalla and Port Kembla and Westernport in Victoria, and yet he is  opposed to it.

CASSIDY: Well you say it will be difficult for him to explain, why would he vote allowing  compensation on a tax he doesn’t want in the first place?

COMBET: Well he is a total opportunist. He should get behind a $300 million package that will  support the steel industry. This is a separate vote on the Steel Transformation Plan Bill.

CASSIDY: But as compensation for a tax that he doesn’t support?

COMBET: That’s not the correct characterisation of it. This is to assist innovation within the  steel industry and help the industry over the coming years become more competitive, and it  should be supported to make sure that the steel industry is in the best position to be able to  innovate, become more emissions efficient but also more productive and more commercially  efficient over the next few years.

CASSIDY: So if it was to go through this week and then the Senate in November, is that the  plan?

COMBET: Yes.

CASSIDY: And if that was to happen then you would imagine that every time companies make  judgements about the future, they sack workers or close down altogether, whatever, Tony  Abbott will then blame that they are doing this because of the prospect of a - not the  prospect, but the reality of a carbon tax next July?

COMBET: Well, of course, he will stop at misrepresenting nothing. He will no doubt do  anything that he thinks is going to serve his political interests. But you just have to carefully  dissect all of the dynamics in the economy and say what they are that are occurring. Of  course, many areas in manufacturing are under pressure because of the high Australian dollar.  It’s good to see that the dollar has come off a bit over the last couple of weeks, that will  relieve some pressure, but the Government is very mindful of the issues and the pressures in  manufacturing. That is why we took the steps that we did this week and why a taskforce is  being established to continue the dialogue about manufacturing, why we had a jobs forum  and a tax forum. And the Government will do, you know, the business that people expect  Governments to do. Tony Abbott is just going to run around like the charlatan that he is trying  to misrepresent things. But people will see through that and when the carbon price in fact  comes into place from the 1st of July next year and people find that it is a manageable reform  with a very modest cost impact and where nine out of ten households receive assistance to  meet what are very modest cost impacts, people will increasingly see through Tony Abbott. I  mean, you could write his public policy achievements on the back of a postage stamp. The  guy, despite all these years in politics, it’s hard to think of what he has achieved and it is  because he does nothing but politics and his own self interest.

CASSIDY: Malcolm Turnbull had an interesting take on it this week in a speech in London on  China. He worries that whatever we do here, China is going to have the competitive edge on  new, low carbon green technologies. Has he got a point there?

COMBET: Well, we’ve been slow to respond to this issue, the Howard Government did  nothing for years. And at the same time, of course, in the Chinese economy, massive  investments have been made in low emissions technologies. They dominate the solar PV cell  production internationally, they’ve got the largest installed renewable energy capacity in the  world. And Malcolm Turnbull, it’s interesting isn’t it that he has got to go off to London to  deliver a speech really that is a good contribution to public policy. But of course it’s nothing  that Tony Abbott would allow within the Liberal Party in Australia.

CASSIDY: Just finally, on the other vote, on the Migration Bill this week, how humiliating  would it be if you were to lose a vote in the House of Representatives?

COMBET: Well it is a very important debate that we are having, that will resume later this  week. Obviously we are going to work very hard to make sure we secure passage of the  amendments to the Migration Act that we have brought forward, to secure their passage  through the House of Representatives. So let’s just wait and see how that goes. However, it is  very important that the Government is able to implement its policy in this respect. The  Malaysian agreement that the Government has reached is the best deterrent and is the best  from a humanitarian point of view ... Now, Tony Abbott, again here is playing a really  disreputable game, political game, but the Government really should be afforded the  opportunity of implementing its policy. And I note that Mr Crook made some comments in  that regard and of course his vote will be important in this in the House of Reps and certainly I  hope that that continues to occupy his thinking.

CASSIDY: Do you think you will have his vote?

COMBET: Well let’s wait and see, but it is very important the Government can get on and  implement its policy and put in place the best deterrent to stop people, you know, taking on  what is a very dangerous voyage and which we have seen has been the cause of the loss of a  lot of lives.

CASSIDY: And if you establish ahead of time that you haven’t quite got the numbers, is there a  prospect the Government will withdraw the Bill altogether?

COMBET: Well it’s not for me to speculate about that. Obviously we intend to try and have  the amendments passed.

CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning.

COMBET: No worries, Barrie, thank you.



ENDS

