

JENNY MACKLIN MP  Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services   and Indigenous Affairs

TRANSCRIPT

Doorstop, Canberra

15 November 2011



E & OE - Proof only

Subjects: National Museum of Australia exhibition about Forgotten  Australians and Former Child Migrants

JENNY MACKLIN:   First of all, I’d like to acknowledge all of the representatives of  the Forgotten Australians and Former Child Migrants and to thank all of them for  being here today.   Most of all to thank them for their extraordinary generosity in  making this exhibition happen.  It wouldn’t have happened if they weren’t prepared to  speak, if they weren’t prepared to tell their stories that are just so, so important but so  difficult to be told and heard.   I’d also like to thank and congratulate everybody here  at the Museum.   It is a very, very moving exhibition and we do recognise just how  important it is that this story be told.   Thank you.

Although we don’t have people from the National Library here with us today, I do  want to take this opportunity to also thank people from the National Library and of  course, thank once again, those members of the Forgotten Australians and Former  Child Migrants who have told their oral histories to people at the National Library.   They too, will make sure that these stories will live forever and that is so important.   We never, ever, want to see the cruelty that happened to these children ever happen  again.   Andrew.

ANDREW SAYERS:   Thank you Minister.  We at the National Museum of Australia  are very happy to be able to tell a story, a very important story, in this exhibition.  And  it is the story of Forgotten Australians and Former Child Migrants, and  representatives of whom are behind me here today.  And I would like to thank  everybody who’s given their stories to this exhibition with such generosity and of trust  in the National Museum.  This I think is one of the most important exhibitions the  National Museum has mounted because it is telling a story which is so tremendously  important to Australia’s history.

Jay Arthur and Adele Chynoweth are two curators who worked on this exhibition for  two years and have put together an exhibition which is profound and moving, and I  hope is visited by a great many Australians, not only here in Canberra but across  Australia.

So since it is your story and I’d like to introduce our guests here today, Joanna  Penglase who is the Co-Founder of the Care Leavers Australia Network and historian  and author who’s done a tremendous amount to tell these stories and has assisted

enormously in the exhibition.  Also, Jim Luce who is the President of Care Leavers  Australia Network, thank you Jim.   Caroline Carroll who is the Chair of the Alliance of  Forgotten Australians, thank you very much Caroline. And Harold Haig, thank you.   Harold is on the International Association of Former Child Migrants and their  Families.

This exhibition is the National Museum’s opportunity to assist in you telling your  stories and so thank you very much.

JENNY MACKLIN:   Anyone want to say something?

JOANNA PENGLASE:  Thank you to the Museum for being worthy of the trust that  we put in you.  It’s the most wonderful exhibition and very moving.   I started  researching this history just over twenty years ago and nobody knew what I was  talking about, and over the years it’s grown from me to come to life.  It’s one of our  most hidden subterranean history and it’s extraordinary that today we have an  exhibition in the National Museum of Australia.  That is truly extraordinary and even  we who lived it and we who’ve researched it and talked about it for all these years,  even we still find it hard to believe that these things happened.   Thank you very  much, I won’t say anymore and thank you Minister Macklin.

JOURNALIST:   Minister you seem quite moved by this exhibit and you’ve spoken  about the importance of history not repeating itself, do you think that there is a  danger or a possibility that in future decades to come your ministerial counterpart will  be opening an exhibit about asylum seekers in mandatory detention under a Rudd,  Gillard and Howard Governments?

JENNY MACKLIN:   I think this exhibition demonstrates to each and everyone of us  why it is critical to always, always make sure that children are treated with the utmost  love and care and respect. That’s what this exhibition reminds us of and certainly  something that I’m determined to do.

JOURNALIST:  You didn’t answer the question.

JENNY MACKLIN:   Well I’m not going into history, I’m talking about what’s so  significant from today and what it means to me.

JOURNALIST:   Can I get your thoughts on uranium mining, is that a …

JENNY MACKLIN:  I don’t intend to talk about those matters today.  We’ve just seen  a very, very significant exhibition, very important to the people who were with me  today.  It’s certainly not appropriate to talk about those matters here.









