Julie Bishop  Federal Member for Curtin  Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs  Shadow Minister for Trade



Channel 9 News

Friday, 24 June 2011

Subjects: Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard’s dysfunctional relationship

E&OE…

JOURNALIST The Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party, Julie Bishop, joins me now from  Canberra. Good afternoon Ms Bishop.

JULIE BISHOP Good afternoon.

JOURNALIST You’re Kevin Rudd’s opposition number as Shadow Foreign Minister, how  do you think he’s coped with this last year?

JULIE BISHOP I guess I have a fairly close perspective on the relationship between Julia  Gillard and Kevin Rudd, and it is highly dysfunctional.

After 12 months the Gillard Government is defined as untrustworthy and incompetent.  Untrustworthy because Julia Gillard betrayed Kevin Rudd, her leader, having promised not to  challenge him she did and took his job. Incompetent because the Government hasn’t been  able to deliver on any of its promises in the last 12 months.

And Julia Gillard set a benchmark that she would fix the three problems - asylum seekers,  the mining tax and climate change - and none have been fixed. So on her own benchmarks  she has failed and I know Kevin Rudd feels very bitter about that.

Now the problem with the dysfunction between the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister  is that it is affecting Australia’s foreign policy outcomes. For example, Julia Gillard doesn’t  want Kevin Rudd anywhere near the live export debacle in Indonesia, she doesn’t want him  anywhere near the Malaysian solution. She needs him but she doesn’t have any authority over  him. They can’t live with each other; they can’t live without each other.

JOURNALIST Well given that dysfunctional relationship, as you just put it then, are you  surprised the party has managed to keep it together for this long considering the  circumstances, the polls and everything they’ve had to deal with this year?

JULIE BISHOP The Government is extremely fragile. The alliance with the Greens means  that Julia Gillard spends more time courting Bob Browns vote than she does her own  backbench.



She is at the whim of the independents at any particular point in time and we haven’t seen  any progress on some of the big challenges facing Australia. Particularly those three issues  that she said she would fix, 12 months on there is absolutely no sign of it.

Take asylum seekers, another boat of asylum seekers arrived today. In fact in the seven  weeks since Julia Gillard announced her Malaysian solution, the people swap, more people  have arrived by boat than in the last six years of the Howard Government.

JOURNALIST It certainly is going to be an interesting next 12 months. Ms Bishop, thank  you for your time this afternoon.

JULIE BISHOP My pleasure.

