CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH DAVID OLDFIELD, 2UE MORNINGS

FRIDAY, 16 DECEMBER 2011



E&OE PROOF ONLY

SUBJECTS: Weapons found in detention, strengthening the character  test, refugee claims.

DAVID OLDFIELD: We’re joined by Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, who to his  credit is generally always available. He certainly doesn’t back down from being  asked these sorts of questions and I’m grateful for his time today. Merry Christmas,  Chris.

CHRIS BOWEN: Same to you, David, and merry Christmas to Lisa and the whole  gang.

OLDFIELD: Oh, thank you, thank you. Look, why aren’t these people being  punished?

BOWEN: Well, look, firstly, David, these figures, and I agree with you, nothing  that should be a weapon or could be used as a weapon should be in detention  centres and that’s why we regularly conduct these searches and find these things.  The second point to make is that these things are also found on entry into  detention centres. So you get checked when you go into a detention centre if  you’re going for a visit or what have you and, we remove things from people.

Now, these are things which could in other circumstances be very innocent. You  know, people have a pair of nail scissors in their bag for all sorts of reasons or, you  know, other things for all sorts of reasons, which going about your daily business  are fine but are not appropriate or welcome in a detention centre. And secondly,  you get things that are found in rooms which, again, may be innocent, but are  removed. For example, if somebody takes a butter knife from the dining room and  that’s found in their room, well, that’s confiscated from them. They may have a  reason why they had a butter knife there but it’s not appropriate to have in your  room and it’s taken from them. Now, I’m not saying they’re all innocent, of course  not.

OLDFIELD: Well, hammers and screwdrivers, from what we’ve seen of these  people, they’re not exactly doing a bit of work around the place. They don’t pick up  after themselves from all of the reports, let alone being, you know, a bit handy.  The hammers, screwdrivers, knives, metal pipes, broken pool cues.

BOWEN: Yeah, well, again, you know, there are pool cues around and there might  be a reason why one might be broken, but again it gets confiscated and there’s an

investigation and questioning as to why. And then, you know, we have the code of  conduct within detention centres which is then brought into play in terms of, things  can be removed from them, they can be told, ‘Well, you know, you’re not going to  get any internet or access to various things’ in various cases. And of course, that’s  a decision made on the ground by the manager in light of the circumstances.

OLDFIELD: We’ve had riots, we’ve had millions of dollars in damage and buildings  being set fire to, we’ve had emergency services workers pelted with tiles and lucky  they haven’t been killed under those circumstances, we’ve had people raped. Have  we actually had anybody in a detention centre charged and punished?

BOWEN: Well, there’s certainly been a number charged, David, and -

OLDFIELD: Punished?

BOWEN: Well, they’re going through the courts. Of course, we let them go  through the courts if they’re charged and, as you know, I strengthened the law last  year so that if anybody’s convicted of any offence whilst in immigration detention  they can be denied a permanent visa. That’s a significant strengthening of the law  because I do think it’s a problem.

It’s been a problem for both governments. You remember the riots under the  previous Government, under the Howard Government, nobody was denied a visa  arising out of those. So I thought, well, it’s very important that we strengthen the  law. Any decision I take to cancel or deny a visa can be appealed through the  courts and I wanted the law to be crystal clear.

Now, we need to let the charges of those people involved in those riots go through  the courts. If they’re convicted, then I can deny them a permanent visa.

OLDFIELD: Why are these people accumulating weapons, though? Is there a  situation of gangs, for example, congregating, getting together in the detention  centres? Are there issues between different groups, like, you know, different types  of Muslims, Sunni and Shi’a? What’s happening?

BOWEN: We certainly do, from time to time have tension amongst different types  of groups in detention centres. Sometimes it’s between different nationalities,  sometimes it might be a dispute between members of the Tamil community and  Afghans for example - I wouldn’t overstate that but it does happen from time to  time. Other times you have disputes between families. And you can imagine living  in a fairly confined space there’s arguments about whose doing what, and whether  somebody’s behaving appropriately and we do have tensions between individuals  and families from time to time in detention centres.

As is well known, sometimes there’s disputes between us - the Department of  Immigration and Serco - and detainees. Of course some of these people think it’s  appropriate to protest their visa outcomes or that violent behaviour might change  their visa outcomes, and very clearly it does not.

OLDFIELD: It’s 12 minutes past ten. David Oldfield, 2UE. We’re very grateful to be  joined by the Immigration Minister. Detainees and weapons.



Look Minister, there’s a question here that I often sort of pose but I don’t think I’ve  ever quite posed it to you previously and I’m sure it’s something that a lot of  Australians wonder. We have a huge situation in theory of people travelling, you

know, exhaustively over long distances just to get to Australia because they are  said to be fleeing for their lives. Wouldn’t you think they’d be a bit more bloody  grateful when they get here?

BOWEN: Well look David, I think one the things in this debate is  overgeneralisation and simplification. And we’ve got lots of people in different  circumstances. And yes, there are some people who - you know, I read the  behavioural reports and think ‘you’re not very interested in being a good Australian’  and I respond to that accordingly.

There are other people in detention who are very grateful for the services that are  being provided and for the chance to at least make their claims for asylum. So look,  we’re talking about individuals, and as with any large group of individuals you’re  going to get different attitudes and, as I say, sometimes when I’m in detention  centres I get people coming up saying how grateful they are that they’re being able  to make their case and they really just want to get on and be good Australian

residents. You do get others who have a different approach, which is very  disappointing, and if they behave in a way which is unacceptable through violence,  well then that gets dealt with through the courts and through the strengthening of  the laws that we’ve put in place.

OLDFIELD: Chris there was a story the other day about a young fellow, 17, you’d  be familiar with the case, who’d come from Indonesia - he’s from Kuwait. He’d  come from Indonesia and he’s been trying to get his parents brought over on the

basis that he was under-18 and he should be reunited with his parents. Now this is  a classic tactic as you would be well and truly aware more so than the rest of us, I  suppose, where you send the young person ahead and then that allows you to  apply to get the rest of family here. The young person comes as an unauthorised  arrival, but then sympathy is shown.

Now then this particular person said - and now I love the way one of the bias  newspapers described it, he was described as having ‘fled’ Kuwait, he’s a Kuwaiti.  Described as having ‘fled’ Kuwait. Now Kuwait has an unemployment rate of 2.2  per cent. It’s described as extraordinarily wealthy, with an open economy and has  amongst the highest living standards of the Middle East, if not in fact the world. In  fact their unemployment rate is about a third of what we have in Australia. Why is  someone fleeing Kuwait?

BOWEN: Well, firstly, there’s a few points to make here about that particular case.  And I won’t comment on the individual specifics of the case, I know you’re not  asking me to.

OLDFIELD: No, I’m just trying to make the point, I suppose, that Kuwait surely is  one of those countries that falls into circumstances where it’s very hard to maintain  a position as an asylum seeker?

BOWEN: Look, again, I make this point: we have a range of circumstances for  people who come to Australia by boat. Some are genuine refugees, who are  genuinely fleeing difficult circumstances. Others are not, and get rejected through  the process. And sometimes they are economic refugees, people looking for a  better life - and I can understand why they are but you’ve got a process to go  through to apply to come to Australia and that’s why we say, ‘Well, no, you are not  a refugee, we are not going to accept you as a refugee and we are going to talk to  you about arrangements for you to return to your home country’.

We get criticised about that. There was a high profile case recently, where we  found consistently that somebody was not a refugee and we were returning them  to their home country, and that was appealed through the courts. But that’s  appropriate, because if you’re going to have a refugee process then you have to  have an outcome for somebody who is a refugee, but you have to have a different  outcome for somebody who’s not and that is being returned.

So there are a range of circumstances. Sometimes there are refugees who are  reasonably comfortably well-off but who are being persecuted because of their  religion, or there are other times when there are people who are well-off but want  a better life and are not refugees, and other times people are very poor and are  making an economic decision. There’s a range of circumstances, and that’s why it’s

so difficult to assess - and people claim that they’re being persecuted but  sometimes they’re not and other times they are very genuine. We need to work  through -

OLDFIELD: - Chris, this is the sort of thing that gets a lot of us, and it really gets  me because - as you can appreciate - I’ve spent a lot of time looking at all of this  sort of thing, and looking at where these people come from and assessing, myself,  the sort of reasons that they claim and I’ve always found you to be pretty straight.  I say pretty straight because most people would not consider any politician to be  completely straight.

BOWEN: It’s not the most popular profession in the world.

OLDFIELD: Yes, but pretty straight - congratulations on the pay rise too, very nice  - but I’ve always thought of you as pretty straight, so I’m hoping you’re going to  give me a straight answer here - as amongst the pretty straight aspects - and that  is, that we are, it would seem, getting an increasing number of people who are  essentially ‘country-shoppers’ and we are getting those people who are coming  here purely for the circumstances of improving their life. Not because they are -  and no one can blame them for wanting to improve their life but not at our cost,  and no one can blame them for that; but you can pretty much make a case for  asylum out of anything can’t you? I mean you’re talking about somebody who’s  essentially well-off, but persecuted. I mean, is that really, the test? Are we having a  scenario now where if you can get to Australia and you can make a claim that, ‘Oh,  where I am I’m in a religious minority, and people don’t look at me nicely when I  walk down the street’. I mean, what actually constitutes persecution of a degree  that allows you to come?

I saw a case the other day where a couple of women from Africa were claiming  that if they were sent back to their country that they might be circumcised. Now,  no one wants that done to anybody but I also noted that in the country that they  were from it was illegal to do that. So essentially we had people making a claim for  asylum on the basis that if they’re sent back to their country they might have a  crime committed against them. You could claim that claim that anywhere in the  world.

BOWEN: Look, this is a very good question. We comply with the United Nations  Convention, which says danger of persecution based on your membership of a  particular social group or religion or gender; and there’s five categories. Now,  you’re quite right that just normal discrimination doesn’t cut the mustard so you  can be in a difficult circumstance but that doesn’t amount to persecution under the  Convention. You need to be in danger of something quite serious happening to  you. In the case that you raised, for example, we would all agree that circumcision  is very dangerous and is something that we would resist anybody suffering from;  and we do see those cases -

OLDFIELD: This is circumcision of women that we’re talking about, I’ve no issue  with circumcision of men.

BOWEN: No, that’s quite separate. I was talking about female circumcision. Now  that is very very serious and we have a system in place to deal with that and that’s  called complementary protection and that is where we would look at those cases  and yes you do - and you’re quite right and this one of the challenges is that you  get cases where people raise these concerns and they can be very hard to judge.

You might have evidence that this might happen in a country sometimes, it’s illegal  but it still does happen in that country; so you’ve got to weigh up the evidence  before you and make a decision about whether -

OLDFIELD: - Yeah but Chris it happens here. It happens here. Auburn Hospital in  Sydney is reportedly not infrequently repairing genital mutilation or female  circumcision done in Australia in backyards.

BOWEN: The point I’m making David is that it’s not an automatic approval. So we  go through the circumstances and we make a decision about whether the claim is  genuine or not, and in some countries - and I think you and I are on the same  page here - if there was a real risk that somebody was going to suffer something  like that then we wouldn’t send them back, but we’ve got to make an assessment  and it can be difficult to make that assessment.

OLDFIELD: Here’s a question for you as you go and I appreciate your time here  this morning and thank you for being with us for so long. I won’t be surprised if  you haven’t received my letter as yet, or it hasn’t reached your desk, because it  would have only been a week or ten days ago that I sent it, but I have written to  you about a particular couple that I talked about on the program a couple of weeks  ago: Ernest and Daphne Konschel. Are you familiar with them, the South African  couple?

BOWEN: Yes I am, yes I am very familiar with the case.

OLDFIELD: Now, I’ve written to you particularly, personally making an appeal on  their behalf because their’s seems to be one of those standout cases where one  would make an exception: they are in their 80s, they are largely being rejected  from Australia because Mr Konschel has early-onset dementia and they’re seen as  being a potential drain on the health system if they are allowed to stay.

Now their circumstances of course are that where their son and daughter both live  here are Australian citizens and have provided for them and are willing to continue  to provide for them, even having built in the back of their home a specialised  cottage for their needs, but they are being denied being able to stay. Now in  fairness, these people don’t necessarily, don’t have very long to live.

You are - your Government, as the previous Government did - are having people  come here, claim asylum: they’ve got AIDS, they’ve got Hepatitis B, they’ve got  tuberculosis, in some cases they’ve got diseases we’ve not even seen in Australia  before; many of them will require liver transplants and all sorts of things, and  they’re quite young and will be a drain on us for a very, very, very long time. Yet  there’s no question about them being able to stay because they’re asylum seekers.

Now the Konschel’s: Mrs Konschel has already been stabbed in a home invasion  back in South Africa, one of the most dangerous countries in the world. How can  you, in all conscience, given the circumstances of who you let into the country,  regardless of the medical costs, how can you in all conscience send two people in  their 80s, whose children are here and are paying for them to be looked after, back  to the murder and rape capital of the world that is South Africa, especially given  the history: they have no support back there at all and they’ve already been subject  to a violent assault where the mother was almost killed? How can you send them  back?

BOWEN: Well David, we’re not, and I do have a bit of an update for you. But let  me just go through that, it was quite a long question and I apologise for giving you  a bit of a long answer, but it is an important case and I just want to explain the  process to you.

In cases like this where somebody has overstayed their visa, which is what these  people have done, they’ve come under a visa and stayed longer than the visa  allowed them, we often get requests to stay permanently because of health  reasons like this; and in cases like this the law gets applied by the department and  the department says ‘no’. And then they can appeal it to the tribunal, and where  they’ve come on a tourist visa or some other temporary visa and they don’t have a

case to stay longer and there are these health issues, the tribunal almost always  says ‘no’ because they’re obliged to uphold the law.

Then people in this situation can apply to me for what is called Ministerial  Intervention, where I can look at it and say, ‘Look, this doesn’t quite comply with  the law but on compassionate grounds or common sense grounds I’m not going to  send you back and you can stay’, and this happens a lot David. There are several  thousand cases each year -

OLDFIELD: Will it be happening in the case of the Konschel’s?

BOWEN: Yes it will. I look at these cases, several thousand -

OLDFIELD: You will be providing for the Konschel’s, 84 and 83 years old, to stay  with their family in Australia?

BOWEN: Let me just tell you what I am going to do. Now, they need to - in  normal circumstances, they would need to actually apply to me. Now because  you’ve written to me and because they’re obviously very exercised and upset about  the situation, I’ve said to my department, ‘Don’t wait for them to write to me, send  the file up and I want to take a look at it’. That’s currently in the process of  happening, I think they’ll have some good news before Christmas. That is what I  am aiming towards.

OLDFIELD: Merry Christmas, grateful for your time and grateful for your decency  extended to a white couple from South Africa in great danger of their return and  wanting to stay here with their family in Australia. Good on you Chris.

BOWEN: Good on you David.

ENDS





