Search this site   Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Parliamentary  Secretary

Links



Thomastown rooftop protest,  community detention Friday, 11 November 2011

Interview with Neil Mitchell, 3AW Mornings

Neil Mitchell: On the line is the Immigration Minister, Chris  Bowen. Good morning.

Chris Bowen: Good morning, Neil.

Mitchell: Where are these people now?

Bowen: There's two still in hospital. One's got a broken  wrist—the one who fell off the roof—and another one is  being kept in for observation. The other two are in different  locations, out of hospital.

Mitchell: But are they back in detention or not?

Bowen: No, not yet. I'll be making a decision about that  later in the day. They're being held away from each other  with somebody keeping an eye on them and I'll be making a  decision later on today or tomorrow about whether to place  them into detention.

Mitchell: And what is your inclination at this stage?

Bowen: Well, I'd need a good reason not to. They've clearly  been behaving in a very inappropriate way.

Now, the background of this, Neil, is that you'd recall last  October I announced that I didn't think it was appropriate to  keep children and young people and families in detention.  We've moved about 2000 people into the community since  then. The vast majority of those have, you know, gone  about their business, not caused anybody any trouble, been  very welcome and, you know, responded accordingly in the  local community.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 5 Thomastown rooftop protest, community detention

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180199.htm

When you've got that number of people in the community,  you're going to get a small handful of incidents. This is one  of them and, you know, it's completely inappropriate  behaviour by these boys, very inconvenient for the  neighbours, which I apologise to them, very inconvenient to  the police and completely inappropriate behaviour.

Mitchell: And potentially dangerous?

Bowen: And potentially dangerous.

Mitchell: They were armed, weren't they?

Bowen: Well, I understand they had knives, as you said,  because they were hurting themselves. As I understand it,  they didn't threaten the police or attempt to hurt anybody  else, but there'll be a full investigation obviously.

Mitchell: How old are they?

Bowen: Seventeen and 18.

Mitchell: Okay. Well, that's an adult, 18, isn't it?

Bowen: Well, look, anybody under 18, if they're under 18  then we move to move them into the community unless  we've got good reason not to. Of course, we look at their  behaviour while they're in detention. If they've got parents,  of course we look at their parent situation. But by and large,  if they're a child, under 18, then we move them into the  community unless there's evidence or reason not to.

Mitchell: Now, what is the house that they were in? Is it  owned by the government, is it a charity house, what is it?

Bowen: Well, the ways these things work, Neil, is that we  work with the Red Cross and they do a very good job for us  and they source these houses and rent them on the private

market, and then we work with them and [inaudible] the  children, in this case, unaccompanied minors, which means  they're children without their parents in Australia—in some  cases it's families—and then Red Cross houses them for  us.

Mitchell: So this is a Red Cross facility, is it?

Bowen: Well, Red Cross will have leased it in all likelihood.

Page 2 of 5 Thomastown rooftop protest, community detention

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180199.htm

Mitchell: And do they monitor it?

Bowen: Yes, we have a carer there—where there's  unaccompanied minors—so there's somebody keeping an  eye on these boys, and they monitor the situation. And not  just Red Cross, there's other charities involved; Life without  Borders and some churches are involved and church  charity groups, and they do this work on our behalf. And  obviously, we monitor it as well.

Mitchell: Would you be concerned about the monitoring  that's gone on here, that it's got to the stage of a police  siege?

Bowen: Well, obviously something's gone terribly wrong  here. Obviously, these boys have thought it was  appropriate to jump on the roof to protest about something.

Mitchell: They've done more than that, they've jumped on  the roof armed.

Bowen: Yes.

Mitchell: To the point that we've got a police siege under  way. And you keep calling them boys, I mean, 18 is not a  boy.

Bowen: Well, 17 and 18. And look, as I say, when they're  moved into the community they're clearly under 18. We  have to draw the line somewhere, of course. And I'm not  defending these boys in any way, Neil, don't get me wrong.  I'm not defending their actions; completely inappropriate.

And I'll be looking at their cases very closely today with a  view to making a decision about how to treat them.

There's been, as I say, a small handful of cases out of the  2000 people we've moved into the community where I've  had to say, 'Well, look, sorry, your behaviour's not  appropriate, you're going back into detention.' And that's  important too, because that sends asylum seekers a clear  message that if they're going to be housed in the  community they need to behave and respond accordingly.

Mitchell: Is it possible they could be deported?

Bowen: Well, that would depend on their asylum claim and  whether it's accepted or not. At least for some of these

Page 3 of 5 Thomastown rooftop protest, community detention

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180199.htm

boys, their asylum is at various stages of rejection and  they're appealing that. So that means that my department  or an independent reviewer's looked at them and said,  'Look, sorry, we just don't think you're a genuine refugee.'  They have the right to appeal that. If they're not a genuine  refugee, then we look at steps to remove them. That is  sometimes easier than others.

Mitchell: But if you're involved in a siege with police, is that  reason to say you've given up the right to be an Australian?

Bowen: Well, if they're charged with anything, then that  would certainly be taken into account. And if they're  convicted of anything, certainly I've toughened the rules in

relation to that so if you're convicted of anything while your  claims are being processed, that can be taken into account.

Mitchell: Do you know when these people arrived in  Australia?

Bowen: Look, at different times, some arrived earlier this  year and some of the other boys arrived last year.

Mitchell: And they're from Iran, is that correct?

Bowen: That's correct, and they've been living in the  community since June.

Mitchell: Do they work?

Bowen: No, they're not allowed to work. They can go to  school. To be honest, I'm not exactly sure whether these  boys were going to school or not.

Mitchell: Fair enough. I'm just a little, a resident told me  that the people on that street had not been told what the  house was being used for. Is it normal policy to tell people

what's going on?

Bowen: No, because generally, as I say, it shouldn't really  provide any inconvenience for anybody, any impact at all.  Of the 2000 people we've moved into the community, the  vast majority just want to keep themselves to themselves,  be good neighbours.

As I say, this has clearly not happened yesterday; very  inconvenient for the neighbours. Again, I'm sorry about that.  But look, in the vast majority of instances, it's all worked

Page 4 of 5 Thomastown rooftop protest, community detention

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180199.htm

very well. Neighbours have welcomed the asylum seekers;  the asylum seekers have responded accordingly.

Mitchell: Do you know what their objections were, why they  were on the roof and threatening self harm?

Bowen: Look, as I understand it—I can't go into too much  detail about this, Neil—but as I understand it, it was a  dispute over their case manager and the department

moving their case manager on. I can't comment on any  more detail about that and whatever it was, this is clearly,  as I've said before, getting on roofs and trying to hurt  yourself is not how you deal with the Department of  Immigration to try and get your message through or to  make your point. It's very inappropriate, it makes no  difference, it will not change the outcome and whatever  they were trying to achieve, well, clearly it's not going to  work.

Mitchell: Thank you for your time.

Bowen: Nice talking to you, Neil.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180199.htm  Last update: Monday, 14 November 2011 at 15:25 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 5 of 5 Thomastown rooftop protest, community detention

30/01/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2011/cb180199.htm

