CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH DAVID LIPSON, SKY NEWS LUNCHTIME  AGENDA

WEDNESDAY, 20 JULY 2011



SUBJECTS: Christmas Island incident, character test, Malaysia  transfer agreement, Kevin Rudd, media.

DAVID LIPSON: Joining me now from Sydney is the Immigration Minister,  Chris Bowen. Thanks for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, David.

LIPSON: What happened at Christmas Island last night? We’re hearing  reports of, as I say, tear gas, rubber bullets, quite a lot of destruction as well  in a number of rooms inside the facility.

BOWEN: Yes, last night at about 11 o’clock Christmas Island time we did  have up to 50 people who engaged in violent activity. There was damage to  some buildings, damage to some computers, about 50 people involved, some  damage to some kitchen areas, of course which is still being assessed. The  Australian Federal Police were called; they did take steps to de-escalate the  situation. Those steps weren’t successful and the Federal Police needed to  use gas and beanbag rounds to bring the situation into control.

LIPSON: We also heard that the Serco security arrangements there, the  personnel there were sort of forced to flee before the police were called in.  Are you going to or have you upped the security presence for tonight because  I understand there’s still a lot of [inaudible] there.

BOWEN: Well, it’s standard procedure that when the Federal Police take  action that Serco step back and let the Federal Police take the appropriate  action. Of course, in circumstances like this we make sure there’s appropriate  security in place. The Federal Police have appropriate standby activities in  place, particularly after an incident like last night, that in following days and  nights have the appropriate arrangements in place, and tonight is no  different. Of course, I’ve been in contact with my department this morning,  been briefed on the situation and the appropriate arrangements being put in  place for this evening.

LIPSON: Any idea of the damage bill?

BOWEN: Not yet, David. These things can take some time to assess. Some  computers were destroyed, which is particularly unfortunate. They were  computers in the medical area, so that will make the accessing of medical  records for the other detainees there more difficult. And that’s one of the key  points: these sorts of protests affect the amenity for all the other detainees  who just want to do the right thing. This is a relatively small number of  people who cruel the situation for everybody else in the detention centre.

LIPSON: 50 people, though, you say; others feeding us information have  said up to 200 people. That doesn’t sound like a tiny number of people  involved in this. In fact, we’re hearing that the threats from the Government

that getting involved in such violence could affect the temporary protection  visas has actually encouraged more people to participate so that the  authorities won’t know who started the trouble. Are those sorts of threats  working?

BOWEN: Well, I’ve made it very clear, David, on a number of occasions, that  we have strengthened the character test through the Parliament. That means  that anybody convicted of any offence while in immigration detention can be  denied a permanent visa. We have seen 30 people charged out of the recent  disturbances in Villawood and Christmas Island. I think that is well known  through our detention network.

I don’t accept the premise of the question that that test somehow  encouraged further activity. In fact, all the advice I have is to the contrary;  that is, a very clear message the vast majority of detainees understand. Fifty  people is a significant number; it was a significant event last night. But I’m  making the point that it is not all detainees and nowhere near a majority of  detainees. We have around 600 people in that facility at Christmas Island as  we speak. We had up to 50 involved last night.

LIPSON: Well, it’s coming up to 11 weeks, as I mentioned earlier, since the  Government announced an agreement with Malaysia. Julia Gillard today said  that we’re still in advanced discussions with Malaysia on this deal. But why is  this taking so long?

BOWEN: Well, this is a unique arrangement, David. It’s, if you like, an  arrangement which has not been tried in very many other places at all. It is  important we get it right and we’ve been focused on that. The Prime Minister

and I said at the time that it would take some weeks to sort out the  operational finer details, and that’s exactly what’s occurred. Those discussions  are at an advanced stage and we’ll be saying more at an appropriate time.

But it’s appropriate that we take the time, in consultations with Malaysia and  also the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to make sure that  every detail is sorted through in an appropriately methodical manner.

LIPSON: What’s the sticking point, though?



BOWEN: Well, there’s no sticking point, David. I don’t accept the premise of  that. There have been discussions around all the operational details. It’s a  complex arrangement with lots of moving parts, and we have been discussing  those with Malaysia and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

It’s very important that we pull the rug out of the people smugglers’ business  model, that we say to people, ‘Do not get on the dangerous boat journey to  Australia because you won’t be processed or resettled in Australia, you’ll be  taken to Malaysia’.

I think we’ve already seen a substantial reduction in the number of boat  arrivals to Australia in recent times. I don’t say that the announcement of the  Malaysia arrangement is entirely responsible for that. Clearly, our very clear  message through the region has had some impact.

LIPSON: Okay. Well, I just want to get your thoughts on another couple of  issues around today. We’ve just heard reports or just heard an  announcement, I should say, from Kevin Rudd, the Foreign Minister, that he  will be having an aortic valve replacement surgery, operation on 1 August. He  says that Craig Emerson, the Trade Minister, will step into his role for two  months, that this is the second time he’s had this procedure; the first time 20

years ago. Mr Rudd also confirming that he would be staying in politics, that  he would be running again for the seat of Griffith.

But Chris Bowen, if I could ask you, do you have a message for Kevin Rudd or  what does this mean for this hung Parliament? Does it make it a little bit more  precarious?

BOWEN: No, I think my message for Kevin Rudd is that we all wish him the  best through his health situation, that the operation goes well and we look  forward to his return. I don’t think people should read more into the political

situation than the fact that Kevin has announced that he will be having an  operation and that we all wish him the best through that operation.

LIPSON: Okay. Well, the big story today, of course, is the News of the World  parliamentary inquiry in Britain; Rupert Murdoch appearing before that. One  of your colleagues, Stephen Conroy, has been very critical, not only of News  of the World, but of the landscape here in Australia, particularly the Daily  Telegraph, who he’s accused of being biased against the Government,  essentially trying to bring it down. Do you share Stephen Conroy’s view on  that?

BOWEN: Well, look, let me make a couple of comments about the general  issue. Firstly, the events in the United Kingdom, I think, are a salient  reminder to all involved in public life, whether it’s participants or  commentators or journalists, that society has expectations as to journalistic  behaviour, that there is a line - even in this era of public accountability and

transparency, where people in public life have to accept the fact that all

elements of their life are on public display - that there is a line and that  society has expectations.

In relation to Australia, we have a robust media in Australia. I think it’s no  revelation that certain Australian newspapers from time to time promote a  particular editorial line. That’s part of a robust democracy. It’s also a part of a  robust democracy that Government Ministers and commentators are able to

point that out from time to time.

LIPSON: So you don’t have a problem with the way the Daily Telegraph has  been reporting on the carbon tax particularly?

BOWEN: Well, I think the Daily Telegraph has taken a particular editorial line  and that’s their right under our robust democracy. I think the Daily Telegraph  readers, when they read the Telegraph, know that that’s their editorial line  and are able to factor that into their considerations.



LIPSON: Chris Bowen, thanks very much for your time.

BOWEN: Pleasure, David.

Ends



