CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH ALEXANDRA KIRK, ABC AM

WEDNESDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Asylum seeker statistics, Malaysia arrangement, onshore  processing, Opposition policy, bridging visas.

TONY EASTLEY: The United Nations refugee agency has released data showing  Australia has defied the global trend with a 19 per cent fall in the number of  asylum seekers arriving in the first half of this year. Industrialised nations saw an  average 17 per cent growth in asylum applications. Only Australia and the Nordic  region of Europe recorded a significant decline.

The Immigration Minister Chris Bowen told Alexandra Kirk a number of factors  have caused asylum seeker numbers to drop.

CHRIS BOWEN: I think partly, of course, it's the push factors: the return to  more normal arrangements in Sri Lanka has resulted in a significant drop in the  number of Sri Lankan Tamils seeking asylum in Australia.

I think the announcement of the Malaysia arrangement towards the end of that  period has clearly had an effect. The tragic boat accident off Christmas Island  had an effect. So I think that there's always a range of factors which goes into  determining these figures.

ALEXANDRA KIRK: But the Malaysian deal only came up in May, very late in  the piece; that is very late in the first half of the year. Is that when the numbers  suddenly dropped?

BOWEN: Well, look, we'd seen a reduction all the way along and I think we also  saw a further impact from the Malaysia announcement so you're quite right. I'm  suggesting there are always a range of factors and this is no different.

KIRK: The Opposition cast doubt on your explanation, pointing out that the fall  came off the back of very high arrival numbers, that they'd gone up almost 70  per cent just before that.

BOWEN: Well, you know, the Opposition makes these things up as they go  along.

I've said clearly that this reduction is the result of a number of factors and that is  pretty hard to argue with. And one of the factors is clearly the determination of  the Government to implement regional arrangements, which was a key factor as  well.

KIRK: You haven't dropped the Malaysian solution. It still remains your policy  with no prospect of it ever being resurrected. Sooner or later aren't you going to  have to accept that it is defunct?

BOWEN: Well, look, we've accepted as a matter of practical and legal reality  that onshore processing is the only viable option in the light of the Opposition's  failure to pass legislation through the Parliament. Despite the fact that their  rhetoric and supposed position is they support offshore processing, they just  won't vote for it.

But it's perfectly appropriate and necessary for us to point out that that Malaysia  arrangement and similar arrangements under a regional framework are  absolutely vital in this field. I mean, even Mr Ruddock today has said - admitted  - that their policy would not work again if implemented.

We saw advice from the Department of Immigration to Estimates. We'd made  that advice previously available to the Opposition very clearly.

If you do want to see a deterrent for travelling to Australia by boat you need to  have regional arrangements in place, which mean that people gain no  preferential treatment or benefit of resettlement out of taking a dangerous boat  journey to Australia. That is actually what the Malaysia arrangement offered.  That is exactly why it would've had a huge impact. And I suspect very strongly  that is why the Opposition opposes it: because they don't see it in their best  interest politically for boat arrivals to fall.

KIRK: If onshore processing proves to work out - that is, if it goes without a  hitch - could it be that it won't be a political problem for you come the next  election?

BOWEN: Well, look, Alex, obviously we'll do our best to make onshore  processing work. We'll do our best to make sure the arrangements apply  effectively.

But we'll continue to point out that if you want to deal with this issue in a holistic  way, if you want to bear in mind how Australia deals with the challenges of  humanitarian settlement - 43 million people displaced around the world, about

the prospect of Australia resettling more people - that regional arrangements are  absolutely vital.

And the Opposition, I suppose, will continue to stick their head in the sand, say  they don't need legislation and their policies from last time will work when very  clearly, very clearly, that is Fantasyland.

KIRK: Are you considering issuing bridging visas with strings attached; that is,  that asylum seekers, say, go to regional areas first?

BOWEN: Well, look, we often get requests from different regional areas to work  with us on resettlement of asylum seekers or refugees and we will work with  regions on that. There are mechanisms for bridging visas to be applied to  regional areas. I'll make further announcements about that in due course.

KIRK: But you couldn't force them, say, to stay there indefinitely, could you?

BOWEN: Well, I'm not proposing that Alex, of course. But bearing in mind, of  course, that some people in this situation will need care and support in relation  to mental health and other issues, and we need to make sure that all the  appropriate arrangements would be in place wherever they lived.

Ends



