





Posted on November 24, 2011

ABC News Radio

SUBJECTS: The year in Parliament

E&OE……

Fran Kelly: He’s the Manager of Opposition Business in the House, he joins us in  our Parliament House studio Christopher good morning.

Christopher Pyne: Good morning Fran

Kelly: Two hundred and fifty bills passed by the parliament this year.  Doesn’t that  suggest, in fact prove that minority government is working perfectly well?

Pyne: Well Fran of the two hundred and fifty bills the Coalition said yes to eighty  seven percent of them so in fact we only opposed thirteen per cent.

Kelly: So the Parliament’s working?

Pyne: Well no what it points to is the fact that most of those two hundred and fifty  bills were uncontroversial, it doesn’t mean the Parliament’s working it means that  the claim that Labor has somehow got two hundred and fifty bills through in a tooth  and claw fight is simply rhetoric from Anthony Albanese.

Kelly: No but what about the point that the Opposition was making at the beginning  of this Government that it would be a debacle, it would be gridlock in the  parliament, it’s not gridlocked the parliament is functioning.

Pyne: Well it is a debacle; the parliament resembles something like a Doctor  Moreau’s Island.  What we saw this week was another week of secret deals, special  arrangements, legislation drafted and pushed through in the dead of the night,  secret deals with Andrew Wilkie or Tony Windsor and Robert Oakeshott and Bob  Brown, the Greens calling the shots.  Now legislation might finally get through but at  what cost?  The cost to the Australian tax payer is hundreds of millions of dollars of  featherbedding and largess to special interests, invested interests in particular seats  while the average Australian misses out again and again and again.

Kelly: As Anthony Albanese pointed out though there has always been deals done  to get legislation through which is usually in the Senate, I mean the Howard  Government spent many hundreds of millions of dollars I would suggest trying to get  their legislation through with the assistance of Brian Harradine in Tasmania, Mal  Colston you know this is not new.

Pyne: Well Fran let’s look at the Government’s record this year - there’s been more  boats arrive in the last three days carrying more people than arrived in the last six  years of the Howard Government.  I wouldn’t say the Government’s border  protection policies were exactly working.

Kelly: I don’t think they would either.

Pyne: No and their response to the Government’s spending addiction and the fact  that they have a budget problem has been to introduce two new great big taxes,  two arrows through the chest of the Australian taxpayer, which still lead to a ten  billion dollar deficit.  Now Anthony Albanese and the Labor Party can make all the,  they can interrupt you as often as they like, claiming everything is brilliant and  marvellous and say silly lines like the “noalition”, I mean I could call the Labor Pary  the “liebor” party, the truth is that kind of rhetoric doesn’t mask the fact that in the  last three days more people have arrived on boats that arrived in six years under the  Howard Government, they have introduced taxes that are levying thirty five billion  dollars and are spending forty five billion dollars because of those taxes.  We have  now got a hundred and seven billion dollars of net debt and a budget deficit of fifty  four billion dollars.  It’s hardly been a successful year and that’s why business says  and state premiers are saying that one of the biggest problems with Australia at the  moment is the lack of confidence in the economy because of this Government.

Kelly: Waging a new tax is not necessarily a negative is it, and these taxes are  across the whole community they’re not taxes that everybody will pay in a sense.   They’re on specific areas of business in the same way the Opposition would put an  impulse on business for instance to pay for some of your policies.

Pyne: But Fran if the only achievement the Government can point to is the  introduction of new taxes I don’t think the Australian public are going to be popping  the champagne corks and firing the confetti cannons at election time if all the Labor  Party’s got to show for their term in office is great big new taxes.

Kelly: Are you saying though that the changes forced on the Government - we  were discussing those with Anthony Albanese there by the cross benchers, that  those changes aren’t any good I would have thought you would have supported the  sort of change that Tony Windsor forced on the Government with the mining bill in  terms of more environmental protection and oversight of coal seam gas exploration?

Pyne: Fran the Mining Tax is a complete shambles.  They have had five separate  Mining Tax deals.  Yesterday the Treasurer said that it would stand the test of time,  it didn’t last from midnight to dawn.  The Government has changed the Mining Tax  so often, they have so many different estimates and forecasts, nobody quite frankly  knows how much the Mining Tax will collect - at one stage the Government was  saying it was going to collect eleven billions dollars then forecasted that it might be  closer to twenty two billion dollars, now state government’s in New South Wales and  Western Australia and levying three billion dollars of royalties, so they’ve lost that  money it’s down to eight billion and yet they’ve got fourteen billion dollars of  spending associated with the Mining Tax.  Only the Labor Party could introduce two  new taxes and end up with a bigger deficit than they had before.

Kelly: The Gillard Government has now been in for a year and a bit and at the  beginning of this process Tony Abbott’s aim was to try and rest Government during  the term, during this term that was the stated aim and that hasn’t worked at this  point, is it time to change tactics, the Opposition has really been approaching this  year like a never ending election campaign, can you maintain that momentum into a  second year?

Pyne: Well Fran two years ago the Labor Party were fourteen points ahead of the  Coalition on a two party preferred basis, they’re now fourteen points behind. A year  ago the Prime Minister was twenty points in the positive territory she’s now minus  twenty one.  If The Labor Party thinks this has been a sensational year let’s hope  they have another one like it next year because if they do they will be annihilated at  an election, so let’s not listen to any of this nonsense and rhetoric about what a  fantastic year the Government supposed to have had.  The “liebor” party has  introduced a new tax based on a lie, a Mining Tax that you can’t trust the figures the  Government is talking about, next week they’re having a crisis mini budget because  of the unravelling budget situation, I mean honestly for the Labor Party and anyone  who’s barracking for the Labor Party suggests that this has been a good end to the  year is stupefying to the Australian public.

Kelly: Christopher Pyne thank you very much for joining us on breakfast.

Pyne: It’s always a pleasure thanks Fran.

Kelly: Christopher Pyne is the Manager of Opposition Business in the House.

ENDS



