CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH LUKE GRANT, MTR BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 23 DECEMBER 2011





SUBJECTS: Meeting with the Coalition, Malaysia Arrangement,  Nauru, temporary protection visas.

LUKE GRANT: Morning, Minister.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Luke. How are you?

GRANT: I’m well. Nice to talk to you. Merry Christmas to you.

BOWEN: And to you and your family.

GRANT: Will you get together today, yourself and Morrison?

BOWEN: Yes, we are. We’re having a meeting this afternoon, Mr Morrison  and I and also Mr Rudd and Julie Bishop. And let’s see if we can get this issue  sorted. Both sides say they agree with offshore processing. We’re prepared to  vote for it, we’ve brought Nauru to the table. I’d like to see what the  Opposition is going to bring to the table in the spirit of genuine compromise.  But I hope we can sort this out in good faith this afternoon. The Australian  people have been waiting for us to do it.

GRANT: Yeah.

BOWEN: We’re ready to do it. Let’s talk turkey and get it sorted.

GRANT: You and Mr Morrison are the main ministers involved here. Why  Kevin Rudd and Julie Bishop?

BOWEN: Oh, look, to be frank, this was the Opposition’s suggestion. They  said they see some foreign policy implications here, relations with our region.  In the spirit of good faith, we’ve agreed to that, Kevin’s happy to come to the  meeting and be part of the conversation. But as you say, Mr Morrison and I  are the key immigration spokespeople dealing with immigration matters, but if  they suggest that there’s some foreign policy implications we’re happy to  accommodate that.

GRANT: TPVs, I think Wayne Swan ruled that out in his letter. That’s just not  negotiable, not going to happen?



BOWEN: Well, look, we don’t support TPVs. When they were introduced last  time we actually saw the number of people coming to Australia go up. The  Liberal Party spreads the myth that they played a role in reducing the number

of people coming to Australia by boat. They didn’t, because what it meant  was that there was no family reunion, so people came to Australia by boat  and then, you know, rang their wives and family and said, ‘Look, sorry,  they’ve told me I can’t sponsor you so you’re going to have to come by boat  too.’ So we actually saw more people coming. So we don’t think they work.

Now, you know, obviously in a spirit of goodwill, if the Liberal Party’s got  something they want to put to us this afternoon, we’ll listen to it. You know, I  really want to have a good faith negotiation and discussion. But we’ve  brought Nauru to the table, that’s a pretty big thing to bring to the table. So I  want to see what the Liberal Party is coming to the table with this afternoon.

GRANT: I’ve spoken to Scott Morrison a couple of times, Chris, and the thing  he says to me which, I don’t know, it just seems to grab the attention, it is  numbers, but they left four in detention and now four years into the life of the  ALP Government there’s been as many as 5,000 or 6,000 in detention. And  the idea, then, that what they did before worked seems to resonate.



BOWEN: Yeah, look, it’s a simple mantra for them and I understand why  they say that. Now, go through the history here. I mean, they did a number  of things: they introduced TPVs in 1999; boats kept coming. They opened

Nauru; boats kept coming. Now, the thing about Nauru was under the  Howard Government they said look, ‘If you come to Australia by boat, we’ll  send you to Nauru and you’re not getting to Australia. We’ll resettle you  somewhere else but you can’t come to Australia.’ Then they couldn’t deliver  on that. People who went to Nauru did come to Australia. Ninety-five per cent  of those who were found as refugees either came to Australia or New Zealand  because the Howard Government went to other countries and said, ‘Can you  resettle these people?’ and other countries said, ‘Well, actually, no, they’re  your problem Australia, you’ve got to deal with that not us.’ So the people  smugglers know that, the asylum seekers know that. They know that if you  get sent to Nauru then you wind up in Australia.

Now, we’ve said Malaysia is very, very different to Nauru because under our  agreement with Malaysia, you get taken back to Malaysia and you don’t get  resettled to Australia. You’re just one of the 100,000 asylum seekers in  Malaysia and the UNHCR will refer you to Australia if they think you’re a  compelling case. But you get no advantage out of coming by boat and that’s  the big difference and that’s why we say Malaysia’s the centrepiece of our

policy. They want to do Nauru as well; we’re happy to make that a  complement to Malaysia in the spirit of compromise. But, you know, the  centrepiece of their policy is Nauru, that’s fine. The centrepiece of our policy  is Malaysia.

GRANT: Yeah, well, I don’t know how many commentators you speak to. I  happen to think that’s a pretty solid argument. I think the idea that you go to  Malaysia instead, not Australia, and we bring people from the back of the  queue forward at the front of the queue over here I think is a good way to  go. I hope you get something worked out today. I appreciate your time.



BOWEN: I certainly hope so. I’m certainly giving every bit of energy and  every bit of commitment we can, Luke. We’ll see how we go.

GRANT: Fantastic. Merry Christmas. Thank you.

BOWEN: Same to you.

Ends

