Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison

Shadow Immigration Minister   Scott Morison

Sky News

Interview

Australian Agenda program   31st July 2011





Peter Van Onselen:   Welcome back.  You’re watching Australian Agenda where I’m  joined by editor-at-large from The Australian, Paul Kelly, and we’re joined now by the  Shadow Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison.  Thanks for your company.

Scott Morison:  Good to be here.

Peter Van Onselen:  Let’s just go straight to this so-called Malaysian solution.  Now the  government are saying that this is going to break the people smugglers’ business model.   What’s your response?

Scott Morison:  Well they’ve been the people smugglers’ business model for the last  three years, and what this agreement is is an open admission that those three years of  policy were failed.  I mean they softened the policies.  The boats came, another one  today I notice, and as a result for that three years where they said it was push factors, it  was all these others issues - no, it was their policy, they admitted it.

Peter Van Onselen:  But looking forward, those three years of failure, do you think that  they inhibit the ability to succeed now, or do you think that they’re now on the right track?

Scott Morrison:  I think there are two problems.  The first one is we’re going to live with  the legacy of that policy failure for some period of time.  I mean the chaos in our  detention network is a direct consequence of those failed policies.  The riots, the self-

harm, the abuse of staff working there, that is all the product of all those boats coming,  and it’s costing us over a billion dollars a year, so that’s going to be a legacy for some  time to come.  The second point is they just don’t seem to be consistent in their  approach.  I mean they say that everyone who turned up over the last three months was  going to go to another country; no, sorry, they changed their mind.  They say that  everybody who gets sent to Malaysia cannot end up in Australia; we learn today that’s  also not true.  So the inconsistency of their policy and their approach I think is a real  problem.

Paul Kelly:  But just on this point, of course they’ve changed their policy very  substantially and of course what they’ve said in the past has been inconsistent.  But if  we just focus on the Malaysian deal as such, do you think it will work?

Scott Morrison:  Well time will tell, Paul.  I mean I’ve said that from the day it was  announced almost three months ago.  We’ll see if it does or not, but the issue is this -  it’s a one-off 800 person arrangement.  This deal has a use-by date.  I mean if now more

Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison

than 600 people have arrived since this agreement was announced were all going to  Malaysia, this would be over almost before it began.

Peter Van Onselen:  Your policy has a use-by date as well though.  Nauru does, in the  sense that once it fills, where do they go?

Scott Morrison:  Everyone who would come to Australia illegally by boat would go to  Nauru and they would all be subject to temporary protection visas.

Peter Van Onselen:  What happens when it fills?

Scott Morrison:  Everyone would be subject to-  Well the capacity at Nauru is quite  significant.  You know, there are other options available to us as well.

Paul Kelly:  But surely the point about Nauru is that people who go to Nauru are likely to  end up back in Australia, in fact that’s the most likely result?

Scott Morrison:  Well let’s just go to the facts from last time.  There were 1,637 people  went through the Pacific Solution, 705 of them ended up in Australia, 43%.

Paul Kelly:  A substantial number.

Scott Morrison:  Well it’s not a majority, like the Minister constantly claims.

Peter Van Onselen:  But over 70% ended up in developed world countries like Australia.

Scott Morrison:  They went to New Zealand, as will be the case with the Malaysian  solution.  I mean I don’t know where Chris believes these people are going to end up,  but they can end up in Australia, in Canada, in the United States.

Peter Van Onselen:  The difference is, under the Malaysian solution they go back . . .

Scott Morrison:  . . . They’ll end up in developed countries.

Peter Van Onselen:  But the difference is, under the Malaysian solution they go back into  the UN processing queue, whereas in Nauru they remain Australia’s problem to find  places for them to go.

Scott Morrison:  Well let’s be clear about what Australia’s problem here is.  In Malaysia,  anyone found not be a refugee under this agreement Australia has to get back to their  home country.  Not only do we have to pay for it, we have to arrange it, and not only if  they are rejected as a refugee; they have the opportunity under this arrangement to  apply for protection under our other international conventions.  So this suggestion now,  and you add to that the fact that they can all even end up here as a refugee, I think the  Minister has wiped off a significant part of what he thought was going to be the deterrent.

Paul Kelly:  Would the coalition be at all interested in the sort of bargain that Labor’s  looking at here, that is sending asylum seekers who arrive by boat to another country  such as Malaysia to be processed, in return for taking more refugees offshore?  I mean  are you interested at all in that sort of bargain?

Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison

Scott Morrison:  You’ll remember last time we were here and we discussed this, there  was a speech I gave to the Lowy Institute.

Paul Kelly:  Yes.

Scott Morrison:  In that speech what I was talking about was the UNHCR putting  together a genuine regional solution for central Asia, that Australia, Canada, the United  States, the United Kingdom, other countries could participate in, in which this could be a  feature.  That’s what I was proposing.  I wasn’t proposing a one-off deal with one country  for 800 people.

Paul Kelly:  That proposal of yours was an incredibly ambitious proposal which required  really some sort of international solution.

Scott Morrison:  Well it does.

Paul Kelly:  I mean there’s very little prospect of that happening, is there?

Scott Morrison:  Well that would be a matter for the UNHCR and the other international  agencies that are involved.  But that wasn’t my solution.  What that was was one part of  a broad range of things we’re looking at.  It wasn’t in place of Nauru, it wasn’t in place of  temporary protection visas.  The government has put everything, everything on this  Malaysian agreement.  It’s their only policy, and as we’ve learnt today the cracks are  already starting to emerge and the thing’s not even a week old, and we’ve had another  boat arrive.

Peter Van Onselen:  But in that speech to the Lowy Institute you also talked about Iran  and Pakistan as possible places where a processing centre, like what is essentially  happening in Malaysia, could happen.  Now human rights abuses in those countries are  worse than they are in Malaysia.

Scott Morrison:  There are 2.4 million Afghan refugees living in Pakistan and Iran.  In  fact, the vast majority of Afghans it would seem that have come to Australia haven’t  come out of Afghanistan, they’ve in fact come out of Pakistan and Iran.

Peter Van Onselen:  Sure, but you gave the government a good kick over the human  rights concerns over Malaysia . . .

Scott Morrison:  . . . Yes, but this is the difference . . .

Peter Van Onselen:  . . . But Iran and Pakistan, surely there’s issues?

Scott Morrison:  What’s happening in Malaysia are people going back into the  community, and as you know I’ve been there, and they are the most vulnerable people  I’ve ever met.  There is no legal framework for protection for refugees and asylum  seekers living in Malaysia.  Why?  Because they’re not signatories to the convention.   Now Iran by the way is a signatory to the convention.  I’m not going to put too much  stock in that.  But what I was proposing was a regional solution, an actual regional  solution that involved more than two countries, an arrangement to be put in place where  people would be in a particular facility, not just sort of roaming, fending for themselves  around the countryside in Malaysia, where there’s one clinic to deal with 94,000 people

Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison

funded by the UNHCR.  So that arrangement I think is completely different to what is  suggested here.  The agreement I was suggesting was a multilateral arrangement, a lot  like we saw with the Indochinese refugee crisis back in the ‘80s, which would be actually  brokered, run, driven by the UNHCR, not by a panicked, desperate government here in  Australia trying to find a political fix.

Peter Van Onselen:  But you did jump the gun though in some of your criticism when you  were in Malaysia, didn’t you?  I mean you talked about that they would be in detention,  that there would be no work rights and that there’d be no education.  There are work  rights and there are educational opportunities.

Scott Morrison:  I can only go on what was the position at the time when a Malaysian  official spoke to me.  I never said they would necessarily go in detention; the Minister  has made that claim.  What I said is that when I asked the Minister in parliament ‘will  they go to this facility that was reported in the Daily Telegraph?’ he refused to answer.   So I went to Malaysia, I asked around, and there was a general view that the facility I  visited may be it in that video which was taken by the Daily Telegraph.  I said ‘this may  be it?’  I said ‘this could be the facility’.  Now I’m glad the Minister cleaned that up,  because it was a simple question - all he had to do was say yes or no.  But that’s the  secrecy and the lack of being upfront with the Australian people we’ve seen from this  arrangement all the way along, and particularly this pledge they made that everyone who  turned up from the signing of the deal and from the announcement of the deal, they’d all  go offshore.  Now none of those are going offshore, they knew that.  I mean to suggest  things have changed in Papua New Guinea, well if they really didn’t understand the  situation in Papua New Guinea three months ago, then heaven help us.

Paul Kelly:  If we look at the figures, there’s clearly been a significant reduction in the  number of boat arrivals, as the Minister said, over the last several months.  What do you  think are the factors behind that?

Scott Morrison:  Well let’s put it in perspective.  2011 versus 2009, actually 2011 is  ahead of 2009 on arrivals.  2010 was a record year and if the government wants to  adopt that as their benchmark of success, well good luck to them.  This year, pretty  much since the terrible tragedy of the SIEV 221 and a very bad monsoon summer, the  arrivals this year have been slower than last year.  There’s also been the riots in  detention centres here in Australia, which received a lot of coverage I think throughout  the region.  People have been spending longer in detention.  Now the Minister, I note,  didn’t claim the success of his policy in relation to these matters.  There are a range of  factors operating here . . .

Paul Kelly:  . . . But he did say that . . .

Scott Morrison:  . . . But the point is, Paul, we’ve still got one boat a week with over 50  people on each boat from the day this agreement was first announced.

Peter Van Onselen:  Let me jump in here, because we do have a couple of graphics that  I just wanted to show you.  We’ll bring them up on screen.  The first one is comparing  arrivals over the 82 days since the announcement came in of the solution.  We’ll just  bring that up and it’s got after Nauru was announced, back in the days of the Howard  government, there were 1,789 arrivals in the 82 days following the announcement.  Now  in the 82 days since Minister Bowen announced the Malaysian solution . . .

Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison



Scott Morrison:  . . . Which included the Tampa by the way.

Peter Van Onselen:  Sure, but nonetheless . . .

Scott Morrison:  . . . Which is when we announced the solution, so-

Peter Van Onselen:  When Nauru was announced as an option, that’s the number there,  1,789.  Now in the 82 days since Malaysia has come up we’ve had 570.  That’s graph  number one.  The next graph-

Scott Morrison:  You’ve got to update that, because we had another one today.

Peter Van Onselen:  That’s true.  We’ll have to up it by another 54.  But in the-

Scott Morrison:  You better keep ready to update the graphs fairly regularly, perhaps.

Peter Van Onselen:  I’ll bring them back, but here’s the next one.  This is the graphic  comparing this time last year, same period of 82 days, to this year, and you can see that  it was 1,602.  You say it’s not much of a benchmark; mind you, last year was a very high  year on arrivals.  That’s what it was, that’s what it’s been since Malaysia was  announced.  So you have to acknowledge that the cap is a continuing concern for the  government obviously, what happens when they hit it.  But on that graph you can see  that this has clearly had a big impact.

Scott Morrison:  No, I don’t concede that, because if you go back to 2009, as I said, the  arrivals in 2011 are higher than in 2009.  Now 2009 was a year we had over 50 boats.  I  think we had 61 in total and that was significantly up on the record of the Howard  government.  I’ll say this.  Over six years we had about 300 people turn up, 300 people  turn up.  When the government can claim that sort of success on their policy, well I’m  happy to hear them make that debate.  I haven’t said that this won’t work, I haven’t said  it will work - I’ve said let’s wait and see what happens.  But the point we’ve always made  is this policy of Malaysia has not been necessary, because we believe our alternative  policy could be taken up, and it hasn’t been taken up for no other reason than stubborn  political pride.

Paul Kelly:  But if we look at the graph, the graph does show a significant fall away.  The  Minister says he believes part of this is the announcement effect of Malaysia.  I mean  surely there’s some sort of logic behind that?

Scott Morrison:  I’ll let him argue that, Paul.  But since this agreement has been  announced we’ve had a boat a week, with over 50 people on every boat.  Now if that’s  his measure of success, if that’s what he’d like to see continue, well I’ll let him explain  that to the Australian people.

Peter Van Onselen:  Let’s just look at Nauru as an alternative policy.  This is the  opposition’s policy.  What happens when Nauru fills or if Nauru fills?  If you’re in  government and the boats keep coming, we’ve had the one time trick, as I’ve referred to  it, of being able to use Nauru to stop the boats, but that PR message is being destroyed,  admittedly by Labor by undoing it.  Having undone it, how does it work a second time?

Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison

Scott Morrison:  Well you’re making a lot of assumptions there, Peter.  You can take at  Nauru at least 2,000 if not 2,500 people at Nauru.  So I’m not troubled, I’m not worried  about hitting the head on the ceiling here in terms of the capacity of Nauru.  I think the  government should be worried, because they have an agreement for just 800, and in the  12 weeks since they announced that agreement more than 600 people have turned up.   So I think it’s the government who has the capacity problems and the use-by date  problems with their own policy.  I don’t have those concerns about our policy.

Peter Van Onselen:  Will journalists get access to Nauru?  The Minister was saying that  during the Howard years that was fairly limited.  Will it be better if you’re elected?

Scott Morrison:  Well that is one of the things that the Foreign Minister, Kieren Keke,  said would happen this time around.  I mean to assume that we would run Nauru the  same way it was run ten years ago I think would be a mistake.  Many lessons were  learnt over that period of time.  One of the key lessons that happened during the  operation of Nauru was to move to an open facility, and that is that people could move  around and there would only be a night-time curfew and where people would go back to  have their meal and where they’d reside, but they could move freely around.  Now that  was a very successful policy, and that is something we would do again.  Now I notice  that the government I don’t think has been able to get that same agreement out of  Manus and out of PNG, and that’s why I think actually Nauru provides a very good  option.

Paul Kelly:  After people are sent back to Malaysia, to what extent will the coalition focus  on their conditions in Malaysia, their employment, their educational situation, and  campaign against the government in terms of those conditions?

Scott Morrison:  Well I’ve been no stranger of holding the government to account, Paul.   I think people agree with that, and I’ll continue to seek to do that with the resources that  we have available to us, because there are some serious issues here.  I mean the claim  has been made that they have access to health and education - that’s an absolute joke.   The schools that they will be allowed to go to are volunteer one refugee schools, where  teachers are trained by the UNHCR for ten days!  I mean that’s the Prime Minister’s view  about the education they should get.  As I said, there’s 94,000 people there and one  health clinic sponsored by the UNHCR.  There is one mental health counsellor.  I mean  people spend five years there for a starter, five years.  I mean that’s the starting time, not  the end time.  I mean you asked the question of the Minister before - that’s how long,  and longer, they will spend.

Paul Kelly:  Okay, if we look at the politics of this, the really interesting thing about the  politics is that you are attacking Labor on the grounds of its brutality towards asylum  seekers being sent to Malaysia; that is you’re saying that this is unacceptable, the  conditions are unacceptable, the coalition won’t tolerate that.  Now in terms of this whole  debate about asylum seekers over many years, the coalition has always had the brand  of being tough on the boats, of having the toughest policy.  But essentially now you’re  reversing that, you’re attacking Labor from a different direction.  Does that tarnish your  brand of being tough on the boats, do you think?

Scott Morrison:  No, because our policy, Paul, has always been consistent.  That has I  think been our trademark of policy in this area.  We mean what we say, we say what we  mean.  We don’t change our view along the way, we don’t flip and flop as this

Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison

government has, we don’t say that people will be sent to another country and then  change our mind when, you know, they work out that that could never have happened.   Our position has always been consistent.  We don’t believe detention is a prison.  We  don’t believe that people that come by boat should be punished, but we don’t think they  should be rewarded, and there is a key distinction here.  So our policy position has  always been consistent, and so we haven’t changed our view at all.  So if the  government wants to embrace the unthinkable in Malaysia because of its anything but  Nauru plan, which is purely, desperately politically driven, well that’s their choice, and

they’ll be held to account for that.  The guarantees and the protections the Minister  claimed to have put in place, well I think they’ll be shown up for what they are.

Paul Kelly:  But there’s a big risk for you in this, isn’t there?  Because you’ve attacked  this Malaysian deal very, very strongly.  Where are you going to be if it works?

Scott Morrison:  Well we have campaigned for three years for the government to change  its policy to stop the boats.  Now we’ve been successful.  The government has finally  agreed with us that their soft approach after the 2007 election was the wrong decision.   So effectively I can say today, I mean the government has finally woken up.

Paul Kelly:  So you claim credit?

Scott Morrison:  Well they wouldn’t have changed their policy, Paul, I can guarantee you,  if the coalition hadn’t hounded them over this for three years.

Paul Kelly:  So if the policy works, you’ll be claiming credit?

Scott Morrison:  We think the policy they should be pursuing is the policies we’ve  advocated.  They’ve chosen to go down a different path, but I think quite clearly we can  claim that the arguments we’ve presented over three years have been found to be true.   The government has agreed they need to change their policy, they got it wrong.

Peter Van Onselen:  Tony Abbott has said that they won’t succeed.  He’s been very  strong in his rhetoric about boat arrivals.  Let’s just have a listen to something he had to  say.

Tony Abbott:  The coalition has been consistent all along, building on the record of the  Howard government, which found a problem and created a solution.  Julia Gillard and  Kevin Rudd weren’t man enough to leave well enough alone.  They changed the policy.   They gave the people smugglers a product to sell, they put the people smugglers back  into business.  We’ve had a small armada of boats come our way since then.  Now she’s  desperate for a pre-election fix, which she will never deliver on if she’s re-elected.

Peter Van Onselen:  In this spirit of consistency, do you think it’s an armada of boats that  are coming?  And do you think that she’ll never deliver on it now that they’ve signed this  deal?

Scott Morrison:  I’ve addressed that question twice before, Peter!  So I’ll refer to my  previous answers on the first part.

Peter Van Onselen:  You never say on the first part that it’s an armada of boats though.

Australian Agenda 31st July 2011 Scott Morrison

Scott Morrison:  Look, we all use our different phrases to describe the situation.  But on  the second issue, I maintain what I’ve always said on this, and that is we’ll see what  happens.  But the truth is, the government would never have changed its policy had it  not been forced to do so.

Peter Van Onselen:  Another issue on consistency, we had the Shadow Justice Minister  Michael Keenan here, and he said that temporary protection visas could essentially be  indefinite.  Is that your view, that people could come to Australia after having been in  Nauru for example and be on TPVs for the term of their natural life?

Scott Morrison:  Our policy as we took to the last election is there is no guarantee of a  permanent visa.

Peter Van Onselen:  But is that really appropriate that you can have somebody  potentially be on a TPV in this country for 10, 20, 30 years, have children here, set up a  life, and there’s always the risk that they get sent back to another country?

Scott Morrison:  You’re making the assumption that that’s how long they would be here  and that they wouldn’t be in a position after being here for a number of years to return to  their own home country because it’s safe, because they’re no longer a refugee.

Paul Kelly:  To what extent is the coalition prepared to accept an increase in the offshore  refugee intake?

Scott Morrison:  That’s a good question, and I think it’s one that hasn’t had a lot of focus  in this debate, and Chris and I do have different views on this.  Settling 13,750 people is  a tough job and we’ve got to get it right.  If we fail to settle those people properly in this  country and enable them to make a great contribution, as so many refugees have in this  country, then we create problems.  It is a tough job, and we don’t think expanding that  program is the way to make the job of settling the current 13,750 any easier.  It costs  more for a start, and with a government with a budget in crisis in a massive deficit to go  and spend more in this . . .

Paul Kelly:  . . . So you oppose the expansion of the program?

Scott Morrison:  Yes.  We have not supported the expansion of the program because we  believe 13,750 was a fair and reasonable number.  It’s the highest per capita  resettlement program in the world, and if the government wanted to take more refugees  out of Malaysia they could do so within the existing program.  Let me just say this, 4,000  over four years is what this government has agreed to.  Now this year just finished, I  understand we would have taken just under 500.  So what we’re really talking about here  is not 4,000 extra out of Malaysia, it’s probably just about 2,000 and a bit over those four  years.

Peter Van Onselen:  Alright, Scott Morrison, Shadow Immigration Minister, we  appreciate you joining us on this special edition of Australian Agenda looking at the  Malaysian solution, so-called.  Thanks for your company.

Scott Morrison:  Thanks, Peter.  Thanks, Paul.

