







PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  AUCKLAND  6 SEPTEMBER 2011



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Pacific Islands Forum; Nauru; Polls

If I can just say a few words and then I’m happy to take a few questions.

I’ve just arrived in Auckland. I’m here for the Pacific Islands Forum.   This is the 40th year of the Forum. We’ve always been a strong supporter and the  Forum continues to have a contemporary meaning and relevance.

I’m looking forward to the discussions over the next few days. There will be a  range of issues raised, but I will be particularly focussing on four areas.

First, on the question of economic growth and jobs and education, as I say in  Australia when I’m back home, having a decent life starts with the opportunity to  get a great education and to get a job. The same is true in our region, so I will be  particularly focussed on education and skills, on labour mobility, on trade and the  power of trade to improve job opportunities, and on the question of remittances:  the ability of people who are working in another country to send money back  home in a cost-effective way.

Second, I will be focussed on the questions of development aid. A quarter of  Australia’s aid goes to the Pacific region, and around half of the aid of most of the  region flows from Australia. We have the Cairns Compact, and we will continue  to work on that because we want to strengthen the effectiveness of our aid in the  region.

Third, I’m intending to focus on climate change. This is a meeting that brings  together some nations that are most at risk from climate change: they are small,  they are low-lying, and most at risk from rising sea levels.

Fourth and finally, I will be talking to the nations participating in this forum so that  I can reflect their voice when I go to the G20 and to other meetings around the  world.

So, they are my objectives for the Pacific Islands Forum.

Can I say, too, I’m very pleased to be back here in New Zealand, and I’m looking  forward to seeing Prime Minister John Key, and to his chairing and leadership of  this important event.

This has been a year in which Australia and New Zealand have been brought  and bonded incredibly closely together. We are always family for each other, but  that family relationship has clearly been shown this year as we have stood by  each other in times of trouble - for us, our summer of natural disasters with floods  and cyclone; for our friends in New Zealand the shock of Christchurch.

This is my third visit to New Zealand this year, which I think shows the strength of  the bond that is always between us, but has been particularly on display during  the course of this year.

I’m happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you plan to speak to the Nauruan president  about us building an asylum seeker there, and asylum seeker centre there?

PM: I’m here for the Pacific Islands Forum and I’ve just outlined my objectives in  relation to that Forum. I’m not intending to raise the issue of people-smuggling.  Obviously, if leaders want to raise the issue with me, then I will discuss it with  them, but it is premature for me to be pursuing that agenda here at this Forum,  given the High Court case of last week and that the Government is still preparing  its response.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you disappointed that today’s poll shows that  less than a quarter of Australians are happy with the job you’re doing as Prime  Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: I don’t do this job as Prime Minister because I want to see it  reflected in opinion polls. I do this job as Prime Minister because I want to do  what’s right for the nation’s future: that’s a focus on jobs, a focus on opportunity,  and a focus on making sure that no-one gets left behind. That’s what’s driving me  and I’ll continue to do it.

JOURNALIST: But you can’t keep ignoring the polls, can you, Prime Minister?

PM: Well, democracy isn’t about looking at fortnightly opinion polls - it’s about  making the decisions that give people opportunities and prosperity today: things

like getting a job or getting an apprenticeship, and the benefits of opportunity and  prosperity tomorrow and making sure that we are organising our nation so we  aren’t seeing people and regions left behind.

And I do, as Prime Minister, particularly understand at this phase of our  economic growth and development, that there are many Australians who feel that  they are at risk of being left behind, or the industry that they work in is at risk of  being left behind, or their region is at risk of being left behind.

Managing our economy so we see growth and opportunity and jobs right around  the nation is what I’m pursuing and what I’m focussed on.

JOURNALIST: Can you admit that you’re a little bit disappointed, or are you  happy with the way you’re polling?

PM: What I judge myself by is making sure that we are achieving the vision for  our nation’s future that I aspire to. People will judge that at the 2013 election.  That’s their democratic right, and they’ll go in to polling places then and cast their  votes.

For the time in between I will be continuing to strive to realise that vision of the  nation’s future. I came into politics driven by a vision of opportunity for all. It starts  with a great education; it must include having the ability to get a job. That’s  what’s driving me.

Thank you very much.

[ENDS]





