CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

Wednesday, 7 September 2011



SUBJECTS: High Court decision, asylum seeker processing, Opposition  briefing.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, Cabinet met two nights ago. Has it made up  its mind yet on the way ahead for boat arrivals to Australia?

CHRIS BOWEN: Well, obviously, we’re making progress in working through the  issues methodically. Last week, the High Court’s judgement was a paradigm shift  in refugee law, a major shift in the understanding of the 2001 changes, and as

appropriate, given the size of that change, that we take our time to make sure  we get our response right, and that’s exactly what we’re doing.

BE NSON: Is your policy - there’s a lack of policy at the moment, a bit of a  vacuum - but is it clear that the way ahead in the minds of the Government is  offshore detention?

BOWEN: Well, look, we’ve been working very hard over the last 12 months to  get a regional framework up with offshore processing as part of that. I think  offshore processing, when it is part of a regional framework, when it is part of a  holistic response, when it is part of Australia playing more of a role in helping  regional neighbours in settling more refugees in Australia, can play an important

role in providing that disincentive for people to make the boat journey. In and of  itself, offshore processing is not a deterrent. But offshore processing as part of a  broader framework is an important part of what we’ve been trying to do.

BENSON: Julia Gillard, the Prime Minister, is in New Zealand now discussing  regional issues with Pacific region leaders. She set out her priorities and the  issue of asylum seekers is not one of those priorities. Why is that?

BOWEN: Well, look, very clearly, Marius, we have a legal situation in Australia. I  mean, we have a Memorandum of Understanding with New Guinea, for example,  which we’ve had to put on hold because clearly under the High Court judgement

offshore processing in New Guinea would be held to be invalid.

So we’ve had to work through the results of that High Court judgement: not only  is Malaysia held to be invalid, but clearly New Guinea would be and there are five  barristers who say that Nauru - five senior barristers: Queen’s Counsel, Senior  Counsel - who say that Nauru is very severely impacted upon by the High  Court’s judgement. So it’s appropriate that we step back and we settle the legal  position before engaging in further discussions with other countries.

BENSON: Tony Abbott says the Opposition is prepared to work with you to  ensure offshore detention does have a legal basis. He’s being briefed today on  the Government’s position on offshore detention and bureaucrats are giving him  the information on that issue?

BOWEN: That’s correct. Mr Abbott said two days ago that he was prepared to  work with the Government and he was prepared to leave all options on the table.  If that’s still his position, then this briefing will be very important to him. It’s  important that he has the same advice, the same expert advice that we receive,  and that’s the fair and reasonable thing that we’ve offered him, because the  Liberal Party has to reflect on the High Court’s judgement just as much as the  Government.

We need to determine a way forward and the advice to us is very clear that  offshore processing needs to be part of a regional framework, that offshore  processing in and of itself doesn’t provide the deterrent that’s necessary, and so  all that information would be made available to Mr Abbott today, which we think  is the reasonable and appropriate thing to do.

BENSON: Do you feel comfortable with this new bipartisan approach on this  issue, because Tony Abbott specifically on this issue and more generally has  depicted you as bunglers and no-hopers, and on this issue of asylum seekers, he  says your Government is dying of shame; now he is saying, ‘We can work  together’?

BOWEN: Well, look, Mr Abbott’s rhetoric is a matter for him, but the fact of the  matter is the High Court changed the law last week; it’s had ramifications for  Government policy, it has ramifications for Opposition policy. And clearly the  Parliament expressed a view in a bipartisan way in 2001; now that the High  Court has reinterpreted that view we need to then both reflect and I think it’s  appropriate that we make that advice available to him.

BENSON: Just to clarify again, you say all options are on the table: that includes  Nauru, temporary protection visas?

BOWEN: Well, look, as I said, it is appropriate we go back in light of the High

Court decision and we all reflect on our policy. Now, Nauru in and of itself, as  I’ve said, in my view is not an appropriate deterrent, and I stand by what I’ve  said about temporary protection visas in the past as well, but -

BENSON: Then can I clarify, despite your opposition in the past, are you saying  they are now an option?

BOWEN: Well, look, as I’ve said, Marius, it’s time, it’s appropriate we all step  back, we all review all the policy options. Do I think temporary protection visas  provide the appropriate deterrent in the appropriate way? No, I don’t, but we are  stepping back and allowing all options to be on the table for a proper discussion  at the Cabinet, at the party level, and Mr Abbott should be in the position where  he can do the same thing.

BENSON: What happens with the next boat arrival now; what’s the policy?

BOWEN: Well, the policy at the moment, given the change in the legal situation  from last week, is that people would be processed in Australia while we work  these issues through.



BENSON: Chris Bowen, many thanks.

BOWEN: Thanks, Marius.

Ends





