



Meet the Press - Channel Ten - With Hugh Riminton, Lauren Wilson and Dylan  Welch

11 September 2011

Subject: National Security, Asylum Seekers, High Court, September 11  Anniversary, George Brandis, Same Sex Marriage, Labor Party.

HUGH RIMINTON: Now, welcome to the program, Robert McClelland. Good  morning Attorney-General.

ROBERT MCCLELLAND: Good morning.

RIMINTON: You’ve got a cabinet meeting on tomorrow; you are the first law officer of  the land; do you have a solution in your back pocket to offer them?

MCCLELLAND: Well, these things have to be debated clearly and obviously Cabinet  will consider a possible legislative amendment to the Migration Act and, clearly, we  have advice and we’ll be giving advice to Cabinet on those and other options- no  question about that. And then after Cabinet decides on the course of action, it will go

to Caucus shortly thereafter for a decision to be made. But there’s certainly options  available.

RIMINTON: So, you say ‘options’ in the plural…

MCCLELLAND: Well, there are varying drafting techniques as to how this can be  framed. But in terms of the various outcomes, I think they’ve been out there publicly  as to whether it is drafted to encompass three particular sites. Whether it’s one  particular site or, indeed, a broader discretion to administer- they’re essentially the  drafting options.

RIMINTON: But you expect then an answer through Cabinet tomorrow- that this will  be a decision that you will get out tomorrow?

MCCLELLAND: I expect so. Obviously there will be an agenda item but I expect  there’ll be a Cabinet decision and subsequently a Caucus decision. There’ll be  debate as there always is on issues of significance- and that’ll be the case here.

RIMINTON: So, if you have a Caucus after the Cabinet, is Caucus given, effectively  a fait accompli? “This is what we’ve come up with. You can debate it, but that’s what  it is.”

MCCLELLAND: I think the ALP Caucus, over the years, has shown it will never  accept a fait accompli. Obviously Caucus is influenced by whatever the Cabinet  decision is, but that doesn’t stop them debating or, indeed, determining the issues.  So that’s part of the history of the Labor Party. That- you can never take for granted  Caucus in the Labor Party and nor should you.

RIMINTON: I’m sure you’ve been looking at this pretty closely. Is there a single set of  words that you can use in legislation to amend the Migration Act that would cover  potentially both Malaysia and Nauru, or any other off-shore options?

MCCLELLAND: There Ares various options and certainly there’s words that are  appropriate in each instance and, ultimately, after the Cabinet decision is made it’ll  go to the parliamentary drafters for even more detail work. But there’s clearly various  sets of words that you can use in each instance.

RIMINTON: And reactivating Malaysia is plainly the intent?

MCCLELLAND: Well, again, it’s not my call- I mean it’s Minister Bowen’s call. But  clearly that is going to be very much part of the focus of debate in Cabinet and  Caucus.

RIMINTON: Why is that? Why Malaysia?

MCCLELLAND: Well, there’s been reports of briefings given by the Immigration  Department and I wasn’t a party to those, but essentially it’s about trying to destroy  the people smugglers’ model. So that essentially you take away their market. What’s  the point of paying a people smuggler if you actually go back to the end of the  queue, so to speak?

RIMINTON: And Nauru doesn’t work in your view?

MCCLELLAND: The problem with Nauru is that it’s not all the different from what  happens on Christmas Island. Christmas Island is, albeit it’s Australian territory, but it  is an offshore territory. Nauru is a different country but essentially it is the same sort  of processing system. And, if you look at the figures, most people processed on  Nauru ended up coming to Australia or New Zealand.

RIMINTON: So, if you can get this legislative amendment through Cabinet, through  Caucus and then on, you still have the political issue. You’ve got the Greens saying  they’ll only back onshore processing. You’ve had clear statements from Tony Abbott  saying that Malaysia’s no good- he’ll only support Nauru.  Now, between the two of them, they own the Senate. So, are we in danger of having  a sustained political stalemate in getting any legislative changes through? And in the  interim, flotillas of boats are arriving with children or possibly not arriving, possibly  sinking.

MCCLELLAND: Well, it’s a feature of minority government that you’ve always got to  negotiate for your legislation. But, equally, we’ve had quite a good track record of  getting that through. Clearly there’ll be work to be done; there’ll be negotiations to be  had. Depending on the outcomes-

RIMINTON: But this is unique really, isn’t it? Because you have been getting  legislation through. But this is one where the Greens and the Coalition, for different  reasons, are trenchantly opposing your preferred option.

MCCLELLAND: Well, again, I’d just want to stress that the option has to be  determined through those processes. But it’s a matter of working through those  issues, a matter of working through the merits. At the end of the day, it’s a question  as to whether everyone involved wants to address people smuggling or they want to  score political points. That’s the straight out discussion.

RIMINTON: Did the High Court get it wrong?

MCCLELLAND: Look, my job isn’t to second guess the High Court’s reasoning. We  think, certainly we prefer one of the judge’s reasoning that traced the authority that  we relied on, or our legal advisors relied on, to advise the Government. Having said  that, the High Court, essentially said that the legislation passed by Philip Ruddock  had to be construed consistently with our international obligations. So, that’s an  analysis-

RIMINTON: So, was the Prime Minister wrong to criticise the court decision?

MCCLELLAND: Well I think that criticising the reasoning of a judge is always fair  game. And she made a point and she’s absolutely right. She did not criticise the  judges personally- didn’t challenge their motives, their competence-

RIMINTON: So, that’s the threshold that would require you as the first law officer to  in and defence the judges who can’t speak for themselves is that they have to be  criticised personally before you would stand up and defend them?

MCCLELLAND: Criticising judicial reasoning is always fair game in our system. What  is inappropriate is any criticism- and it wasn’t made- of the judges personally or their  motives. That’s my role to ensure that line, that barrier is maintained.

RIMINTON: Okay, we’re going to take a break. When we return with the panel, the  lessons of 9/11.

[Advertisement break]

RIMINTON: Welcome back. This is Meet the Press. Our guest is the Attorney-General Robert McClelland and welcome now the panel- Lauren Wilson from The  Australian and Dylan Welch from The Age. Good morning to both of you.

LAUREN WILSON: Good morning.

DYLAN WELCH: Good morning.

RIMINTON: Now, US intelligence agencies remain on high alert over the potential Al  Qaeda anniversary attack everyone’s been talking about. President Obama says  though, terrorism will never win.

PRESIDENT OBAMA: There should be no doubt, today America is stronger and Al  Qaeda is on the path to defeat.

WILSON: Ten years on from September 11, what’s your understanding of the risk  profile of aspiring attackers? Is Australia more at risk of a 9/11 style attack where you  see insurgent flying in from overseas in the days or months before an attack? Or is it  a threat of home grown terrorism?

MCCLELLAND: You can’t discount either possibility but, I mean, if you look at the  history, there’s been four terrorist attacks foiled in Australia, thirty-eight people  charged with some cases before the courts. But twenty-one of those, I think the  number is, were born in Australia. So, if you’re looking at the history, the major threat  in Australia has been from the so-called ‘home grown’ potential terrorists.

WILSON: US Authorities are responding to a credible and specific terror threat in  Washington and New York at the moment. Do you have any intelligence to suggest  that Australia is at higher state of risk on this anniversary?

MCCLELLAND: No. Our alert level remains at medium- which means that a terrorist  attack is certainly feasible. But if we have evidence of a specific attack, we would  then raise the alert level higher and that hasn’t occurred- it hasn’t occurred since the  September 11 attacks.  But certainly, a terrorist attack is feasible in Australia but there’s no specific  intelligence of an intended one at the current time.

WELCH: Has there been any intelligence that has, perhaps, raised your eyebrows  recently?

MCCLELLAND: I’m responsible for signing the warrant process and every time I sign  these warrants, the material in them does raise my concern. It’s obviously material  that isn’t made public. I should stress, however, that the scope and the focus of the  investigation is a very, very narrow group of people. But, nonetheless, they are a  group would be intent on harming their fellow citizens.

WELCH: In 2008, the then Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, delivered a national security  statement- our first. He promised that the government would deliver subsequent  iterations of the document every twelve months. Since then, almost three years on  and we’ve heard nothing. Why is that?

MCCLELLAND: No, there will be a national security statement updating that. The  statement was important. We’ve had the counter-terrorism whitepaper that has been  issued as part of that process. But certainly we will be providing a national security  statement and some work is being done on that. As well, we’re generally and  constantly drawing together and auditing the interaction between the agencies.

WELCH: In the same period, in that same period, 2008 to now, the UK has published  to national security strategies- whitepapers in effect but much more formal than a  statement. Australia, ten years on from September 11, still does not have an over-arching formal document. The academic world, senior national security bureaucrats-

they all think that’s needed. It seems that the only people uninterested in a national  security is the political clerks- why is that?

MCCLELLAND: Look, we’ve looked at the overseas experience. We’ve looked  specifically at the British as to whether we would benefit from a national security  strategy or whether that would be too restrictive. We have taken the approach of  looking at the broader national security statements. It’s not our current intention to go  for an overall national security strategy. The real risk is you’ve got a national security  statements, you’ve got counter-terrorism plans and then you’re looking at a national  security strategy- what document prevails can create its own confusion. So, for that  reason, we’ve decided not to create a third document if you like.

WILSON: We continue to hear about Afghanistan, Pakistan and Somalia and Yemen  as key terrorist hot spots, but isn’t it the case that the greatest threat to Australian  remains Indonesia?

MCCLELLAND: Look, having said that, Indonesia has done some terrific work and  we work with them as partners. They’ve apprehended probably more terrorists than  any other country in the world. But having said that, there is no doubt that we need to  work with Indonesia to monitor those who are active in Indonesia and the contact

they have in Australia. There is no question that is required and is done. We have  very close relations, both with Federal Police and also our security agencies.

WILSON: Have we underestimated the threat though?

MCCLELLAND: Well, I don’t think so. There’s a lot of resources going into it and we  constantly evaluate that.

RIMINTON: Can I take you to another matter? Craig Thomson- George Brandis has,  for the second time, asked for the police to investigate not only Thomson but the  Health Services Union. He’s completely within his rights to make those requests of  police, is he not?

MCCLELLAND: Any citizen can refer any alleged breach of the law to the police.  Indeed, I’ve done it on many occasions as Attorney-General. In truth, my role as an  officer of the Commonwealth doesn’t give me any greater status to do that. So that  can be done.

I don’t think the police regard it as helpful, however, when politician comment on the  merits of the matters. I think once it’s referred, I think the police have to judge  things…

RIMINTON: So all that non-sense about separation of powers, of being some terrible  breach about him raising these matters that we’ve heard previously, that’s a lot of  politicking isn’t it?

MCCLELLAND: Well I think politicians should bear in mind they’re not prosecutors  and they should avoid crossing that line. And, indeed, I don’t think the police  appreciate when politicians seek to try and encourage or induce them to take a  particular course of action. It’d could potentially, affect the public’s confidence in the

independent role of prosecutors and the police. It’s a matter of propriety and that’s as  high as I’ll put it.

RIMINTON: Now, same sex marriage- if I can get you on another issue. We’ve got  the ALP conference coming up later this year- this is going to be a big issue there.  You’re position on this in past has been very much not one for reform; what position  will you take in this?

MCCLELLAND: Well, the Marriage Act’s within my portfolio.  Obviously I’ll listen to  the debate on it, but can I say that, as part of the reforms that we introduced- the  eighty-four amendments or the amendments to eighty-four pieces of legislation, I  was involved in intricate discussions with all sides of the equation. I, by and large,  drew parties together and I drew them together on the basis that was the end of the  line and the government supported marriage- the definition as being between a man  and a woman- and I have to be true to myself and the negotiations that I had…

RIMINTON: So it would be a betrayal to the system, in your view, if Labor was now  to try and push through a marriage amendment- an amendment to the Marriage Act?

MCCLELLAND: At a personal level, when I was in the discussions and I brought  together- I think- a broad consensus of the community to support those  amendments, I did so on the basis that my stated intention, the government didn’t  intend to amend the Marriage Act. So, I have to acknowledge those negotiations I’ve  had and I have to be true to the position I took in those negotiations.

RIMINTON: Quick question, will Kevin Rudd ever again be Prime Minister of  Australia?

MCCLELLAND: Well, in terms of the Labor Party, Julia Gillard is the leader of the  party and she will remain as so. There’s no question about that- I think that anything  else is media gossip. But she is clearly the very strongly supported Prime Minster.

WELCH: But certainly Mister Rudd thinks he has a chance, doesn’t he?

MCCLELLAND: I haven’t spoken to Kevin. Kevin can have his view but, from the  Party’s point of view, we’re firmly behind Julia Gillard.

RIMINTON: Okay, thank you for being with us. The Attorney-General, Robert  McClelland.

MCCLELLAND: Thank you.



