CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS, SKY NEWS PM AGENDA

MONDAY, 19 DECEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Indonesian boat tragedy, offshore processing, Prime  Minister Gillard, NSW Coronial Inquest.

DAVID SPEERS: Joining us now is the Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen.  Minister, thanks for your time. First can I ask what is the latest information  you have on the search operation?

CHRIS BOWEN: Well, the search operation’s ongoing, David, as you said.  We’re advised by the Indonesian authorities that 33 people have been  rescued. The weather conditions are very severe. It is not just Indonesian  authorities being involved in the rescue, but also local fishermen and other  locals being involved.

We have dispatched a PC3 Orion and Dash aeroplane and HMAS Ararat. I’m  advised we’ll make the site later this evening Eastern Standard Time and they  will participate in the search and rescue efforts in full cooperation and

coordination with the Indonesian authorities.

SPEERS: That would mean, therefore, there are about 215 or 220 people  unaccounted for 48 hours since the boat went down. The hopes can’t be  great for their survival.

BOWEN: Well, of course, David, we will probably never know exactly how  many people were on this boat. When we’ve seen these tragedies in the past,  you’re able to reach an estimate, but tragically the reality is there will be  people who are never found in all likelihood and we will never have a certain  number.

Obviously, with each passing hour, the chances of finding survivors falls, but I  know that the Australian authorities, the Indonesian authorities, BASARNAS  and the other Indonesian authorities involved won’t stop looking until they  can be confident, for want of a better word, that there is no point going on in  the search efforts.

SPEERS: In terms of the death toll, this does however look like being an  even worse tragedy than the Christmas Island disaster almost exactly a year  ago. What went through your mind when you heard this news?

BOWEN: Well, again, David, just utter devastation that this had happened

again. This had been obviously what the Government had been concerned  about, what we had been warning about and very concerned about that. It’s  not a political statement. I’m not making any political points today. I’m simply  saying that we have been concerned about danger of life on the high seas  and obviously this is a terrible, terrible day, a terrible tragedy and something  that all Australians would be deeply distressed about.

SPEERS: I know you don’t want to make political points. Nonetheless, we do  have a political deadlock over offshore processing in Australia. Both the  Coalition and Labor support it but can’t reach agreement on where it should  happen. Have you spoken to the Opposition, to your counterpart Scott  Morrison, in the wake of this latest tragedy?

BOWEN: Well, David, I have a habit of briefing the Opposition whenever  there’s a significant event such as this and I’ve done so. I do talk to Scott  Morrison from time to time and brief him and talk about various events.

Our position remains the same as I publicly outlined: we believe in offshore  processing and we want to work with the Opposition to see offshore  processing implemented. But David, you won’t find me today making any

criticism of the Opposition or making any political points today. There are  people in the water waiting to be found and my focus, Jason Clare’s focus and  the Government’s focus is on that effort.

SPEERS: Yeah, I can appreciate that, but I think Australians look at this  awful tragedy and they wonder how can this political deadlock be broken and  can’t believe that it hasn’t been. Are you able to indicate at all whether this is  going to prompt some movement from at least the Government’s side?

BOWEN: Well, David, we believe that in order to have a proper deterrent to  stop people risking their lives at sea then you need to have a properly  constructed regional offshore processing arrangement. We believe we have

one in place, ready to go, waiting for the approval of the Parliament. It has  been the focus of my 12 months as Immigration Minister to put together the  agreement that we have put in place and I’ll continue to progress that and to  do whatever is necessary to see it implemented in a proper, sustained,  reasonable way.

But David, I really don’t want to get into a political debate today. I am not  going to make any political statements about the Opposition or anybody else.  Our position is well known, it’s clear. I’m not backwards in coming forward  and making that position well known. I’ve done so on your program many  times. But our position is clear, our rationale is clear. We haven’t pursued  offshore processing for fun or because it was good for us politically - it’s  neither of those things. We’ve done it because we believed it to be the right  thing to do and we’ll continue in the appropriate time and in the appropriate  way to prosecute that case.

SPEERS: But why not at least try Nauru, the Coalition’s preferred option, as  you reportedly argued within Cabinet?

BOWEN: Well, David, in Cabinet, outside Cabinet - obviously I don’t  comment on Cabinet meetings - but everywhere internally and externally I  have argued that Nauru in and of itself, by itself, is not a solution -

SPEERS: - As part of a mix, as part of a mix with Malaysia.

BOWEN: Well look, our position is that we need the Malaysia agreement  implemented, that an offshore processing centre elsewhere in Papua New  Guinea would be a useful complement to that. That remains our position.

The Opposition’s position remains that they believe in Nauru, but our position  remains that  offshore processing, wherever it is - an offshore processing  centre wherever it is - just by itself doesn’t provide the deterrent necessary.  Because you do find the majority of people being processed as refugees will  end up in Australia, and it won’t provide the necessary deterrent. Again, I’ll be  making those points David, I’ll be making those points at the appropriate time  in the appropriate way. I’m happy to answer your questions but you won’t  find me criticising Liberal Party policy or Liberal Party individuals today.

SPEERS: Well let me ask you then, within Labor, has that Cabinet  disagreement broken down relations between you and the Prime Minister?  Some have suggested that there has been increased tension, that you are  now in the Rudd ‘camp’ for want of a better word. Can you comment on that  at all?

BOWEN: David, not at all, not at all and I have worked with every ounce of  energy that I can muster for Prime Minister Gillard and I continue to do so.  We talk very regularly about all these issues and I continue to work with her  very, very closely and -

SPEERS: - Is she the best person for the job?

BOWEN: Yes.

SPEERS: Alright, that’s emphatic. Can I ask you then about then back on this  boat - it had a capacity for only 100 passengers and yet 250 were crowded  onboard. Are people smugglers taking even bigger risks now in the rush to  get asylum seekers to Australia? Is this part of a trend for bigger numbers on  each boat?

BOWEN: Well, I’ve made this point before David, there is nothing altruistic  about these people smugglers. These are not some kind of modern-day Oscar  Schindler. These are people who are making profit out of misery and if they  can make more profit by cramming more people onto dangerous boats then  they will, and they are doing that.

We have said that we can expect people smuggling activity to increase if we  don’t have offshore processing in place, and it has increased. It has increased  in intensity, we’ve seen more arrivals and we are seeing - as you correctly  point out - people smugglers having no regard for human life whatsoever and  putting more people onto dangerous boats and that underlines why we have  worked so hard, so hard, to get offshore processing up.

It hasn’t been easy. It wasn’t easy for me to argue to the Labor Party  National Conference that we should put offshore processing into our platform,  didn’t do it for fun, didn’t do it to be popular, did it because it is the right  thing to do. Because I believe there is nothing humanitarian about a policy  which says to people that the best way of a new life in Australia is to risk your  life to get here. There is nothing humanitarian about that at all and I’ll  continue to argue that: internally in the Labor Party - a debate we’ve had and  the Government won on the floor of the National Conference emphatically -  and I’ll continue to argue that externally as well.

SPEERS: Chris Bowen, a final question on a separate matter. The NSW  Coroner has today issued a pretty damning report about the deaths - the  suicide deaths of three men at the Villawood Detention Centre last year. It  talks about systemic - the Coroner talks about systemic failings by the  department and by Serco, the company that runs the centre, and has rejected  claims that it can’t make recommendations to you. It’s made  recommendations to overhaul procedures about how asylum seekers who fail  in their applications are removed from the country, talks about better training  of officers. Will you be adopting these recommendations?

BOWEN: Well these are recommendations that the Coroner has brought  down and today I’ve obviously been made aware of them. I have not had the  opportunity to fully read them and to fully be briefed on them. Obviously I’ll  be paying them very close attention and I’ll be asking my Department to look  very seriously at them and I’ll be looking very seriously at them. I need to go  through them in some detail and show them the due respect they deserve  and that doesn’t mean providing a running commentary on them today. I  note that they made no specific allegations or findings against the individuals.  They did make recommendations about systemic issues.

Obviously, I want our management of what are very complex and difficult  arrangements - these were, in one particular case, in particular in relation to  a removal, removing somebody from Australia which is always fraught,  always difficult, always very emotional, and always dealing with the difficult  issue of removing somebody from Australia who doesn’t want to be removed.

We do it on a very regular basis, there are lots of removals from Australia  everyday, but I want to ensure that our procedures are best-practice, so I’ll  be paying very serious regard to the Coroner’s recommendations.

SPEERS: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, thank you for joining us.

BOWEN: Thank you David.

Ends





