



THE HON NICOLA ROXON MP  Minister for Health and Ageing



TRANSCRIPT

Interview with Ali Moore - Lateline ABC  26 May 2011



E&OE ONLY

Topics: Plain Packaging of Tobacco

Ali Moore: And now back to our story on the tobacco industry's attempts to use trade  relations to derail the Government's plans for plain packaging of cigarettes. Just a short time  ago I spoke to the Health Minister, Nicola Roxon, who was in our Brisbane studio.

Minister, welcome to Lateline.

Nicola Roxon: Good evening.

Ali Moore: We've heard tonight that a former US ambassador to the World Trade  Organization, Peter Allgeier, has been actively lobbying Malaysia to pressure Australia not to go  ahead with its plain packaging legislation. Has the Malaysian government been in contact with  you or any of your colleagues in the Government?

Nicola Roxon: Well, not with me and not, to the best of my knowledge, with the Government  but I think this just shows the lengths to which big tobacco are determined to go to stop the  Government introducing plain packaging in Australia but we're very determined that this is a  public health measure which will have an enormous benefit and we won't be frightened off  because big tobacco are hiring lobbyists or trying to look at different ways to influence the action  that we're taking.

Ali Moore: Whether or not it's a case, do you acknowledge that it seems more than a  coincidence that it's Malaysia that's being lobbied, not any other country? And of course  Malaysia right now you're in crucial negotiations with over the asylum seeker swap.

Nicola Roxon: Well, look, I think that's a question you'd have to ask the big tobacco  companies. It's their business who they will employ and who they want to lobby. We've seen  them very aggressively taking lots of different angles.

We've just been able to uncover today and discussed in the Parliament that British American  Tobacco has spent 97 per cent of its political donations last year on the Liberal and National  Party in Australia. So, they're looking for all sorts of ways to influence the debate.

I hope that the Liberal and National Party do come on board and support this measure but  certainly the tobacco companies are spending a lot of money in a lot of different ways to try to  influence the outcome in our Parliament.

Ali Moore: Do you think they're likely to be successful, if not in influencing the outcome  with you then in succeeding in getting countries, particularly countries in the region, to lobby  you?

Nicola Roxon: Well, I don't know. I mean, ultimately the laws that other countries make for their  countries is a matter for them and I would think most countries would think the laws that we are  making for our country is a matter for us.

In fact, we've received quite a lot of international support for this. The US Secretary for Health  has made very positive comments about the steps that we're taking. The European Union is  looking closely and has encouraged us in going down this path. The WHO, the World Health  Organisation, of course recommends this as action that states should consider. So I think  there's actually quite a lot of international support for what we're doing.

That won't stop those who oppose us, namely big tobacco, for trying everything that they can.

Ali Moore: You talk about the US there, and of course we've also heard tonight that  members of the US Congress have written to the Government, in particular Donald Manzullo.  Now he's no ordinary member of Congress. He's on the committee on foreign affairs. How many  letters has the Government received from members of the US Congress?

Nicola Roxon: Look, I don't think there's been large numbers. Of course we've been out with  our plain packaging legislation. There's been an exposure draft. We've been very public about  what we intend to do.

Members of the public in Australia are able to put forward their views and, of course, if other  countries or other organisations have views, they're welcome to put them forward too but we're  Australian, we can make [laws] in Australia to protect Australians, and I think it's neither here  nor there if particular congressmen or parliamentarians in other parts of the world don't like what  we're doing.

Ali Moore: Is it really neither here nor there, though, when you have a look at someone like  Donald Manzullo and this letter - and I'll quote from it - it says:

Australia's plain packaging proposal legally abrogates sanctioned trademark rights. Not only  does it violate Australia's global trade obligations and undermine trademark protection, it also  has the negative effect of emboldening governments less committed to intellectual property right  protection to dismiss global trade rules.

You can't get much plainer or more serious than that.

Nicola Roxon: Well, we fundamentally disagree with that view. We are absolutely confident  that the steps we're taking are consistent with our international obligations. None of our  international obligations say that we are not permitted to act in the interests of public health and  the community.

So, obviously this is a matter that big tobacco have signalled they will fight, they will probably  fight in the courts, they obviously   have friends across the world that they will try to influence.

Unfortunately, it looks like they also have friends in the Australian Parliament, because they're  very actively trying to influence the Liberal and National parties.

Ali Moore: But are you saying that Donald Manzullo is basically in the pocket of the  industry? Do you think that's where this is coming from?

Nicola Roxon: I don't know. I think that the language that is being used is exactly the same  language as the tobacco companies. Now that might be coincidence, that might be because  there is a meeting of minds. I don't know.

The point I'm making is we're very confident that the steps we're taking are consistent with our  legal obligations and our international obligations.

Ali Moore: And I'll have a look at that legal advice in a minute but we are talking about here  a member of the committee on foreign affairs in the US, and if you look at that sentence, for  example, the issue of where we may be encouraging others basically not to comply with law, I  mean, they're very serious threats.

He also goes on to talk about how effective intellectual property protection and enforcement is a  major element underpinning the support of Congress for free trade agreements, including the  Australia-US FTA. I mean, isn't there an element of threat in that?

Nicola Roxon: I don't read it as a threat, I read it as a strongly expressed view, one that we  don't agree with.

Now, that is appropriate if people have that view, we live in a democracy and people can  express it but our government has made a determined decision that this is what we're going to  do. We've got clear advice that we are able to do this and what we're seeing, I believe, is the big  tobacco companies trying to play every trick they can.



They've been out asserting that crime gangs will take over the country, they've been asserting  that young people will smoke more tobacco because they'll be forced to reduce their prices and  profits.

We've seen them challenging the intellectual property rights, we've seen them donating large  amounts of money to try to influence the political debate here. This is going to be a rough-and-tumble debate but we are determined that we're doing the right thing.



Ali Moore: But all that said, big tobacco complaining and challenging is one thing, a major  trading partner being very specific about how they consider this action, isn't that an entirely  different question?

Nicola Roxon: Well, I think you are jumping here to a very, very big conclusion. One person  writing a letter which you have obtained is not the US Government making a representation to  Australia.

The US Secretary for Health is on the public record congratulating us for the work that we are  doing. I take those comments very seriously.

Ali Moore: Can you read those comments, though, as meaning that you're not going to be  transgressing our obligations under world trade rules?

Nicola Roxon: Well, we've got our own advice that we are complying with our international  obligations but I think it is - you know, you cannot look at a comment or a letter that a  parliamentarian in Australia makes and say that that is the view of the Australian nation.

I think that you are making too big a leap here and when there is evidence that is to the  contrary, that is the [US] Secretary of [Health] welcoming these moves, I think that's a pretty big  leap.

Ali Moore: Your legal advice, you say you're very confident, and yet other countries, other  jurisdictions that have looked at this - I mean, for example, the US hasn't gone down this path.  Canada and the UK - the UK says it's now going to reconsider it but certainly in the past when  they've looked at it, when Canada's looked at it, they have decided that one of the key issues is  whether or not it would amount to an infringement of intellectual property rights and, indeed, the  Canadian Health Minister went into Parliament and quite firmly said that it did.

So I'm curious as to what your legal advice is that is so different to the advice that has been  given to many other jurisdictions who have sought advice on this subject.

Nicola Roxon: Well, again, I think it's making some sweeping comments here. We have sought  advice, we have been provided with advice that makes clear that we are within our rights, both  internationally and domestically, to take this action.

It is action that requires a significant amount of political will. Not every other country is going to  make a decision at any point in time that they can do that. We believe we can. We've led the  world on tobacco control legislation in the past. We would be leading the world again and  breaking new ground, but we think we're on very strong legal ground, even though we're  breaking that new ground and I think you're seeing a lot of countries readdressing whether they  can do this.

And, in fact, I noticed a press release recently from one of the provinces in Canada saying they  were introducing plain packaging. So I think you're seeing different things happening at different  points in time, none of which stops us from taking this action.

Ali Moore: So what is the legal advice? Because certainly under the WTO there is a  commitment that the use of a trademark in the course of trade shall not be unjustifiably  encumbered. How do you get an exception from that? On what grounds?

Nicola Roxon: Well, there's very clear grounds that you can act in accordance with public  health. Almost every international obligation that you have has exemptions to it. You even  quoted yourself in that language: can't unjustifiably.

Obviously they're the sorts of arguments that people will mount. Now I'm not here to make a  legal case. I'm not here as a barrister or a silk. I'm here as a member of the Government that,  based on its advice that it's taken, is determined to take this step to protect and try to reduce the  harm caused by tobacco in Australia.

Tobacco smoking still kills 15,000 people every year and we think this is a step worth taking if  we can reduce that number.

Ali Moore: You do expect legal challenges though?

Nicola Roxon: Well, big tobacco companies have made absolutely clear that they will  challenge this. We know that they will fight tooth and nail.

You're seeing that played out now across the nation and I think what the big tobacco companies  are doing with all this very noisy huffing and puffing is making clear to most of the community  their fears that this measure will work. It will affect their profits and that means it will save lives.  That's why we're so determined to keep going.

Ali Moore: They will fight tooth and nail. Obviously it's going to get extremely expensive.  How much have you budgeted for to take this legal action to its logical conclusion?

Nicola Roxon: Well, we've budgeted to introduce this measure. That includes the consultation  and of course includes getting legal advice. It of course includes a range of things.

Ali Moore: Fighting a court case?

Nicola Roxon: But, Ali, I think your listeners - you'd think your listeners might be - and viewers  - might be interested to know about the billions of dollars that we currently spend every single  year treating diseases caused by tobacco.

There is no way in the world the most expensive legal case in the country could cost as much  as we spend week in, week out, fixing up the damage caused from tobacco. So this is - if it was  just a financial question, it would be a no-brainer. It's much more than that but that isn't enough  to put us off taking this action.

Ali Moore: What happens to duty-free under this legislation? Because of course that would  still be highly branded and cheaper?

Nicola Roxon: Yeah, look, we - there are a range of issues that are quite difficult on the edges.  Any tobacco that is sold in Australia will be covered by this legislation, so duty-free products that  are sold in Australia would be covered by it. I think there is a…

Ali Moore: So they'd have to be plain-packaged…

Nicola Roxon: A difficult…

Ali Moore: …as well.

Nicola Roxon: Yes, they would, that's my advice, any tobacco…

Ali Moore: What about if you bought it in Bangkok and brought it in?

Nicola Roxon: Yeah, well, then that's going to be an area where we can't, through our  legislation, seek to regulate the way products are sold in other countries and we don't attempt to  do that. We attempt to make sure that we can cover the tobacco that is sold here in Australia.



There are of course restrictions on the amount of tobacco that can be brought in if you buy it in  another place.

So, you know, this has to be taken a step at a time. There are some difficult issues and practical  issues that'll be worked through. That's why we've gone through this consultation process,  released an exposure draft. While there is a plan to introduce the legislation in the coming  months, it wouldn't start till 1 January next year and there's a soft six-month lead-in time.

So we're aware of the practical challenges that need to be dealt with but they're all ones that are  not beyond our wit and we think are worth sorting through.

Ali Moore: After cigarettes - and you did say if it was just a financial question, it would be a  no-brainer - would you consider extending it to other products where there are significant health  risks and health costs? Alcohol is the obvious one.

Nicola Roxon: No, look, we don't have any plans to do that and I think the difference that  people need to understand is we have years and years of evidence now about the harm that  tobacco causes.

There is not a single or small amount of tobacco that it is safe to smoke. It is a killer product.  There is no other legal product that is on sale that currently so much is known about the  damage that it unequivocally causes.

This is a dramatic step, we don't back away from that, but there is a clear case for it for tobacco,  there is not a similar case that's been made for any other product.

Ali Moore: Nicola Roxon, many thanks for talking to Lateline tonight.

Nicola Roxon: It's a pleasure.

Ends

