CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

THURSDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2011



SUBJECTS: Proposal to increase the humanitarian intake, offshore  processing, gay marriage, politicans’ remuneration.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen has put asylum seekers on the agenda for  the ALP National Conference which opens tomorrow in Sydney, with a call to  boost Australia’s humanitarian intake from just under 14,000 to 20,000. Mr  Bowen wants that increase to be part of a trade-off. In return he wants the  conference to back offshore processing of asylum seekers.

Chris Bowen joins us now, good morning Mr Bowen.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning Marius.

BENSON: Now this proposal is simply that, you’ve described it as an  aspiration, it’s nothing like a Government policy. You want Conference to  consider the idea of increasing the intake to 20,000?

BOWEN: Well, that’s right. The Labor Party Platform is all about statements  of principle, all about where Labor stands on issues. Now I have said for some  time that we can and should take more refugees and I think we can do that  as part of a regional cooperation framework. That has been my position for

some time. I think it’s important that we take this opportunity of the National  Conference to spell that out in clear terms where we stand on all of these  issues. Now what you can do, as part of a proper regional framework, is see  Australia take more refugees, provided you have those checks and balances  in place.

BENSON: But the conference is not likely to accept the offshore proposal;  the conference view has always been against that.

BOWEN: Look, I will be putting my views and the views of the Government  to the conference. I hope and expect Conference’s support for those, but as I  say, I think it is important that we take this opportunity. The National  Conference only comes up every two years; the Platform is open to many and  varied interpretations. I think it should be a lot clearer on Labor’s approach to  these things. I think it should be clear that dangerous boat journeys should  be discouraged and that regional agreements to do so are appropriate. I also  think it should be clearer that Labor aspires to resettle more refugees into

Australia.

BENSON: Your briefed the Left faction on this last night. You would have no  chance of convincing them on the merits of offshore detention regardless of  the trade-off?

BOWEN: This is not about a trade-off. I simply believe that is an opportunity  for the conference to consider what has been my view for some time, that we  can and should increase the refugee intake. Of course, that was part of the  Malaysia Arrangement should it have proceeded; a significant increase of one  thousand refugees a year. I always saw that as the start.

The Liberal Party says that is too many refugees;, I fundamentally disagree.  Australia can afford to take more refugees over time, but I will be putting  those views to the conference. I expect a robust debate around various issues  including asylum seekers that has been the case for every National  Conference I have attended.

But there will also be much that we agree on and certainly I think the  conference will be close to unanimous, if not unanimous, in the view that  Labor has a proud record and we should continue that record by setting out a  target that we want to aspire to over time.

BENSON: Mr Bowen, how do you read the public mood on increased refugee  intakes?

BOWEN: Well look, certainly in my experience people recognise that  Australia can and should play a very significant role in resettling refugees. I  think the public rightly want an orderly process, rightly want to see people  who are in camps around the world receiving a fair go, rightly want to see  those dangerous boat journeys discouraged. All the feedback I get, including  in my very multicultural Western Sydney electorate, and wherever I go in the  country, says that, ‘Look, you’ve got to have an orderly process to this’, and if  you do that then of course I think the Australian people would be more than  happy to have a discussion about increasing the refugee intake over time.

BENSON: But you don’t have an orderly situation at the moment. What is  Western Sydney telling you about boat arrivals?

BOWEN: Well, I think the view across the country would be that both  political parties support offshore processing, so both political parties should  vote for it. My political party is prepared to vote for it in the Parliament; it’s a  pity that Mr Abbott’s political party is not prepared to vote for it. I think that  Tony Abbott’s made a political calculation that boat arrivals are in his political  best interest, therefore he’s put his political best interest ahead of the  interests of Australia and I think that’s very disappointing.

BENSON: Another issue at the conference is going to be gay marriage. Can

you just explain your own factional position and personal position on that?

BOWEN: Well, my personal position is that I strongly support a conscience  vote. I think that is the responsible thing to do and I think that will be the  view of people who are of a like mind to me within the broader Labor Party as  well. I think that we should have more conscience votes in Australia. I wrote  a paper on this when I was a backbencher saying that conscience votes are a  good thing and that where possible we should have more of them, and I think  this is a prime candidate for a conscience vote.

There are strong views in the community about this and I think if you are  going to have a proper community debate about that, the appropriate way is  for the national Parliament to have every MP considering the issue closely and  having that discussion on the floor of the national Parliament, not on the floor  of a party room.

I also think that the Liberal Party should be adopting a conscience vote on  this as well and giving those MPs on that side of the party who have a  different view to Mr Abbott the chance to express that view on the floor of  the national Parliament. But I think whatever the result, the community would  then be much more understanding of that result.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, it looks like there is going to be some good news in  your pay packet soon. There is a recommendation for your pay to go up by  maybe $70,000 to just over $300,000. Anyone would welcome that?

BOWEN: Well so I read in the Telegraph, Marius, but that’s the extent of it.  I’m aware that the Remuneration Tribunal is looking at these issues. I’m not  aware of what their conclusions are; I’m not aware that they’ve even  completed their report. So we’ll wait and see what their report says about  MPs’ remuneration. It is always controversial, but I’m not going to speculate  on what may or may not be in the report. I know as much as you and that’s  what I’ve read in the paper today.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thanks very much.

BOWEN: Good on you, Marius.

Ends



