







THE HON SENATOR CHRIS EVANS

Leader of the Government in the Senate

Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Jobs and Workplace Relations

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

3 July 2011

Meet the Press

ISSUES: THE BALANCE OF POWER IN THE SENATE, THE PRICE ON CARBON  WILL NOT APPLY TO PETROL, JINDALEE RADAR SYSTEM, WORKCHOICES,  HIGHER EDUCATION REFORM, MINING TAX.

HUGH RIMINTON: You feel the passion there, Ellie. Thank you for that. Welcome  back to the program, Chris Evans. Good morning to you, Senator.

SENATOR CHRIS EVANS: Good morning, Hugh.

RIMINTON: Let's deal, if you don't mind, with the immediate issue of the day - the  Prime Minister announcing that the carbon tax, the carbon price, will not apply to  petrol for domestic users, for families, for tradespeople, for small business. This is a  piece of political pragmatism, surely, rather than policy purity?

EVANS: Well, what it is - it's a reflection of the work we have been doing with the  cross-party committee to come to a landing point that allows us to attack the issue of  carbon in our economy, so the Prime Minister's made it clear that petrol will be  excluded, which I think is a good thing for families and for tradespeople and small  businesses, and we'll see the rest of the package unfolded when the agreement's  finalised.

RIMINTON: What happened to the idea that you need to send a price signal to  people to change their behaviour to get smaller cars next time they buy one - to  perhaps use less petrol if you're deliberately avoiding a price on petrol as part of the  carbon price?



EVANS: Well, we have always made it clear that the first aspect of this is to tax  those large polluters, the 1,000 largest polluters in our economy.

So, were working through the negotiations to make sure that price is placed on those  companies to change their behaviour, and there'll be a range of other measures that  continue to encourage all Australians to conserve energy and to take part in better  practices.

There is a lot going on by people's own initiative. This will help by pricing carbon, and  I think it will allow us to transform our economy to a cleaner economy, and one which  allows us to access the sort of jobs and new industries that will emerge.

RIMINTON: It shows the Opposition's cost-of-living attack line is spooking you,  doesn't it?

EVANS: Look, this is a negotiation that we're engaged in. One of the things we have  made clear is we want to compensate those who are doing it tough in the economy -  families, pensioners, those people that would find it difficult to deal with extra costs.

We're trying to make sure the package is fair.

Those people get compensation, and we're able to attack the key issue, which is the  pollution in our economy and how we encourage companies to act more responsibly  and reduce their pollution.

RIMINTON: I'll take you to the story of the day, if I can - the 'Sun Herald' newspaper  has a front page story and they are referring it to "Border Radar Fiasco" - the $1.8  billion Jindalee radar system protecting northern Australia having failed to spot a  single asylum seeker boat in the last two years. Is that a failure of our northern  defensive systems?

EVANS: I'm not sure of the accuracy of those reports. Jindalee is an important part  of our defence systems, as you know, this Government's put enormous extra  resources into northern detection and defence. But the reality is, under this  Government, 99% of the boats have been intercepted before landing - much better  than the earlier record of the Howard Government.

RIMINTON: They want to be found - isn't that a failure of the radar system that it's  not picking up hundreds of boats that are turning up to our north?

EVANS: The point is, the system is picking up those boats with the aerial and other  surveillance we do, we have intercepted 99% of the boats.

So the system's working. Jindalee's contribution to that is obviously something that  the defence experts would have to comment on. I know the system's working,  because we are intercepting.

And I know Jindalee is a very valued resource, but it may not be the key resource in  this battle against unauthorised wooden-boat arrivals.

RIMINTON: OK. As well as being the leader of the Government in the Senate, you're  also, of course, the Minister for Workplace Relations. There are moves in the Liberal  Party at the moment to get that back on the agenda. Malcolm Turnbull now saying  that it is effectively impossible for a business to sack someone without paying a  penalty. Is he right?

EVANS: What WorkChoices used to do is deny people the access to pursue a claim  for unfair dismissal.

If the accusation is that the Fair Work Act helps fix that, that's right.

The Labor Party has defended the right of every worker to have the right to pursue  an unfair dismissal case.

People ought to have security at work, people ought to have the protection of an  independent umpire, and we're proudly in favour of that, and the reality is the Liberal  Party supports the Workchoices regime which had, at its core, removing people's  rights to defend themselves or seek re-dress against unfair dismissal.

HUGH: Peter Reith thinks that Tony Abbott's gone soft on workplace reform. Do you  agree? Do you think he has gone soft on it? Has he walked away from it?

EVANS: Look, I think there's a debate inside the Liberal Party. It goes to the question  of, should we be honest with the Australian people before the next election, or  should we hide our continuing commitment to a Workchoices-style regime?

The reality is, they are ideologically driven to policies which seek to attack the wages  and conditions of ordinary Australian working people. And we saw that through the  WorkChoices regime - penalty rates, overtime, the right for protection against unfair  dismissal were all driven down. And this Government is very proud that we've tried to  bring fairness back to our industrial relations system, and give ordinary workers  rights at work to be protected against unfair action.

RIMINTON: You've been Government leader in the Senate since 2007 under Kevin  Rudd and Julia Gillard. Why is Julia Gillard a better leader than Kevin Rudd?

EVANS: Well, I don't think it's a question about being "better," but certainly Julia has  a very inclusive style. She works well with the rest of the team.

HUGH RIMINTON: So she's not better?

EVANS: Well, Julia brings very strong attributes to the job. I enjoy working with her.  It's a much more collegiate system, I suppose, under her leadership. And I think  that's shown by her capacity to make the parliament work.

The reality is, despite not having majority in either House, we've got every  Government bill through the parliament in the last year, and we're able to govern  effectively despite the numbers in the parliament.

RIMINTON: OK. We're going to take a break. When we return with the panel - what  will be the mechanics of the Labor-Greens relationship in the new Senate? And the  ‘Snap of the Week award’ goes to the woman in Iowa who presumably wanted to get  a photograph of herself with President Obama, or perhaps judging by this, she just  wanted to take a picture of herself and the President somehow got in the way.

RIMINTON: Welcome back. This is Meet the Press. Our guest is Senator Chris  Evans. Welcome now to our panel, Claire Harvey from the 'Sunday Telegraph', and  Marius Benson from ABC Radio. Good morning.

MARIUS BENSON: Good morning, Senator. Senator, you have been working with  the Greens and the Independents to, as a minority government, as a minority in the  Senate. Now the Greens alone hold the balance of power in the Senate. How will  you work with them, given that they are bent on your destruction - Bob Brown says  within decades, you'll be gone and the Greens will be the major party?

EVANS: Well, the reality is, we've been dealing with the Greens for many years. We  have never had a majority in the Senate since I've been in the Senate. So we've  always had to bring together Coalitions to get Government legislation carried.

At the last parliament, I had to get the Greens, Senator Fielding and Senator  Xenophon to win any votes. In some senses, this should be easier than the previous  arrangement.

BENSON: Do you think it genuinely will be, that you only have to get the Greens on  side now? Easier?

EVANS: People ought to remember, the Government can either rely on the Greens,  or it can rely on the Opposition. And the test for the Opposition will be whether or not  they're going to be constructive and engage in policy, or whether they'll continue to  be oppositionist, oppose everything, and that, if you like, forces the Government to  deal only with the Greens.

We are happy to deal with the Opposition if they're prepared to engage in positive,  constructive talks about legislation that’s for the benefit of the nation.

BENSON: Speaking of the Opposition, Tony Abbott says that, come the next  election, he'll win, and you'll be so shattered that you'll abandon any attempt to fight  for the carbon tax. If the fight happens, it'll happen in the Senate. You are the Senate  leader. Will you abandon the fight for the carbon tax if you lose the next election?

EVANS: Look, I think Tony ought to focus on the debate we are having at the  moment. The reality is, this Government's going to introduce legislation into the  parliament to try and put a price on carbon. The debate ought to be in the parliament  about the policy issues involved.

Tony Abbott may think he'll race an election campaign for three years, doing stunt  after stunt, slogan after slogan, but the rest of the parliament will try and deal with  one of the major challenges of our generation, and try and get good legislation

through the parliament that I'm sure will form the basis of our legislative response for  many years to come.

CLAIRE HARVEY: Senator, you speak about the challenges of legislation. You've  been working on things like the Fair Work Act and higher-education changes. The  general public doesn't know any of that. Why has a Labor failed so comprehensively  to tell Australians what they've achieved?

EVANS: Well, I think it is often hard to get good-news stories up. I know my own  portfolio of Education - we have got 100,000 more people attending higher-education or university since this Government came into power.

We have actually invested billions of extra dollars to make sure every young person  gets the chance to go to university if they've got the ability and the commitment. And  if people want to talk about productivity improvements, the best thing we can do is  educate our workforce.

So the changes - the former minister, the now prime minister made, have really  delivered results, and I think we'll have a much more highly skilled workforce in years  to come as a result of those changes.

HARVEY: Would you acknowledge that Labor has completely failed to sell that  message?

SENATOR CHRIS EVANS: Well, look, I think we're starting to get more traction on  those issues, as people see the results.

As I say, enrolments are up and participation is improving. We are seeing a lot more  people from rural and regional areas, a lot more people from low socioeconomic  backgrounds starting to attend university and graduate.

So the records are starting to show that those reforms are worked, which obviously  makes it easier to then explain and defend the changes we've made.

RIMINTON: And yet, Senator, you get things like today, the former NSW Health  Minister, the Labor Party power broker John Della Bosca, telling The Bolt Report this  morning, he thinks we should have another federal election. Take a listen to this if  you would.

JOHN DELLA BOSCA, FORMER NSW LABOR MINISTER (THE BOLT REPORT):  It's now catastrophism.

ANDREW BOLT: Do you think we should have an early election?

JOHN DELLA BOSCA: I think we should have had an election after the last election  result, frankly. You do need a government with a mandate.

HARVEY: Senator, the NSW ALP has just had an historic defeat. Are you interested  in advice from Sydney?

EVANS: Look, I think it's fair to say that former politicians are probably best seen and  not heard in many debates, but the reality is, we won't be taking advice from the  former NSW administration on how to behave.

CLAIRE HARVEY: Is this one of Labor's problems - that you are constantly beset  from critics within your own party?

EVANS: Look, I think there's been a good deal of unity in the Federal Parliamentary  party. We are going through a tough period, but the discipline has been good.  People understand what has to occur - that we've got to win the argument about the  need for a carbon price.

And I think once the detail's out there, the members of the parliamentary party will go  out and argue it and sell it. I think we're all convinced we can win that argument once  we engage on the detail of the Government's proposition.

RIMINTON: Right now, Senator, in Western Australia, in your state, you're in danger  of being wiped out, according to the polls. I mean, the mining tax, the carbon price -  all of that is anathema in WA in particular. Do you think you are facing slaughter in  the West?

EVANS: Look, we've underperformed in Western Australia for many years now - this  isn't a recent thing. I have got to take my share of the blame. But I don't think the  commitment of West Australians to tackling pollution in our economy is any less than  in the rest of Australia.

They are concerned about the carbon price and what it might mean for West  Australian industry. But they know something's got to be done. They are open to the  argument.  And I think, as I say, we can be convincing in explaining the need for the  carbon price.

So I don't think Western Australia is any different to anywhere else in the country in  that regard. Clearly the mining tax has been a problem for us. There was a very  strong campaign against the tax by the mining industry, which said basically that the  world would end.

The reality is, most companies now have accepted the fact that it's going to come in,  that it is fair, that it will allow Australians to get a better share of their resources. I  mean, currently, the mining companies are making huge profits on the back of  Australia's resources, and this mining tax is about saying, "Australians deserve a fair  share of the benefits of the use of their resources."

BENSON: Senator, the carbon tax is your hardest sell. It's hard to sell any tax at any  time, but the particular problem for you is that the Opposition keeps pointing to Julia  Gillard saying, "No tax under any Government I lead." Can you explain why no tax in  August turned to a tax in early this year? Was it simply the price of doing a deal with  the Greens for minority government?

EVANS: Well, to be fair to the Labor Party, we have been trying to get a response to  climate change that's comprehensive for many years now. The reality is, post the

election, we had to find a way through this issue. We have decided on that path. We  are trying to work with those people in the parliament who are interested in a good  policy result. We are getting close to the end of that process. And in the end, the  parliament will decide. Despite all the rhetoric from Tony Abbott, all the fear  campaigns, legislation will come before the parliament. He and the rest of the  Opposition will have to vote on that legislation. And quite frankly, I think the press  and Australians need to demand more of him in terms of what is a really serious,  fundamental public-policy issue that Australia needs to address.

HUGH RIMINTON: Senator Chris Evans, thank you very much for joining us from  Perth this morning.

EVANS: My pleasure.







