1





LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

13 May 2011

ADDRESS TO NEW SOUTH WALES LIBERAL PARTY,  2011 FEDERAL BUDGET REPLY LUNCHEON,  SYDNEY

E&EO………………………….………………………………………………………………………………..

Well Mike, thank you so much. Thank you for that extremely warm introduction and I’m hoping that you  might put a surfing lesson up for auction at the next charity function and that Get-Up! might buy it and they  might give it to me so that I can learn how to surf from you because you’re a terrific teacher. Look, ladies  and gentlemen it’s great to be here. It’s great to see so many of you enthusiastically supporting both the  Federal and the State Liberal Party but I want to especially acknowledge some of my friends and colleagues  before I begin. I want to first of all today especially acknowledge the Shadow Assistant Treasurer, Senator  Mathias Cormann. Mathias had to step into the breach left by Andrew Robb who was unavoidably absent for  the first couple of days of the budget week and Mathias you did a really outstanding job, congratulations. I  also want to acknowledge and this is in no particular order of seniority, Craig Kelly, the new member for  Hughes; Marise Payne, the Shadow Minister for Indigenous Development and Employment; Paul Fletcher,  the federal member for Bradfield; Bronwyn of course, who has many, many sonorous titles but is my friend  and mentor, the member for Mackellar and one of the greatest campaigners this country has ever seen. Great  to have you here Bronwyn today. Bob Baldwin, Kevin Andrews, Helen Coonan, John Alexander, Louise  Markus and of course, Philip Ruddock, the father of the House. It’s so good to have you, Philip and thank  you for all that you have contributed to our Liberal Party over so many years. Mike and your state  colleagues, particularly the Attorney-General Greg Smith, congratulations to you and to Barry O'Farrell for  achieving the greatest political landslide, the greatest landslide  in Australian political history. It was an  extraordinary result. It certainly gave me great heart and I think it gave great heart to every Liberal and  every Liberal supporter right around our country.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, it’s an extraordinary budget week when it begins on the weekend before the  budget is brought down with the Prime Minister rushing out into the Prime Ministerial courtyard in Canberra  to make an announcement about boat people. What did she know about the budget that we did not at that  stage know that meant that she wanted to distract attention from her own budget with a statement about  border protection? It shows that this was always going to be a budget that flopped and if you wanted further  confirmation that the authors of this week's budget knew that there was nothing in it, you only have to look  at today's paper where the Government is already moving on from its own budget by announcing a  population policy. Now, there won't be much in that either, because this is a Government which is much ado  about nothing. But nevertheless, it says something about the way our country is being governed or  misgoverned that this is the way our national leaders are currently operating.

Now, what we’ve seen all week in fact from this Government and from this Prime Minister is more  appropriate and suitable for an alternative opposition than it is from a sound and competent national  government. I was a member, for nine years as minister, of a sound and competent national government and  not once did you see the Howard Government detracting attention from its own budget with the kind of silly

2

stunts that we’ve seen this week from this Government and not once would you have seen Peter Costello or  John Howard standing up in parliament the day after the budget in budget week to berate the Opposition as  opposed to telling us what they were doing to improve the country.

Let me take a few points from the budget. Obviously, the badge of virtue in the eyes of this Government is  the forecast - and I underline the word forecast - of a surplus of just $3.5 billion in 2012-13. Now, I don't  say for a second that every Australian business is doing well, but taxation revenues are forecast to increase  by 14 per cent from this year to next. So, there is no shortage of money coming in to the Government's  coffers and it's driven by the highest terms of trade, the most favourable trading environment in our history  and this is the best they can do. Well, ladies and gentlemen believe me, if the surplus is achieved - and it  will be the first Labor surplus since 1989, the first Labor surplus in almost a quarter of a century - if it is  achieved, it will be a surplus built on China's hard work not on the hard work of the Australian Government.

There were some good things in this budget, let's give credit where it's due. But almost nothing is quite what  it seems. The mental health spending is in fact undercut by almost $600 million of cuts to mental health  services. Medicare-funded psychologist consultations have been savagely cut in this budget. There are some  participation reforms in this budget but when you look behind the fine print, they are trials rather than  programmes. Then of course, there’s the hit on families. Now, it's a mixed message on families. Some  families will get more out of this budget, but then, there are the two million families that are going to suffer  from a $2 billion cut to family benefits. Now, the Treasurer in the Parliament the other day was saying it’s  only two per cent of families. Well, no. Two million families is not two per cent of the families of this  country and a $2 billion cut to two million families averages out at $1,000 and, you know, that’s not  negligible. The Treasurer might thing that that’s not negligible but that is a problem for the suffering  families of this country. And that's what I want to focus on, if I may, for the rest of these remarks.

Families are doing it tough, whatever the Treasurer and the Prime Minister might say. The things we want  might be getting more affordable thanks to the China boom but the things we need are in so many cases  getting much less affordable. We know what is happening to prices in our supermarket. We know what is  happening to the bills that arrive in the post every quarter. They are going to go up and up and up and it is  going to get much worse under the policies of this Government, particularly the carbon tax which is going to  add 25 per cent, just for starters, to your average power bill and is going to add 6.5 cents a litre, just for  starters, to the cost of petrol. So, for all their protestations about wanting to look after the families of  Australia, this is really what they are doing to them - they are hitting them with an unnecessary new tax. In  fact, the working families that Labor spoke incessantly of back in 2007 have become the forgotten families  of 2011.

So, our challenge, as a Liberal Party and as a Coalition is to say to all the decent people of this country, the  families of this country, the policemen, the nurses, the teachers, the shop assistants, the small business  people, that we know the position that you’re in, we can’t work miracles and we can’t wave a magic wand  but we won’t make your life needlessly tougher and if we can cut out the wasteful spending, that will take  the pressure off interest rates and that will help you with your mortgage and if we can stop the big new taxes  that will make it so much easier to pay your bills.

In the end, the task of government is to try to build a better country, to help each Australian to be closer to  his or her best self and that means better public institutions and it means people who have more opportunity  to achieve what they can and I’m very, very pleased that so many of my state colleagues share the same  vision because we do need schools that are more responsive to their communities, school councils that  appoint principals, principals that can appoint teachers. We do need public hospitals that are run by local  community boards, not by distant bureaucrats and it’s so good to see moves in this direction now in states  like Western Australia, Victoria and New South Wales.

I was so disappointed that for all the tough rhetoric of the Treasurer and the Prime Minister there was no  move to take up my four point participation reforms, my four point plan for participation reforms in the  budget. Why should we still be paying the dole to people under 30 in places where unskilled work is readily

3

available? Why should what’s good for long-term unemployment beneficiaries in the Northern Territory -  family income management - why should that not also apply to them right around our country? Why should  we be parking on the disability pension so many older people who with the right assistance could be earning  for their benefit and for the benefit of our country? Why hasn’t this been taken up by a Government that says  it wants to move people off welfare and into work?

The Prime Minister has no real explanation except for the fact that she knows that Senator Bob Brown  wouldn’t stand for it. This is not a serious government; this is a ramshackle coalition. Why do we have the  threat of a carbon tax hanging over us, particularly given the Prime Minister’s statement six days before the  election ‘there will be no carbon tax under the government I lead’? Well, I think we found out today when  Senator Brown took it upon himself to say there will be no early election.  I think we found out today who is  really running this Labor-Green alliance government.

Now, I want to say, ladies and gentlemen - and I’ll close on this note - that the first task of government is to  keep faith with the people who elected it and 144 out of the 150 members of the current House of  Representatives were elected on a platform of ‘no carbon tax.’ Now, if the Prime Minister and Senator  Brown have their way this parliament, elected on a platform of no carbon tax, is going to try to sneak a  carbon tax through. There could be no greater travesty of democracy than to have a parliament  overwhelmingly elected on a no carbon tax platform, try to sneak through a tax which is by far the biggest  change since the GST and is specifically designed to change the way every Australian lives and works.  Don’t think this is no small change. This is designed to change the way you live. This is designed to change  the way every business operates and it should not happen. It should not happen without the people having  their chance to pass their verdict on it at an election.

Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for having me today. I really appreciate the opportunity to give  you these few post budget remarks and I do hope the message will go from here, loud and clear, through you  to your families, to your friends, to your workmates, to your neighbours, to all of your associates, if this  Government does not have the guts to go to the people on its carbon tax it not only lacks legitimacy, it lacks  integrity.

[ends]

