CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS, SKY NEWS PM AGENDA

MONDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2011





SUBJECTS: High Court decision, asylum seeker processing.

DAVID SPEERS: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, David.

SPEERS: For years, you have argued that the Howard Government’s Pacific  solution didn’t work, didn’t really deter the boats. Is that still your view, that  sending asylum seekers to Nauru and Manus Island won’t deter people  smugglers?

BOWEN: In and of itself, yes, that simply having offshore processing just by  itself - not part of a regional framework, not part of a holistic approach - just  simply means you are transferring the processing to another place, but these

people will, if they’re processed as refugees, be returned to Australia. That’s  what happened under the Howard Government and it is simply the case that you  would be transferring Australian processing offshore.

Now, there’s a place for offshore processing but it’s got to be done in a holistic  manner, and I think it’s really time for the Liberal Party to recognise that  offshore processing just by itself is not an appropriate answer to what is a

complex regional problem.

SPEERS: Well they’re saying temporary protection visas are also part of it.

BOWEN: Well, temporary protection visas were introduced and because there’s  no family reunion more people got on boats, so that’s hardly very productive  either. So we’ve said, ‘Look, the High Court has clearly changed the law here:  not only has our Malaysian solution been found to be invalid under law, but  clearly the implication of that - and it is now, I think, a legal consensus - is that  Minister Ruddock’s declaration of Nauru and Papua New Guinea would similarly  be found to be invalid, and that it’s very difficult now and highly contestable for  offshore processing under the current law.

SPEERS: Well, the question now is what do you do? What about just processing  claims onshore? I mean, you always talked repeatedly about your determination  to break the people smugglers’ business model.

BOWEN: Yes.

SPEERS: Can you do that just with onshore processing?

BOWEN: Well, look, I think we are determined to do that because this is very  important. We do have people risking their lives to come to Australia to claim  asylum.



SPEERS: If you process all those claims here in Australia, are you breaking that  business model?

BOWEN: Well, look, we’re going through all the options. It’s appropriate that we  step back and say, ‘Okay, the High Court has made a very significant decision  here; a significant change in the understanding of the existing law. Let’s go back  to first principles: we do want to break the model; we want to do so in a way  which is consistent with our international obligations.’

SPEERS: But that means sending a message of deterrence, doesn’t it? To break  the model means having some sort of deterrent and your department secretary,  Andrew Metcalfe, sent this letter to departmental staff about what’s worked in  the past: he talks about the dramatic impact of towing - this is back in 2001,  when John Howard was in power - the tow back of several boatloads of people  to waters adjacent to Indonesia. That was a deterrent.

BOWEN: Yes.

SPEERS: That worked, he says. So you need some sort of deterrent.

BOWEN: Yes, I agree and hat’s what we were doing through the Malaysia  Arrangement, you see. Turning the boats back - which is still Liberal Party policy  - which is you simply turn the boat around in the middle of the ocean and you  say, ‘Head back to Indonesia’, and that’s Liberal Party policy and -

SPEERS: It was something Labor promised before the 2007 election.

BOWEN: What they’re trying to do is say that there’s no benefit in getting on a  boat and coming to Australia because we’re going to turn you back. Now, the  problem with that is that you do it on the high seas; it’s very dangerous, people’s  lives at risk, our sailors’ lives are at risk, the asylum seekers’ lives are at risk, and  it’s quite clearly far too dangerous to be an effective, sustainable policy.

SPEERS: But -

BOWEN: And can I just say the Liberal Party’s policy to do that, even when  there’s kids on board. All these crocodile tears about what are we going to do  about the children; they’d turn boats around in the middle of the ocean with  children on them. That’s their policy.

But what we were trying to achieve with the Malaysian agreement - and this is  still our aim - is to have the impact of returning people to where they started  their boat journey, in an orderly fashion, with the protections built in. So to say  to people, ‘Don’t get on the boat because you’re not going to achieve anything:  we’re not only going to not process you in Australia or Nauru or anywhere else  where you’d end up in Australia, we’re going to take you back to Malaysia, you’ll  be processed by the UNHCR with the other 92,000 asylum seekers in Malaysia.  We’ll take more people into Australia because we’ll have a much more orderly  process.’ So that’s what the entire regional framework, that’s what the entire  Malaysian arrangement was and remains designed to do.

SPEERS: So, if it remains your aim to do that, that is still obviously an option:  change the law here in Australia, so that you can still send people back to  Malaysia?

BOWEN: Well, obviously, we believe in the Malaysian arrangement. We believe  in the regional agreement. We believe in what we’re trying to achieve. We think  it’s important that we do break the people smugglers’ business model, and yes,  the Parliament could make its views clear.

I think what the Liberal Party was trying to do in 2001 was to make it clear that  the Minister of the day could declare a country. Now, the High Court has read  into that part of the Act various elements which would mean that Minster  Ruddock’s declarations were invalid.

SPEERS: So you could change the Act with Tony Abbott’s support? He has  flagged that he is willing to talk to you and willing to cooperate in changing the  law, even not ruling out Malaysia as an option.

BOWEN: Well, what we need to ensure is that, firstly, the Liberal Party accepts  that their proposed arrangements would, in all likelihood, be very difficult or  invalid under the law and -

SPEERS: Why do they need to accept that? I mean, he’s saying, happy to go  along with your interpretation and change the law.

BOWEN: But I just make the point, we now have a legal consensus: we’ve got  the Solicitor-General Gageler QC, Lloyd QC, Kennett QC, Estcourt QC; five QCs,

or senior counsels -

SPEERS: It’s a [inaudible] legal argument, isn’t it?

BOWEN: Oh, no, but it’s not; they’re saying that any declaration of Nauru would  be highly vulnerable and it’s not just us saying that, that’s based on very sound  legal advice across the spectrum: from people who are lawyers for the plaintiffs,  people who are -

SPEERS: Tony Abbott’s saying, ‘Fine, I’ll work with you and change the law.’

BOWEN: But what we now need to establish is that they are willing to accept  that Nauru, in and of itself, is not the only solution and that we need to have a  holistic regional response. Now we’re working through -

SPEERS: But why does he have to do that? Surely you just need to pass  legislation that waters down the Minister’s requirements under the Act so that  you can have offshore processing?

BOWEN: Well, David, we’re working through all the options and I think it’s  appropriate we do that in a methodical way. This was a significant change to the  interpretation of the law.

SPEERS: Yeah, but do you welcome Tony Abbott’s cooperation on this?

BOWEN: Well, if there is an opportunity for the Parliament to make its views  clear that we believe in breaking the people smugglers’ business model and we  believe that offshore processing as part of a regional framework is an  appropriate thing to do, then of course that is what we’ve been trying to achieve.

So I’m not being difficult here; it’s appropriate that the Government takes some  time to reflect. It’s also appropriate, I’ve made the point, that Mr Abbott and Mr  Morrison reflect on their policy: how it’s impacted by the law and the way  forward, and we do that in a mature way.

SPEERS: When do you start talking to the Coalition about this?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, we’re working through the situation, we’re working  through our options and the Prime Minister and I would have more to say about  that when we’re in a position to. But we’re not going to rush into a knee-jerk  reaction to what was a very significant breakthrough or decision by the High  Court which broke new legal ground in terms of the understanding of the  Migration Act last Wednesday.

SPEERS: But can you tell me that politics won’t get in the way of this, you will

be prepared to sit down with Tony Abbott and work -

BOWEN: Well, we’re going to work in the national interest - and that’s what is  driving me, that’s what’s driving the Prime Minister - to have a solution which is  in the national interest, which deals with what has been a very difficult policy  area, I think you’d concede, David, for 15 years at least, probably more, but a  very significant difficulty for both sides of Parliament.

SPEERS: Particularly on your side of politics. Now, are you prepared to stare  down the Left of the Labor Party over this? They’re making it clear now they’re  threatening a revolt if there’s any return to offshore processing.

BOWEN: It’s not a matter of staring anybody down, David. I think my  colleagues across the spectrum in the caucus know that I have an open door  when it comes to talking to them about their issues. We worked very closely

together on developing the Malaysia arrangement. For example, there were  people in the caucus who had questions and concerns that needed to be  addressed and they knew -

SPEERS: And those concerns have now hardened -

BOWEN: But they knew that they had an open door to me and that I was  always willing to talk through their issues.

SPEERS: Has the Left now made it clear, though, they won’t [inaudible] on  offshore processing?

BOWEN: Obviously, these are emotive issues and obviously there are strong  views on both sides of the Liberal Party. There are Liberal Party members who,  you know, crossed the floor or threatened to in the past, et cetera. Nobody is

pretending that it is easy on one side of politics or the other to reach a  consensus on these views, on these matters. But what is quite clear is that I  think there’s respect in the caucus for the Government’s position of stepping  through these issues methodically.

I think people, across the board, recognise that we really do need to break the  people smugglers’ business model. Nobody wants to see the sorts of things we  went through last December, nobody wants to see the funerals of people who  drowned.

SPEERS: Will the caucus get input on that? Will the caucus get a say?

BOWEN: Well, as I say, we have a process and I think caucus members  understand that I go through the process of listening to all views, that the  Cabinet will take into account all views and the Cabinet will reach a

determination.

SPEERS: And just finally, the 330-odd asylum seekers who’ve been in limbo on  Christmas Island since you signed the deal with Malaysia, you’ve said they now  will be processed quickly in Australia?

BOWEN: Yes, well, they’ll be processed in Australia, of course, under the normal  system. They’ll be able to make their claims.

SPEERS: Is that an embarrassment for you, having said that they wouldn’t be?

BOWEN: Well, obviously the High Court made a ruling last Wednesday and we  have to respond to that and it is going to take - with the best will in the world  from the Government and the Opposition, in a perfect world - it’s going to take  some time to work those issues through, and the sustainable decision to make  was to say while we’re doing that we’ll process those people. That shouldn’t be  read as some sort of lack of determination on my behalf or the Government’s  behalf to have a long-term, sustainable solution which breaks the people  smugglers’ business model.

SPEERS: And so any boat that arrives this week, until you find a solution, will be  processed here?

BOWEN: Well, the situation is people will be processed in Australia while we sort  these issues through, because the High Court has struck down the declaration of  Malaysia. And also, on the same reasoning, the declaration of Papua New Guinea  which Minister Ruddock signed would be invalid, and the Memorandum of  Understanding that we had agreed with Papua New Guinea needs to be put on  hold while those legal issues are sorted through.

SPEERS: Chris Bowen, thank you.

BOWEN: Thanks, David.

Ends

