FEDERAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND  TRANSPORT MINISTER

LEADER OF THE HOUSE

SPEECH BY ANTHONY ALBANESE TO NATIONAL PRESS CLUB

“GOVERNMENT WITH A PURPOSE”

NATIONAL CIRCUIT, CANBERRA  25 JANUARY 2012





Check against delivery...



It’s a great pleasure to have this opportunity to address the National Press Club  on the eve of Australia Day which commemorates European settlement.  Given  this, it’s particularly important that I acknowledge the traditional owners of country  and pay my respects to their elders past and present.

The origins of Australia Day commemorations are the annual dinners organised  by former convicts and the sons of convicts to celebrate their love of the land we  are all privileged to live in.

I believe the Labor movement can take great pride in knowing that the Australia  of 2012 reflects many of the reforms it has championed and its elected  representatives have implemented in government.

While many of Labor’s transformative reforms were hard won, often against  strident opposition from the conservatives both inside and outside the  Parliament, they have nonetheless proven to be profound and enduring.  Indeed  without them, the modern Australia we are celebrating tomorrow would be a very  different nation.

Pensions, workplace reforms, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, Medicare  and universal superannuation, are just some examples of Labor reforms which  have become part of the permanent Australian landscape- and all subsequent  attempts to remove or undermine them, as Workchoices tried to do, have been  rejected by the Australian people.

At the heart of Labor’s philosophy is the Australian concept of a fair go.

Labor believes that there is indeed such a thing as society.

We acknowledge that the state has a role in determining the nature of that  society.  That’s why we seek to govern - to make a difference.  A simple belief  that opportunity enhanced is better than privilege entrenched.  And that we have  a basic responsibility to future generations to leave the planet better than how we  found it.

Modern Labor rejects state control from the top, but accepts that government can  facilitate participation in decision making, in the economy and broader society by  the many, not just the few.

We serve for the long-term national interest, not short-term political interest.

Our light on the hill is a nation every bit as good as the Australian people.

As Labor enters our fifth year of government I am proud that in the triple bottom  line of assessment, our performance on the economy, social policy and the  environment has been, to date, pretty impressive.





THE ECONOMY

A strong economy not only creates the opportunities for working people to get  ahead and prosper financially, it’s also the foundation upon which sustainable  social and environmental progress depends.  And on any objective measure,  Labor’s economic stewardship to date has been highly successful.

When the Global Financial Crisis was causing 30 million jobs to be shed across  the developed world, Australia was creating jobs. As a direct result of our  recession-busting Economic Stimulus Plan, the Australian economy has  emerged positively from the worst global downturn since the Great Depression.

The OECD has even gone as far as predicting that ours will be the fast growing  major advanced economy in 2012.

What’s more, unemployment, interest rates and taxes are all lower than what  they were during the Howard era, and over 750,000 more Australians are in work  compared to when we came to office in late 2007.

We have also managed to reverse the lack of infrastructure spending, with  investment in the nation’s roads, railways, electricity assets and water facilities  now 40 per cent higher than it was during the last full year of the former Howard  Government - a result largely driven by greater Federal investment and the  reforms we’ve instituted through Infrastructure Australia.



The National Broadband Network is significant infrastructure.  It will overcome  the tyranny of distance which has so often been a disadvantage and enable us to  compete with the world, while transforming the provision of services such as

education and health.

Our public finances are in good shape.  We have very little public debt, a budget  returning to surplus, and for the first time ever, a triple-A credit rating from all  three of the world’s leading rating agencies.

In a clear sign of investor confidence in our nation’s future financial stability, the  yields on 10-year government bonds have never been lower than what they are  today.



SOCIAL POLICY

A strong economy is not the end point. It is about enabling more people to enjoy  higher living standards and improved quality of life.

This Labor Government has used our strong economic performance to fund the  biggest one-off increase to the pension; to cut taxes for low and middle income  earners; to put in place an Education Tax Refund to help parents with the cost of  schooling; to provide up to $4,200 a year to families with older teenagers; and to  deliver more generous child care assistance along with the first ever paid  parental leave scheme.

We’ve also doubled the education budget, initiated the largest ever school  modernisation program, delivered a historical funding boost for mental health and  increased hospital funding by 50 per cent in order to recruit more doctors and  nurses and provide additional beds.

But the list doesn’t stop there.

We’ve also delivered the long overdue apology to the ‘Stolen Generations’ and  are working to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous  Australians; we’ve begun work on a national disability scheme; and we have  provided millions of Australians with greater security and independence in their  retirement by legislating an increase in the superannuation guarantee to 12 per  cent.



SUSTAINABILITY

On the third assessment area of our triple bottom line - the environment and  sustainability - we have also taken action, most notably on climate change.



There is a cost to carbon pollution, but until now, we've sent the bill to future  generations. We have acted on the science and from 1 July this year, there will  finally be a price on carbon pollution.

We have introduced complimentary measures such as the renewable energy  target and have a whole of Government approach to tackling climate change.



THE PARLIAMENT

We have achieved this in spite of the added difficulties brought about by the  outcome of the 2010 election and the presence of an Opposition engaged in the  longest dummy spit in Australian political history.  We have worked with the  Parliament that Australian voters elected.

In the sixteen months since the last election, we have not lost a single legislative  vote and at last count, passed 254 bills - more than double what the former  government passed during a similar period in its first term.

Throughout this period Tony Abbott has done for political discourse what the  vuvuzela did for World Cup soccer. The vuvuzela got your attention.  It appeared  interesting at first with its very loud sound, but over time it just didn't have  anything but that monotonous noise to offer.

In the face of relentless negativity, it would have been easy to wind back our  agenda but we have not done so.

What has been most satisfying is the big Labor ideas and long-term reform  embodied in much of our legislation: a price on carbon, the Minerals Resource  Rent Tax, the National Broadband Network, structural separation of Telstra,  health and hospital reform and our Budget bills.  We have done a lot, but there is  more to do.



THE FUTURE AGENDA

We must continue to focus on long-term reform whilst dealing with immediate  concerns.

In order to secure long-term prosperity we must plan and invest in infrastructure  and skills as well as position Australia for a carbon-constrained future.

Labor has a strategy for each of these nation building agendas.  Our opponents  have a strategy of wrecking.

Builders versus wreckers is a new divide in Australian politics.

Today, I wish to briefly outline some of our infrastructure agenda.



NATION BUILDING PROGRAM

First and foremost, we will continue - and where possible accelerate - the roll-out of our six-year National Building Program, an unprecedented $37 billion  capital works program which is renewing and expanding the nation’s road, rail  and public transport infrastructure.

This year alone our infrastructure spend will top a record $7 billion.

Indeed in our Nation Building Program we’ve doubled the roads budget and  increased investment in rail ten-fold.  We have re-engaged with our cities and  have committed more investment to urban public transport since 2007 than all of  our predecessors combined since Federation.

We are rebuilding one third of the entire interstate rail freight network.

All up, we’re delivering more than 160 major projects.

The Hume Highway will be fully duplicated over the next year.

We have committed $4.1 billion for the Pacific Highway where today 1600 people  are working towards the target of duplication by 2016.

We have record funding for the Bruce Highway and have worked with  Queensland to repair thousands of kilometres of road damaged in last year’s  floods.

According to figures I released late last year, our Nation Building Program is an  investment which will pay for itself nearly three times over, generating benefits  such as less congestion; faster, more reliable supply chains; cleaner air; fewer  carbon emissions; and higher productivity.

However, even with Labor’s unprecedented capital works budget, modernising  Australia’s infrastructure is a task too big for government alone.

That’s why we introduced reforms in the last Budget to encourage private sector  and superannuation funds investment in infrastructure.

The Infrastructure Finance Working Group we established at Budget time last  year will make further recommendations to the Government in coming months.



MICROECONOMIC REFORM

Infrastructure provision is just about investment. It's also about better regulation  and microeconomic reform.

It's about the provision of smart infrastructure. It's about breaking down the silos  approach that the Government's development of the National Ports Strategy and  the National Freight Strategy are doing.

One of these major reforms is close to realisation.

After more than a century of failed attempts and false starts, Australia will have  one set of modern, nation-wide laws covering maritime safety, rail safety and  heavy vehicles and administered by just three regulators as opposed to the  current 23.

Once it takes effect in 2013, this vital microeconomic reform will improve safety,  simplify the compliance task for transport operators and boost national income by  $30 billion over 20 years.

We have also introduced safe rates legislation to remove pressures for unsafe  practices by heavy vehicles and ensure our roads are safer for all who use them.



SHIPPING

Labor’s nation building agenda doesn’t stop at the coast line.

Following more than a decade of neglect under the former government and four  years of extensive policy work and industry consultations under us, this  Government is determined to revitalize the Australian shipping industry.

We are at a tipping point. Australia has just 22 ships, less than half what we had  a decade ago.  Only four of which operate internationally; all of them in the LNG  industry.

There are sound economic, environmental and national security reasons, why an  island continent needs a viable shipping industry.

Based on the bipartisan recommendations of an earlier parliamentary inquiry, our  historic package of reforms will simplify licensing arrangements for those  operating in the coastal trade; establish an Australian International Shipping  Register to ensure local shippers are on equal footing with their international  competitors; and establish a Maritime Workforce Development Forum to attract  and train the next generation of Australian mariners.



And as a further measure to level the playing field and attract new long term  investment into the local industry, our package will also deliver a zero tax rate for  Australian shipping companies.

This bold package of reforms has the support of industry and unions - without  reform we won't have an industry.



SECOND SYDNEY AIRPORT

Another persistent and complex challenge which we’ve redeemed from the  former government’s ‘too-hard’ basket is the matter of a second airport for  Australia’s largest city: Sydney.

The bottom line is this: Sydney’s Kingsford Smith Airport is rapidly reaching its  capacity.  Spare landing and take-off slots are rare during the morning peak  periods and pressures are already building in the afternoon peak too.

Further underscoring the need for urgency is new analysis conducted for my  Department which for the first time puts a price tag on inaction and further delay.   It estimates a failure to secure the additional aviation capacity Sydney so  desperately needs will reduce direct expenditure in NSW by $35 billion a year by  2060, and cost the NSW economy some 70,000 jobs.

This is an unacceptable economic price to pay.  But it’s avoidable, if  governments are prepared to act in the national interest and acknowledge the  inescapable reality that Sydney will need a second airport sooner rather than  later.

The national interest dictates how we go about making that a reality will be  guided by the report currently being finalised by the independent taskforce set-up  by the Federal and NSW governments to consider and evaluate all the options.

I have no doubt this report will generate significant community debate and even a  few hysterical responses from some.  But I would urge the members of the  Coalition, in particular, to resist the temptations to play politics with this report  and to be part of a sensible debate on an issue so vital to NSW’s and Australia’s  economic future.

After all, had the Howard government not taken the short-sighted decision in  1996 to cancel construction of a new airport at Badgerys Creek, the worsening  congestion now being experienced at Sydney Airport - along with the debate  we’re about to have - could all have been avoided.

While there will be no easy answers, it’s time for all of us to work together to put  in place a bipartisan, long term solution to a problem that’s been 60 years in the  making.



HIGH SPEED RAIL

An example of this Labor Government actively planning for the future is our study  into a high speed rail network for the East Coast.

For many Australians, high speed rail would be an attractive alternative.  Imagine  boarding a train in Canberra - no racing to the airport, no delays, no lost luggage  - and then being whisked at 350 kilometres per hour, arriving just an hour later in  the heart of Sydney or four hours if your destination was Brisbane.

Indeed, the potential benefits of this technology are hard to ignore: better  integration of our regional and metropolitan communities, less congestion on our  roads and at our airports and fewer harmful carbon emissions.

The fact high speed rail could be a game-changer is precisely why, at the last  election, Labor put it back on the national agenda with our promise of an  exhaustive study into its merits, the early results of which I released last August.

The preliminary work showed it was possible to build a network within relative  close proximity of two-thirds of Australians with the potential to attract up to 54  million passengers a year by 2035.

The second phase of the Study is underway and by the end of the year will  produce a report setting out the ideal track alignment and station locations,  robust costings and patronage projections, financing options and possible  governance arrangements.



TONY ABBOTT AND THE TORIES

Where Labor sees government as an opportunity to make a positive difference to  people's lives, it's as if our opponents see government as their birthright.

Tony Abbott has turned the Coalition of yesterday, into the Noalition of today.

In 1944, Robert Menzies foreshadowed Tony Abbott’s character when he said:

“on far too many questions we have found our role to be simply that of the  man who says 'No.'”

Menzies went on to say:



“There is no room in Australia for a party of reaction.  There is no  useful place for a policy of negation.”

Indeed Tony Abbott is not a conservative, but a reactionary who is determined to  wreck what he cannot control.

When asked to visit a factory he says “yes”, but when it comes to vote to support  manufacturing jobs, he says “NO”.

When asked does he support fiscal discipline he says “yes”, but when asked to  support big miners paying more tax, even when they say that they support it, he  says “NO”.

When asked if climate change is real, he sometimes says yes, but he has said  NO to action.

When asked does he support offshore processing he says yes, but NO when  asked to vote for it.

When asked to sign off a written agreement to pair the Speaker and Deputy  Speaker he said yes, but when asked to put it into practice he said NO.

Prior to the formation of government after the election, he said yes to a kinder,  gentler political culture.  He said he would respect the Parliament that had been  elected.  Since then he has spent every day trying to tear it down.

In order to become Prime Minister, he is prepared to make any claim no matter  how untruthful:

…offer any promise no matter how outlandish;

…discard any principle no matter how dearly held;

…vilify any person no matter how well-meaning their motives; and

…betray any loyalty no matter how longstanding.

In Australia we have serious challenges to solve and we need serious people to  solve them.  Unfortunately, Tony Abbott is not the least bit interested in fixing  anything. He is only interested in two things: making Australians afraid of it and  telling them who’s to blame for it.

Tony Abbott rarely plays to the community’s better angels.

In 2012 I expect more of the same from ‘One Trick Tony’.   More negativity, more  nastiness, more obstructionism, more policy inconsistencies - and certainly  nothing approaching a positive idea or plan for Australia’s future.



CONCLUSION

The society we inhabit is far from a permanent state of affairs, with the political  forces within constantly struggling with each other to shape the future.

There is no “invisible hand” guiding us to a preordained destination.  That’s why  Government matters.

The labour movement - Australia’s oldest, continuing political force - has  engaged in that struggle with vigour and purpose for more than a century, firstly  in the workplace and then in the nation’s parliaments.

We have never accepted the status quo as the best our nation can do.

Of course, while it won’t be possible to judge the extent to which the current  Federal Labor Government advanced our movement’s transformative mission  until long after we have leave office, one thing is already certain: we have and  will continue to be a good Labor administration which governs with a purpose.  There is one thing Tony Abbott has said recently which I agree with: at the next  election the Australian community will have a clear choice.  Indeed it’s been a  very long time since the differences between the progressive and conservative  side of politics have been so stark and so profound.

Like none other in recent times, the 2013 election will define the type of nation  Australia becomes in the Twenty-First Century.





END





FEDERAL MINISTER FOR  INFRASTRUCTURE & TRANSPORT   NATIONAL PRESS CLUB ADDRESS TRANSCRIPT OF Q&A CANBERRA 25  JANUARY 2012     JOURNALIST: You accuse Tony Abbott - we're going to move into questions. I'll get the ball rolling. You accuse Tony Abbott of policy inconsistency in that speech but isn't it Labor who's broken promises on the carbon tax, on poker machines, done a u-turn on offshore processing of asylum-seekers? Isn't one of the challenges Labor faces this year rebuilding trust in the Gillard Government?  ANTHONY ALBANESE: Labor has been in the situation of dealing with the Parliament that was elected. If you go back and you look at John Howard's GST legislation, he was forced to compromise with the Senate in order to get that legislation through. Governments, with the exception of the period between 2005 and 2007, during the Howard period, have had to deal with a Senate in which governments haven't had a majority, by and large. There have been a couple of exceptions. We've seen what happens in terms of that period of the Howard Government when we had WorkChoices, when there was no handbrake at all on a government in the House of Representatives. I'm firmly of the view that dialogue and discussion is a strength of the government rather than a weakness. The negotiations that have always taken place in the Senate now take place earlier, they take place in the House of Representatives. That's the Parliament that the Australian public voted for.We need to respect that and deal with that and that is what we have done over a range of issues where we've been determined to secure action through the Parliament.  JOURNALIST: Hi Minister, Matthew Franklin from The Australian. You've painted a rosy picture of a triple bottom line, a government which you're proud of but you only have to look at the polls to show that you're languishing against a leader who you yourself describe as a negativist, a vuvuzela. I just wonder what your prescription is for Labor's recovery in political terms this year. Are you not fighting hard enough, not explaining well enough? Do you have the wrong leader? Second question. I'm just wondering with the Queensland state election announced today, how you think Labor will go there and, given the enduring popularity of Kevin Rudd, whether you think that his participation in that campaign will be critical to the outcome.  ANTHONY ALBANESE: On the first part of the question, I think we have to continue to tell our story. We continue to talk about the strong economy that we have delivered. It is always more difficult to have a message of hope rather than a message of fear. It is always more difficult to speak about long term planning and achievement than it is to be engaged in short term populism. We do see polls in which the Government's position suggests that we are behind but what we don't have, what we don't have is an election campaign going on. So you have a bit of a

false dawn at the moment. I think that increasingly the feedback that I get, particularly  from the business community, is that they are tired of Tony Abbott's relentless  negativity, that in terms of its objectives what we'll see, I think, played out over this  year is increasing tensions within the Coalition. There's no doubt that Tony Abbott  has said to many of the restless people on his backbench, hold on, I can't keep you  on - I can't put you on the front bench, I have to keep Bronwyn Bishop and Kevin  Andrews and all those people who are there because an election might come about  any time. It's clear that this Government will serve full term. It's clear that that  rhetorical position of Tony Abbott over a period of time, becomes very much weaker.  With regard to Queensland, I wasn't aware that the election had been called. I think  you'll see a fair bit of participation across the board in the Queensland election and  obviously Kevin Rudd, as a Queenslander, will be participating more in that  campaign than non-Queenslanders. Matthew, you yourself, as a former  Queenslander, would know that there's a bit of parochialism in Queensland but it's  certainly a place that I've found good engagement with the Queensland Government.  I think Anna Bligh is a good premier and I would hope that she is re-elected.

JOURNALIST: Regarding the asylum-seeker stalemate, how damaging will this be  for the government this year and at what point do you accept that the Malaysia swap  plan will not pass and come up with some different legislation, a plan B?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well, if there's a suggestion that Tony Abbott would vote for  anything at all, then we haven't heard that from Tony Abbott. What we've seen in  recent days is a dangerous escalation of the rhetoric. Tony Abbott, who says he  supports offshore processing, is not prepared to vote for it, not even prepared to  engage in any constructive way in the negotiations with the Government. I think if you  look at the correspondence between the two parties, released by the Liberal Party,  then you'll see that perhaps Tony Abbott's position is different as well from Mr  Morrison's. The tone of the correspondence changed substantially. I think Australians  want to see a solution to this issue. They want a level of bipartisanship. Tony Abbott  is incapable of providing any and on this issue his hypocrisy has been extraordinary.  And the fact that you have the Navy having to make clear their position that they  disagree so strongly with the position put forward by the leader of the Opposition  which would undermine our relationship with Indonesia, would undermine our  relationship with the UNHCR and undermine our relationship with our own defence  forces is quite disappointing to say the least, but consistent with his attitude.

JOURNALIST: Good afternoon, Minister, John O'Doherty from the Nine Network.  Just in relation to your plan for nationwide laws governing heavy vehicles, yesterday  we saw another horror crash on our roads involving a truck. Do you believe that state  laws as they currently stand are tough enough in relation to your proposed laws? Will  your laws be tougher?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:  There isn't a state law, of course, and that's the difficulty we  have here. And what we're seeking to do by having a national heavy vehicle  regulator, by having paperwork that doesn't mount up this high which is then ignored  by some in the industry, you have an opportunity to get greater consistency. And  commonsense tells you that that's the case.  If you're driving on the same road and you cross the New South Wales Queensland  border and there's different rates of speed, and there's different conditions there. For  example, if you happen to have a livestock vehicle you can have 66 cattle on the  back of the truck in Queensland and 60 when it crosses the New South Wales  border. This defies commonsense. So practical reforms in terms of a single heavy  vehicle regulator will make a difference. So too will the Safe Rates legislation which  is about ensuring that we have a regulator who can investigate any practices which

place pressure on heavy vehicle drivers to essentially do what is unreasonable. For  example, if pressure is put on two people standing there. If one person is told, you've  got to do this in eight hours, even though they know that it's a 10 hour journey but if  the person next to them will get the job if the offer is eight hours, they might take the  job. That places pressure for unsafe practices.There have been reports on this going  back to my first term in Parliament, bipartisan reports. We had this legislation that is  now through - which has been worked up with the industry, has been introduced in  the last week. I think it will make a difference because, as we've seen unfortunately  too often, the reason why this is an issue not just for heavy vehicle drivers but all who  use the roads is that usually it is other drivers who are impacted the worst as well  when there's an incident involving a heavy vehicle. So this is an issue for the sector  but it's an issue for everyone who uses our roads.

JOURNALIST: Paul Osborne from Australian Associated Press.nGood afternoon,  Minister. You have a caucus strategy meeting, which has been labelled a crisis  meeting by the Opposition this morning, on 5 February. What do you want to see  come out of that strategy meeting? Also, how would you read the mood in the caucus  going into the year? And how would you rate consultation with the backbench  compared to, say, the Rudd era?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: There's nothing unusual about the meeting that's taking  place on the Sunday prior pror to Parliament going back. We're having that and then  we're having a barbeque at the Lodge for caucus members.  I'll put my hand up and  fess up and say I had a discussion with the Prime Minister about this at the end of  last year, about getting together. I want, as Leader of the House, one of the agenda  items - now that it's public, one of the agenda items will be what happens in the  Parliament in terms of the strategy, committee, et cetera. It's not - you know, how  have the changes gone in terms of the Parliament - in terms of parliamentary reform.  I want input, as Leader of the House. The Prime Minister wants input as Prime  Minister and other Ministers do as well. The way that Parliament works now, with  everyone being on call, with there being less leave, with it being more hectic while  Parliament is sitting, means that in order to have a discussion which is less time-constrained it makes sense to get together outside Parliamentary sittings. It's as  simple as that. I certainly as Leader of the House have a responsibility to consult  myself with backbenchers and other members of the caucus. I obviously am in a  privileged position. I've never had a problem getting access to anybody. I suspect  that that will be the case in the coming year.

DAVID SPEERS:       Your read on the mood in caucus on the issue of consultation?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: I think the mood in the caucus is positive. You know, every  day in Government is a good day. We're getting forward with a Labor agenda. I sat  there for 12 years in Opposition. I ask this of those of you in the press gallery. Go  down, have a look at the people sitting on the right of the chair and ask whether  they're happier than the people on the left of the chair.

[Laughter]

I assure you, regardless of which political party is on the right of the chair, they will be  much happier. And one of the problems that we've had with the Opposition is that,  frankly, they thought there was a sniff. Tony Abbott thought on election night 2010  that he'd been elected Prime Minister. They started offering jobs to people. Tony  Abbott, at the Christmas function with the press gallery that year - it leaked, who  could have thought it - said I'll see you next year at the Lodge, I'll be hosting drinks at  the Lodge. That is what he said, as you would be aware.

None of it's happened. There's a great deal of frustration and angst there. One of the  things that's occurred in terms of all of our legislation being carried; not just that, but  not a single amendment carried to any piece of legislation without Government  support, is that they haven't focused on any of that. They're being too busy throwing  the toys out of the sandpit to worry about the big details, the big picture policy reform  issues. And I think probably the Parliament is poorer for it. I can assure you that at  the beginning of the Parliament I reckon if any of you - if I had have said we'll take 95  per cent of legislation being carried, you would have thought that was optimistic; 100  per cent is remarkable. And one of the reasons is that there's only been one team of  the field.

DAVID SPEERS: Just the final of Paul's question was how does consultation  compare under Julia Gillard to that of Kevin Rudd?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: I've never had a problem with consultation. I think that the  processes are there. You know, if ministers or members have an issue, then they  raise them. There's a caucus every week, there's caucus committee processes. They  raise them. Don't raise it with members of the gallery, you know, off the record. Stand  up and have a go. Raise it is my attitude towards these processes. It always has  been. It has been when I was on the backbench. It has been in the frontbench. And I  think that it is my attitude in general towards my relationship with the gallery as well. I  talk about what I think.

DAVID SPEERS: You're doing that today. Our next question is from Michelle  Grattan.

JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan, The Age. Mr Albanese, to go back to David's first  question about integrity and broken promises, can you give a guarantee on behalf of  the government that there will be no more breaking of significant promises in the  remaining part of this term? And secondly, you were giving us an explanation of the  broken promises with the hung Parliament. When people come to you in the next  election - come to the government and say, how can we believe you and your  promises this time because of the ones that have been broken? Is your argument  going to be, well, there won't be a hung Parliament next time, so promises won't  need to be broken?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: No. We need to get real about what the position is. And the  debate at the moment has been over the pokies legislation. The fact is, there are not  75 names putting their hand up, saying they will vote for Mr Wilkie's preferred option.  What there is a majority for, of the Parliament, is for the policies that will be put  forward, that are consistent with the Productivity Committee recommendations. Was  there an attempt to get the numbers for Mr Wilkie's proposition? Yes, there was. But  the numbers are not there. The Government will provide -would have provided our  votes for that to occur. There wasn't enough independent support for that to occur. In  spite of Mr Wilkie flying all the way to Western Australia and talking to the  Independents, there was not a single one of either Rob Oakeshott or Tony Crook or  Tony Windsor or Bob Katter saying that they would vote for that legislation. I think the  Australian people understand that reality. Is a hung Parliament my preferred option?  I'll give you a scoop, Michelle. My preferred option is 150 members of the Labor  Party in the House of Representatives and 76 - I think it is, I don't count numbers in  the Senate, so if I've got that wrong, I apologise, too many anyway, we know that - in  the Senate. That's my preferred option. Do that or implement our agenda. But over  some of the discussions, we need to also get real. It has been in the Labor platform  since 1991 that we would take action on climate change, that we supported market-based mechanisms, that we supported a price on carbon. The idea that post the

election, we sort of decided let's do something on climate change is, of course,  absurd as well.

JOURNALIST: Can you guarantee no more broken promises [indistinct]…?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: There has been no conscious decision to break promises.  We have dealt with the Parliament that we were given. And politics is the art of the  possible. If it was the case that an argument could be mounted saying we had not  tried to implement our agenda, then there would be a case. There is no case that that  has occurred since we were elected in 2007.   Indeed, when it comes to the issues that are raised most frequently, the issues of  carbon emissions, the idea if the Greens had just voted for an ETS, of course, we'd  have one now.

JOURNALIST: Lyndal Curtis from ABC News 24. You say you deal with the  Parliament you've been given, but on the list you outlined in your speech, the Prime  Minister said there would be no carbon tax before this Parliament was voted in; the  Minerals Resources Rent Tax was watered down before this Parliament was voted  in; the health and hospital reforms that Kevin Rudd aimed for were watered down  before this Parliament was voted in. Aren't some of Labor's wounds self-inflicted  rather than the fault of Parliamentary numbers? And while I'm on the topic of  Parliamentary numbers, have you effectively snatched defeat from the jaws of victory  by giving away the increased Parliamentary majority you got when Peter Slipper  become Speaker? And do you intend negotiating with Mr Slipper…

ANTHONY ALBANESE: And there's a few there.

JOURNALIST: …on any close votes there are in Parliament? But there was a  seamless thread through them. [Laughter]

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Okay. I'll do my best, and I'm sure you'll pull me up if I forget  any of them. On health and hospital reform and the mining tax, we're very proud of  the achievement that we've done. Parliament and politics isn't just about the  Parliament. It's also about engaging out there with the community. It's not just the  Parliament. We've done that. We've got through changes, in terms of the MRRT and  health and hospital reform which represent a significant breakthrough. Fifty per cent  more funding for health under this Government - more nurses, more doctors, more  beds. The sort of infrastructure that we see being rolled out due to Federal  Government hospital spending that we're seeing around the country is making a big  difference to people's lives. And health was one of the first issues that engaged me in  politics. I'm very proud of what we've done. The mining tax. You know, it's been a  battle to get what we've done, but we are ensuring that we have a situation whereby  the big miners, who can pay more and should pay more, will pay more, as a result of  us getting the legislation through the Parliament. So I think we've made a difference  there.

With regard to Mr Slipper, Mr Slipper is the Speaker. He doesn't vote on legislation.  He has a casting vote if there is a tie. I'll give you the hint, Lyndal. There's 149 people  in the parliament, okay - there's usually not a tie as a result of that - plus the  Speaker. That's what occurs. It is very unusual - unless someone abstains, there will  never be a tie on anything. And if it occurs, I would expect Mr Slipper to respect the  Parliamentary conventions which are there. Tony Abbott said he wanted an  independent Speaker. He's got one. He's got one in Mr Slipper. He's got one. Be  careful of what you ask for. And the reason why this is an issue at all, in terms of the  balance of power in the House of Representatives, is because Tony Abbott walked

away from the written agreement that he signed up to that the Speaker and the  Deputy Speaker be paired. He was directly involved in those negotiations. He walked  away from it, seeking to secure a short term political advantage, and he did. As a  result of Mr Jenkins being the Speaker, Labor was denied a vote on the floor. Now it  is the case that as a result of Mr Slipper becoming Speaker and his resignation from  the LNP, the Coalition, or the No-alition, is one vote down on the floor. It is an  example of how short term political opportunism catches up with you. It caught up  with Tony Abbott at about nine o'clock on the last sitting day of last year.

DAVID SPEERS: The final part of Lyndal's question was about negotiating with  Andrew Wilkie. Is that right, Lyndal?

JOURNALIST: [Indistinct] if you effectively won an increase in your majority, with the  decision to put Mr Slipper in the Speaker, haven't you given that away before  Parliament has even sat because of the deal's broken down with Mr Wilkie?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: No. Mr Wilkie has made it very clear that the position with  regard to confidence motions is essentially the same as the condition that was in  there in the agreement, which is he has made it clear he wants the Government to  serve a full term, that confidence motions should only occur with regard to corruption  or some such matter - it shouldn't be considered in an opportunist political way. And  with regard to issues being considered on their merits before the Parliament, I assure  you, I have long discussions with Andrew Willkie, Rob Oakeshott, Tony Windsor and  Adam Bandt and also Tony Crook and Bob Katter. The idea that any of them are an  automatic tick in the box for any bill is just wrong, and you know that that's the case.  Andrew Willkie has considered bills on his merits up to now. He will continue to do  so. He is someone though who I think is someone of integrity. I think he will  genuinely look at issues on their merits. But he has done so up to this point.

JOURNALIST: Misha Schubert from The Sunday Age. Minister, you were boasting  before about the government not having lost a single legislative vote in the 16  months of minority government. At the risk of being accused of being churlish, I might  suggest that part of the reason you haven't done that is because you've not bowled  up legislation when you knew it would fail in the Parliament.But why not? What's the  psychological and tactical value to you of not losing a vote? Why not bowl up for  instance, the Malaysia offshore processing legislation and make Tony Abbott vote  against it, even if that legislation were to fail because then you could still campaign  against him on offshore processing.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well the numbers of course on that particular piece of  legislation have perhaps changed in terms of the House of Representatives given  now what people previously had indicated. So, what we are about is making sure  where the numbers haven't changed on that legislation is in the Senate, where  without either the Coalition or Greens support, then that legislation would fail even if it  went through the House of Representatives. Just like in other issues, we're about  making a difference, not about having a vote for the sake of having a vote. We're  actually about change, making a difference. It's the theme of my speech today, that  we're not there just to grandstand or make a political point. And you can make  political points, but at the end of the day you're judged, particularly in terms of where  - two years before the next election on whether a difference has been make or not. Is  it possible for our legislation to be carried through the House of Representatives?  Quite possibly. But the reason why it had not been put to a vote was obviously the  Government intended to engage in discussion. It was hopeful that Tony Abbott would  actually see some common sense in terms of - given that the legislation is consistent  with what he says he wants to do. But there is the added issue of the Senate.



With regard to Bills being lost, I would be surprised if - well, I am surprised, frankly,  that Bills haven't been lost on the floor of the House of Representatives. I don't think  it makes any big deal unless its a confidence motion. Just like there are votes lost on  the floor of the Senate all the time and have been for a long while. This is a new  political culture. What we've seen is that - though, the Coalition have attempted to  talk up the problem if that occurs. And some in the media have bought what is a  lemon of an argument.

DAVID SPEERS: I might just jump in with a question. Taking to your portfolio; you  mentioned and gave a quite a compelling argument as to the need for a second  Sydney airport. What's on the table? What's off the table? And when are we going to  see a decision on this?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: The committee is meeting in February. Very consciously  when we established the joint federal state committee we said it would report, you  know, after the New South Wales election. It was reasonable to assume that there  would be a change of government in New South Wales. What that brought together  is Federal Labor with State Coalition. Unless there is some level of bipartisanship for  a second airport, it is simply an issue which if it's a subject as it has been in the past  of partisan politics, we won't get an advance there. Certainly the attitude, even of the  existing owners of Sydney Airport I think you'll find has changed in recent times.  They know that there is a real problem with the constraint that's there at Sydney  Airport. Essentially, the peak hour slots are just about full now. If you look at the  projections of our region of what will happen with aviation in terms of China in  particular, but also India, Indonesia, Vietnam, the prospects of a considerable  increase in aviation activity over a period of time are there.

I was in China just before December. China is building not one new airport, but  dozens of new airports as we see the rising middle class in our region we have an  opportunity to seize that in terms of tourism dollars and economic activity. So this  isn't an issue about noise. This is an issue about economic necessity. And the  analysis that's been done by the Federal Government, together with the State  Government in terms of planning has been done. There are deliberately no politicians  on that committee - the only former politician is former Coalition Minister Warwick  Smith - deliberately so that it's done in a way that advances the possibility of actually  getting some progress on this issue. I've spoken with members of the Coalition about  this issue as well. But unless there is a level of bipartisanship then I am pessimistic  about being able to achieve support for a second airport site. There is an exhaustive  process has been gone through. The Government's position has been to rule out the  Badgery's Creek site - that is our position. But with regard to the other sites, there's  an exhaustive process that depends upon how big you have it and what that is,  whether it's just an overflow airport, single runway or double runway. They've done a  lot of work, but they've also done a lot of work on what happens if you don't do  something about a second airport.



JOURNALIST: Hi again, Minister. I'd like to, if I may, take you to your - away from  your Ministerial position to your position as hard man of the left faction of the Labor  Party. And I note that…

ANTHONY ALBANESE: I've been trying to soften that image, Matthew.              [Laughter]



QUESTION:   I note that in the last election basically, I don't think you'd disagree; the  Greens smashed Labor from the left. They won Melbourne, are into you in Grayndler,  they're into Sydney, Tanya Plibersek's seat. And I would argue that since then they  have, because of the profile they've got and the issues in which they've championed  such as gay marriage and offshore processing, they've pretty much supplanted the  Labor left of which is your tradition. I wonder whether you agree with that. And I  wonder, what can Labor do - the Labor left do to reconnect with these people in  inner-city suburbs, many of whom are more interested in the kind of issues that the  Greens talk about than in the hard bread and butter issues that the sort of traditional  Labor right wing talk about. What are you doing about it? How are you going to  survive?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: I make it a policy of not talking at forums such as this as a  factional person. But I will speak as who I am, which is I think that labels it the Labor  Party I think don't tell necessarily the real story, either in terms of where people line  up on particular issues. I think one of the mistakes is the premise that somehow the  Greens and progressives in the Labor Party believe in the same things - they don't. I  believe that you need to have a strong economy in order to achieve social policy and  environmental advance. I believe that working class people and their interests matter.  I don't think that in terms of positions, my view is that I don't understand why anyone  who's about progressive change in society wants to lobby the decision makers when  you can be the decision makers. I sit in the Cabinet. I get to make decisions as a  Minister. What you seek to do; the highlight of being a Greens Party member or an  independent is being able to lobby a government minister from a position of  necessity, be that in the House of Representatives or the Senate. The main game is  actually being a minister, not lobbying ministers. So whilst I respect the fact that  people have different views and we have a pluralist political system, where I come  from, is very much that. And I think that in a number of circumstances.

There are practical examples, the most important of which is the Greens failure to  support an emissions trading scheme, resulted in Tony Abbott overthrowing Malcolm  Turnbull as the leader of that political party, resulted in therefore a significant impetus  being given to the right wing forces of the Coalition and resulted in a deferral of  action on climate change. When the Greens Party members were in a position to  influence the outcome, which we now have in terms of a price on carbon, guess  what, there's compromise there. There's still support for industry, there's still support  for jobs, there is still a fixed price as there was for the ETS evolving into a market-based system, exactly the same in both. The difference is in one circumstance they  were around the table, in others they weren't; they were outside just criticising it. But I  am yet to see what the big difference is and how the Greens Party justifies  supporting one and not the other.

JOURNALIST: Minister, John O'Doherty from the Nine Network again. If there is an  adverse finding against Craig Thomson by either the police or Fair Work Australia,  will the govern…

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well, there's a hypothetical, there's…

JOURNALIST: There's the hypothetical……but humour me with it…

ANTHONY ALBANESE: So if I was a policeman and a court, or - really. I mean, see,  that's the problem. Is that if you have a question that starts off with that, you know,  what if there was a finding for a member of the Coalition doing, you know, X or Y. It's  absurd. It shows how much the Coalition have attempted to really create a furphy.

What I say is that processes which are legal or quasi-judicial or judicial should be left  to those processes.

JOURNALIST: The reality is there is an inquiry going on…

ANTHONY ALBANESE: They should be left to those processes and shouldn't be  intervened on by politicians, as we didn't seek to intervene into the process with  regard to the one member of Parliament who, this term I know of, has been charged  with something; that was someone in South Australia.

JOURNALIST: Well, if you're not prepared to say whether you would protect him or  cut him loose, can you say at this point in time you fully support him?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: I fully support Craig Thomson as the elected Member for  Dobell, as I fully support everyone else who is an elected member of Parliament. I  think in this country people are entitled to a presumption of innocence. It's as simple  as that.

JOURNALIST: Paul Osborne from AAP. Just back on the Queensland election.  Campbell Newman has tried to make it a referendum on the carbon tax, given  Queensland's mining state and so on. What federal issues do you think will be in the  running during the Queensland election?

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well there could well be a few no doubt. One of them will be  in my area in terms of infrastructure and transport; the reconstruction of Queensland.  I think it is quite remarkable the job that the Queensland Labor government, under  Premier Bligh, has done in reconstructing Queensland from the devastation of 12  months ago. A remarkable effort. Literally, thousands of kilometres of roads rebuilt,  schools, hospitals, rail lines. The economy got back on track - excuse the pun - in  terms of its economic performance, in terms of employment. A good outcome. All of  those issues I think will be very positive for Premier Bligh in terms of her re-election.  And it compares with what is very much an Opposition that's so prepared to vote no  confidence in itself that they're run by someone, as the Leader, who is not even in  the Parliament. What does it say about a team that doesn't have a single member of  the caucus who they think is capable of leading Queensland?

DAVID SPEERS:       Anthony Albanese, thank you.









