





ABC Newsradio  School funding

Posted on September 14, 2012

SUB



JECTS: School funding

E&OE………

(Greetings omitted)

Marius Benson: Christopher Pyne, the battlelines did seem to be drawn in parliament this  week with the Labor Party accusing you of being the party of slashing public spending, and  you accusing Labor of being wasteful and big spenders. Are you happy with that sort of  argument over the next twelve months to the next election?

Christopher Pyne: Well Labor does need to explain where it is getting the money from for all  its promises. There is $120 billion. That is an enormous amount of money. $120 billion of  Labor unfunded promises and every Australian knows that you have to live within your  means. Or you can borrow on the credit card or go into debt. Labor has said it is very happy  to keep borrowing on the credit card. The Coalition is saying we need to live within our  means.

Benson: Now the Labor Party is saying however, Mr Pyne, we are simply seeing this week in  Queensland and NSW just a dress rehearsal for the cuts ahead under a federal Coalition. Is  that accurate?

Pyne: Well Labor is trying to distract people from the carbon tax, from the boat arrivals, from  the Prime Minister’s integrity, from its $120 billion black hole.

Benson: But I am wondering if I can take you to the Coalition rather than Labor and ask you  is tha  t the Coalition intention to have substantial cuts?

Pyne: Well Marius I am explaining why Labor is talking about every other issue besides their  own government. Now I thought it was unusual this week that Labor has talked about

Queensland and NSW Parliaments rather than their own. I think it is bizarre that Labor has  spent the week talking about everything else but their own government.

Benson: But can I ask you about the Coalition’s plans - does the Coalition have a very large  axe as Labor is claiming?

Pyne: Of course it doesn’t. The Liberal Party, if elected, will do exactly as Liberal  governments always do which is find out exactly what the situation is with the books because  Labor never tells the truth about their budget failures. And then we will try and grow the  economy and cut tax so that we can get revenue back into the Commonwealth budget through  increasing economic growth rather than what Labor has done which is allowed for the unions  to run industrial relations in this country, allowed for the unions to go on a spree of union  militancy to make demands from business which has forced business out of work.

Benson: But if the Coalition does find that these circumstances are different when, and if, it  gains power next year - could there be cuts in areas like your own, education?

Pyne: Well Marius we will live within our means and that means that we will have to do the  things that need to be done to ensure that we are growing the economy. And that means  getting government out of the way of business, cutting regulation, cutting green tape and red  tape. And we have said that we will save a $1 billion a year just on cutting red tape alone. I  think that will be a welcome relief to Australian business and I think households will be glad  with a government in Canberra trying to get out of the way of business and grow the  economy rather than heaping more and more red tape on them.

Benson: But what is the voter going to make on the claim and counterclaim this week in your  narrow, large but narrow in this context, area of education? Will there be cuts or will there be  any increasing in spending?

Pyne: Well I wouldn’t believe anything the Labor Party says about the Coalition’s policies.

Benson: Well don’t worry about the Labor Party, what is the Coalition’s intention?

Pyne: Well I have announced that we will increase spending in education by $4.2 billion at  least which is 6% indexation on top of the current quantum.

Benson: And that is not dependent on the circumstances of the economy when you come into  power?

Pyne: No. Absolutely not. That is an absolute commitment. We have said that we will  increase spending on top of the current quantum by 6% indexation each year. That we will  have a capital infrastructure fund, we will have a relentless focus on teacher quality, a robust  curriculum and principal autonomy and we will stop the discrimination against disabled  children at school between non-government and government schools by allowing their  funding to be portable.

Benson: That is Christopher Pyne, the opposition’s spokesperson on education.

ENDS

