Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Ali Al Abbasi (Captain Emad), Cocos Islands  Friday, 15 June 2012

Interview with Alexandra Kirk, ABC PM

Chris Bowen: Well my department has been conducting investigations in  consultation with its sister departments overseas about the information Mr Al  Abbasi provided as part of his refugee claim, and whether that information was  consistent.

I now believe there is enough information to put suggestions to him that he needs to  answer as to the lack of consistency in some of that information and the appropriate  way to do it is to put the evidence to him and allow him to answer those questions.

Alexandra Kirk: When did you first have doubts about the information that he  provided that allowed him to get a refugee visa?

Bowen: Well I asked my department to conduct this investigation. Clearly I said on  the day after this was aired publicly that I'd ask for an investigation into the  information he provided and whether it was consistent. That exhaustive  investigation has occurred since then, and again we've been working closely with  other agencies both in Australia and offshore to test that information.

The advice that's come back to me is that there is enough grounds to doubt some  of that information to begin this process of considering to cancel his visa.

Kirk: Isn't it a bit embarrassing that you only doubted the information as a result of  the Four Corners expose?

Bowen: No, not at all, and I've seen this suggestion around by some, including my  Shadow Minister, and I reject that entirely - it's ridiculous suggestion. Operational  agencies, the AFP, conduct their own investigations, they very correctly keep that  operational and don't politicise the information. That's exactly the way it happened  under previous governments and I daresay it's the way it would happen under any  future Liberal administration.

Kirk: Except that if the police were looking into him before the Four Corners  program went to air, shouldn't the police have informed, say the Department of  Immigration or you, to say, 'Look there is some extra information here that you may  need to take into account'?

Bowen: No. No, very clearly it is an operational matter for the Australian Federal  Police. Now let me be very clear about this too: this process that we're beginning  today, of informing him that his visa may be cancelled and that he be issued with a  Notice of Intention to Cancel, is not based on character grounds, it's not based on  people smuggling issues, it's based on potential inconsistencies in information  provided.

Now let's put this in context: there have been 220 cancellations of visas under this  power in the last financial year. There's been 40 000 visas cancelled in Australia in  the last financial year out of the 4.5 million people who entered Australia either  permanently or temporarily. So from time-to-time, yes, the Department of  Immigration does come across information which shows that people weren't full and  frank in their application to come to Australia, and we take the appropriate action in  response to that.

Kirk: Well what was the information that you had that you, say, couldn't have had in  the last couple of years?

Bowen: Well I can't go, obviously, into the details of the investigation, that would  prejudice the process. What I can say is that he provides certain information to the  Department of Immigration to support his refugee status, his claim for refugee  status; there is now enough concern about some of that information to put to him  that he may not have been entirely consistent in that information and that that may  be grounds for cancelling his visa.

Kirk: Such as his business operations?

Bowen: Well look, I'm not going to go through the details Alex, I can't conduct this -  with all due respect to the ABC, this is a very important matter under law and is not  to be conducted through the media. There are inconsistencies - potential  inconsistencies - in the information he provided, it's appropriate that he be given  the opportunity to answer those inconsistencies. If he doesn't have satisfactory  answers the result is pretty self-evident.

Kirk: There's some suggestion that Mr Al Abbasi was a police informant. Is that  why he was granted a refugee visa?

Bowen: Look, I'm not going to go into speculation, rumours or scuttlebutt about Mr  Al Abbasi and certainly about operational matters of the Australian Federal Police.

Kirk: You say that you'll be notifying him when he flies back to Australia. Do you  believe that he will return to Australia?

Bowen: Oh well, look, that's a matter for him. I've seen speculation about that.  Clearly, if he returns to Australia he does so in the knowledge that there's a process  underway which would require him to answer questions as to the information he  provided to the Department of Immigration.

Kirk: We've seen, over the past couple of weeks, a rash of asylum seeker boats  arriving on Cocos Island. Do you know why that is and do you expect more?

Bowen: Well, I don't go through intelligence. Obviously any arrival by boat, as I've  said ad nauseum, is concerning because it means people are risking their lives at  sea to get here.

Kirk: But do you think there are new forces at play here?

Bowen: Oh look, what is very clear is that people will make the boat journey to  Australia if there is no effective deterrent through offshore processing to do so.

Kirk: But are you concerned there is, you know, this big outflow of people from Sri  Lanka - that there's something going on in Sri Lanka that's causing them to flee?

Bowen: Well I'm always concerned about boat arrivals in Australia; I'm always  concerned that people feel it's worth their while to risk their life to come to Australia  in that fashion. I'm concerned about that whether they come from Sri Lanka,  Afghanistan, Iran or elsewhere.



