Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Offshore processing legislation  Thursday, 28 June 2012

Interview with Kieran Gilbert, Sky News AM Agenda

Chris Bowen: Every government - with the exception of a small period of time -  every government's had to negotiate its legislation through the Senate; but  yesterday we saw people of goodwill - people with whom it didn't sit particularly well  - change their minds and support the government's position. Independent MPs who  previously had been opposed to our proposal; we saw a Liberal MP indicating he  was willing to cross the floor if necessary. So, these things can change, and  Senators, if they reflect on the national interest - individual Senators or Senators as  a party - can reflect on what we need to do for the nation and what we need to do to  save people's lives.

This can pass the Senate today. In fact, it's the only piece of legislation in this  space which can pass the Senate today. So we can leave the Parliament before the  winter recess with legislation passed, which lets the government implement its  policies and save lives.

Kieran Gilbert: But it's not going to happen is it? Because you need eight Senators  to cross the floor, it's just not going to happen.

Bowen: Well Kieran, we are obviously prosecuting our case. Is it difficult in the  Senate? Of course it is, but it doesn't need to be. Tony Abbott could, this morning,  approach the government and could indicate support for the legislation, or he could  indicate he's willing to enter into discussions with the government, at least, to see  this legislation passed.

We've got the situation where the government says that Malaysia would work to  save people's lives; the Opposition says Nauru would work to save people's lives -  we disagree. What's important here is, is there anybody who could argue to you or  to the Parliament that if we implemented today, Malaysia and Nauru, lives wouldn't  be saved? I don't believe anybody could argue that to you sensibly or rationally.

And if no Senator can argue that, no Member of Parliament can argue that, then  this Bill should pass today.

Gilbert: But Minister, you know the Coalition's not going to relent on this. Surely  Nauru at the very least, when MPs return to their electorates at the end of the day  for the winter break - surely the government will accept that as Plan B?

Bowen: We want to see Nauru as a complement to Malaysia but we're not going to  walk away from good policy before the Parliament. We are prosecuting our case  before the Parliament. Obviously we will deal with the results of whatever  Parliamentary vote we have deal with, but what I'm saying to you Kieran is that we

have moved significantly, substantially, to save people's lives and to get this  through the Parliament.

You and I have talked about it. You've seen it happen over a long period: us begin  discussions with the Opposition, us offering Nauru. I mean, let's just see how far the  Labor Party's gone here: something which didn't sit very comfortably with many in  the Labor Party, but we argued that to see this done we would open a detention  centre on Nauru - to save lives.

Now, what has the Liberal Party done in response? They haven't moved a  centimetre, not a centimetre, to save lives. We need to see this legislation pass the  Parliament today. That's what we're focussed on, that's the job of governments - to  prosecute their case. Now, obviously, we will deal with the implications of whatever  Parliamentary vote there is today -

Gilbert: So from that -

Bowen: - there's only one legislation before the Senate, there's only one piece that  can be passed today.

Gilbert: When you say you'll deal with the implications - and I want to get back to  the Coalition not moving a centimetre at the moment, because they would argue  they have - but on the prospect beyond this vote today: will you accept a gridlock  that won't have any change in policy, if that vote fails or do you have a Plan B?

Bowen: Well Kieran I'm focussed on the vote today in the Parliament. I'm focussed  on getting the legislation through. Obviously that is the government's priority. Now,  that is why - as I say Kieran - we've moved so much, that is why we've moved so  substantially.

Gilbert: You can't allow the status quo surely?

Bowen: Well the Parliament can't allow the status quo, Kieran. The Parliament  should not allow the status quo. The Parliament should say, 'Hang on a second, we  all agree with offshore processing and the Australian people are crying out for this  issue to be passed through the Parliament'. The government is prepared to see it  pass through the Parliament, and surely the Opposition is too.

What was clear yesterday, with all due respect to all the speakers yesterday, is  there can be no coherent and sensible opposition to a policy which is based on  countries needing to be a Refugee Convention signatory when the Opposition's  policy is to turn boats around to Indonesia, which is not a signatory, regardless of  who's on the boats - there could be children on the boats, very young children - with  no guarantees or no protections built in about what happens to them in Indonesia.

This underlines the fragility of the Opposition's policy position and I call on the  Opposition to move away from that position today and to say, 'We don't agree with  all the government's policies, but we will allow the government to implement them',  just as -

Gilbert: You say -

Bowen: - just as Kieran - let me finish this point - just as John Howard did in 2001  to Kim Beazley. Nauru would never had opened, would never have opened without

Kim Beazley ensuring the passage of the legislation through the Senate; just as  John Howard didn't have the numbers in the Senate, just as we don't have the  numbers in the Senate.

Gilbert: You say that the Coalition hasn't moved on this, but they have -

Bowen: No.

Gilbert: Yesterday Tony Abbott did.

Bowen: He didn't -

Gilbert: Well he promised a sunset clause, he said that -

Bowen: He voted against the sunset clause, Kieran. I mean, let's go through this -

Gilbert: But, but, what else - he offered an increase in the humanitarian intake - a  substantial increase as well, so at least there was some movement from them  saying, 'Ok, we're willing, we are willing to budge'.

Bowen: Well let's deal with each of those issues in turn. The government actually  negotiated and agreed a sunset clause with Mr Wilkie. After that, Mr Abbott held his  press conference and said, 'I support a sunset clause', and then the Opposition  voted against it. So I'm really not sure what's going on there.

And secondly in relation to the refugee intake, now I proposed an increase as an  aspiration to the refugee intake last year. The Liberal Party said I was desperate, it  was a ridiculous policy, that we couldn't afford it, that they pointed out correctly it  would cost $1.3 billion over four years; and then yesterday, on the back of an  envelope, they said, 'Well we'll increase the refugee intake'. Not to try and get an  agreement with the Labor Party, not to try and get legislation through the  Parliament, but to try and stop one of their own MPs voting for the legislation -  voting for the legislation. That was not a compromise to try and get legislation  through, it was a desperate measure to try and stop the legislation getting through.

So I don't accept, Kieran, that the Opposition is in any way moved to try and work  with the government to get this legislation through.

Gilbert: Ok, well as this gridlock - the debate continues, the words continue in this  Parliament - more boats arrive; we've seen more developments overnight, another  vessel, as the fallout continues from yesterday's tragedy, it just is not going to stop.

Bowen: Well it is not going to stop until we have offshore processing, but proper  offshore processing, offshore processing which sees people being very clear that if  they come to Australia by boat they will not be processed in Australia -

Gilbert: Well for the Greens - do the Greens frustrate you on that?

Bowen: Well I disagree with the Greens fundamentally, I think their position in  naïve. I think it is not based on the practical reality of the situation. I do accept they  hold it genuinely, I do accept it has always been their position against offshore  processing.

That's the difference in my approach to the Greens and the Liberals: I wish the  Greens would change their mind, but I do accept that they believe what they say  about offshore processing. On the other hand, the Liberal Party says they support  offshore processing, they believe in turning boats around to a country that is not a  signatory to the Refugee Convention, but they won't support a package which has  been painstakingly negotiated with the United Nations High Commissioner, with  Malaysia as part of the Bali Framework - they won't cop that. Now I don't accept the  premise of that genuine opposition.

So I fundamentally disagree with the Greens approach, but I do accept their  genuineness. I hope and wish they change their mind, but I more importantly, I  hope and wish the Liberal Party would say, 'We do support offshore processing and  we will vote for it'.

Gilbert: Mr Bowen, a big day ahead - another big day - and I appreciate your time.

Bowen: Thanks Kieran.



