Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

ABC News Breakfast Subjects: Australia’s trade policy; China; US economy; productivity growth; work visas;  asylum-seekers.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

2 November 2012

MICHAEL ROWLAND: When our major trading partners are turning inwards, how does  Australia remain open in its dealings with the rest of the world? And what can be done to  reduce the risk of a trade war between China and the United States?

KARINA CAVALHO: Those are the questions that Trade Minister Craig Emerson will be  addressing at a gathering of some of the country’s top thinkers and policy-makers today.  Craig Emerson will be appearing at the Melbourne Institutes’ Economic and Social Outlook  Conference. He joins us now in the studio. Good morning; thanks for being here.

CRAIG EMERSON: My pleasure.

CAVALHO: This is very timely, given the Government’s release of the Asian Century White  Paper that calls for greater free trade agreements …

EMERSON: That’s right.

CAVALHO: … with Asian countries. And yet, just this morning, there were reports that free  trade agreements with Japan and South Korea were being held up and, of course, Australia’s  free trade agreement with China is now in to its eighth year.

EMERSON: Yes. That’s true. We are open traders. We’ve benefited enormously from that.  We’ve had 21 years of recession-free economic growth because we came up with this idea  that maybe we shouldn’t just be buying and selling to each other in Australia, but selling to the  world. And that’s what the Hawke-Keating Governments put in place: an open, competitive  economy. So that’s benefited us. It actually has been the case that in our own region tariffs  have come down very substantially under the auspices of APEC, the Asia-Pacific economic  community. But of course, more needs to be done, and we’re right out in the forefront seeking  to do that. I’ve just come back from Geneva, for example. We’re one of the few countries that  is really energised still about the so-called Doha Round of multi-lateral trade negotiations. And  there were some fresh winds blowing round Geneva. In or own region, we’ll keep pressing for  further liberalisation.

ROWLAND: And how important is the relationship between the US and China? What are you  making about that as far as trade goes at the moment? You might have to wait at least  another week to find out what the future holds from the US perspective?

Page 1 of 3 ABC News Breakfast, transcript, 2 November 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121102_abc_news.html

EMERSON: A week is not a long time in politics in that regard. Look, China and the US  actually depend on each other. When you talk to the Chinese authorities, they don’t see the  US as a rival over which they should triumph in trade. What they actually want to do is to see  the US economy growing again. And when the US presidential election is over, and hopefully  the Congress deals with this so-called fiscal cliff - where otherwise there would be quite a big  contraction in the US - then there will be more confidence in the global economy. That’s good  for China.

CAVALHO: I wanted to ask you about those comments from the Treasurer, Wayne Swan: is  he talking out of turn here when he’s warning the United States, effectively, that if it doesn’t  take action on tax hikes and spending cuts …

EMERSON: I back Wayne Swan on this.

CAVALHO: … it’s going to go over a fiscal cliff?

EMERSON: It is. I mean, that’s actually a fact. That’s an undisputed fact. The estimate is that  if something is not done by the Congress to break the gridlock, there could be a contraction in  the US of 5 percentage points of GDP. That’s enormous. Now we believe, surely, that  common sense will prevail after the presidential election is over and all the politicking is done.

CAVALHO: But is it correct for the Treasurer to be lecturing the United States on what it  should do?

EMERSON: He’s alerting the world to the reality that if there is not an accommodation, the  breaking of the gridlock that has beset the US Congress, then bad consequences would flow.  But given there’s a big lead-up to the presidential election - and obviously everyone’s

posturing and doing the very best for their parties - after that, here’s an opportunity to get an  actual boost to global economic growth.

CAVALHO: But he’s also said that he wants to see 4 per cent growth in the United States.  Now, would we be happy if the United States was lecturing us on our economy like this?

EMERSON: Within the United States, this is just a factual analysis; it’s not a lecture. It is a  reality that if there is not a breaking of the deadlock, then there is a real problem. That’s bad  for the US economy, and because of the enormity of the US economy, that flows back into  China, our region, ultimately, the whole world.

ROWLAND: What’s your response to the Productivity Commission’s Gary Banks making  some criticisms about our reform policies in Australia?

EMERSON: Well, we’ve been a very strong reforming Government. With the White Paper,  we’ve set out a new set of reform priorities to lift our productivity growth. This is what Gary is  on about: he’s the Chair of the Productivity Commission. Last year our productivity growth  was 3.7 per cent. That is a big kick-up from what has been pretty flat productivity growth for  almost a decade, because there wasn’t a productivity-raising reform program under the  previous government. We’re building it on innovation, infrastructure, education, tax reform and  reform of the regulatory system. So, of course, we agree there should be a lift in productivity  growth; we’re doing everything we can. Gary has included in his prescriptions an increase in  the GST - no, we won’t do that. We won’t do everything that the Chair of the Productivity  Commission advocates. But I think he understands that.

Page 2 of 3 ABC News Breakfast, transcript, 2 November 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121102_abc_news.html

CAVALHO: I want to ask you about overseas labour and foreign workers, because Chevron  is now going to bring in over 150 foreign workers for its $30 billion gas plant in Western  Australia, the Gorgon Gas project. How are they bringing those workers into Australia,  because it’s not under the Enterprise Migration Agreement, is it?

EMERSON: Well, there are 457 Visa arrangements which allow people to come in via the  skilled migration category. They don’t come in for ever, because it is a visa. I’m not saying  that is the device; there are another set of visas that Chevron could access. And then, as you  say, more broadly there are Enterprise Agreement arrangements. Defining features of those  is that the company must look for, actively, Australian workers - and if there aren’t sufficient  Australian workers, then there needs to be a training program, plus the possibility of bringing  in foreign workers to fill the gaps. That’s the way it works.

ROWLAND: Mr Emerson, I’m not sure how much you’ve heard of this, but the Indonesian  Head of Immigration Enforcement has told the ABC that asylum-seeker policies - our asylum-seeker policies; your asylum-seeker policies - won’t work. Is this being constantly reviewed as  situations like this crop up, and Indonesian officials speak out?

EMERSON: We work closely with the Indonesian Government on these matters. We are  implementing all of the recommendations of the Houston Panel Report, and they are an  integrated whole. What won’t work is towing boats back to Indonesia.

ROWLAND: These are some pretty heavy criticisms, and warnings from Indonesia.

EMERSON: Well, Indonesia is feeling the pressure of dealing with large numbers of asylum-seekers. The best way of addressing this is through a regional approach, and that includes  really good relations with Indonesia. If you want to destroy the relationship with Indonesia, tow

boats back into Indonesian waters. And that’s exactly the reason that Tony Abbott did not  have the courage to raise the tow-back policy when he had the opportunity with the President  of Indonesia.

CAVALHO: Craig Emerson, we’ll have to leave it there. Thank you.

EMERSON: Thank you very much.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 3 of 3 ABC News Breakfast, transcript, 2 November 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and...

25/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_121102_abc_news.html

