Minister for School Education Peter Garrett

Minister for Health Tanya Plibersek

NSW Leader of the Opposition John Robertson

Sydney press conference on NAPLAN, school funding, national  partnerships, NSW health cuts

Friday 14 September 2012

PETER GARRETT: Look, thanks everybody for coming down to Saint Teresa's in  Mascot. It's a great pleasure to be back at this wonderful school in the electorate of  Kingsford Smith, I'm particularly proud of and it's terrific to go in and have a look at  the wonderful hall that we were here for the opening for not that long ago. Thank you  Kylie, and thank you to the school principals for hosting us at the school. Today we  have the release of the national summary of the NAPLAN tests Australia wide. What  can I say about this?  Well, I can say the following.

The first thing is that it's pleasing to see that we have about a million students that sit  these tests. We're seeing a consistent trend of about 92 per cent of our Australian  students nationwide sitting at or above the minimum level standards that we think is  absolutely essential for the foundations for a good education. We're seeing some  good improvement in areas such as literacy, particularly spelling, punctuation,  particularly in the early years, and I think that is in some ways a reflection of the big  investment that the Federal Labor Government has placed into early learning and  care.

As you'd probably know, we invest something in excess of $20 billion in that early  years learning framework. I think it's very encouraging to see the way in which Year  3s in particular have performed here. We're also seeing statistical improvements  over time in terms of from 2008 to 2012. Again, mainly in the literacy areas, in  numeracy as well, in Year 5 and they are good and encouraging results. But we've  still got a long way to go, and certainly when it comes to writing, we've seen some  decline and I think for Year 9s as well, in the NAPLAN tests, it's stable rather than a  gradual improvement. Of course, I think all states would like to see that improve over  time as well.

What this means is that there's more work for us to do if we're to reach the top five  performing education nations by 2025. That's the goal that we've set ourselves. And  in order to do that we need to have a national plan for school improvement, agreed  by all states, to get on with that task. That's why it's so, absolutely critical that the  NSW Government and Premier O'Farrell reconsider the cuts that are now being  planned for schools here in NSW, some $1.7 billion of cuts. Bearing in mind that the  NSW Government in its submission to the Gonski panel review not only indicated  and identified the need for increased investment in education, but also specifically  said that the advances that have been made by the national partnerships that we  have in place in states like NSW should not be lost.

Indeed, this is one school where we've had the National Partnerships in place and  it's one school where we've always seen good improvements in the performance of  students at this school. So if we're serious about education, we can't cut funding to  education. If we're serious about responding to the NAPLAN tests today, we realise  that there's more to do. If we're going to do more to help kids in our schools improve  their education performance then that's not going to happen by imposing cuts of the  order of magnitude that Barry O'Farrell has in place here in NSW. I'm now going to  hand over to Dr Dan White from the Catholic Education Office to make some  remarks. John Robertson, Opposition Leader is here as well, and after that, I'm  happy to take questions. (Comments from Catholic Education spokesperson omitted)

JOHN ROBERTSON: Today we're seeing the results of the NAPLAN test and we're  seeing that if you invest in education you start to see improvements in the  educational outcomes of our students. In NSW we have a government lead by Barry  O'Farrell who is cutting $1.7 billion from the education budget. That means  insufficient funds for kids to get proper educational outcomes. It means that money  will disappear for things like text books, for whiteboards, for computers, the sort of  support that students need to make sure that Australia becomes a nation in the top  five by 2025 for education.

We need to be making sure that we've got governments that are investing in  education, investing in our children's future and I'm very worried that these cuts are  going to see our students in NSW slip behind simply because they don't get the  support they need, they don't get access to the whiteboards, the computers, the text  books that they need and they don't have the teachers that they need in their  classrooms. Barry O'Farrell didn't talk about this during the election campaign and no  one voted for Barry O'Farrell to cut $1.7 billion from the education budget in NSW.

JOURNALIST: What's your understanding of the effect that the indexation of the  state education budget under the federal education budget will have?

JOHN ROBERTSON: Well, my understanding is that the funding could well be  affected because of this. Barry O'Farrell is having a significant impact by cutting $1.7  billion. It's going to affect every school in New South Wales and it will affect every  student in the classroom as a result of a cut of this magnitude.

JOURNALIST: What about the health cuts today? The Minister says that $1 billion  will be lost but $2 billion and $3 billion would be sort of recycled to the frontline.

JOHN ROBERTSON: We've got a budget that was released in July this year and  three months later the details of that budget have emerged this week. $3 billion  being cut from our health budget means that we are going to continue to see a  blowout in waiting times, in the length of time people wait in emergency departments.  The Bureau of Health has already released information that says demand in our  emergency departments has grown by seven per cent in the last three months. A cut  of $3 billion means that we're going to continue to see ambulances outside of  emergency departments with bed block. We're going to see cleanliness decline in  our hospitals, we're going to see catering services cut, we will see waiting times blow  out simply because this Government is more interested in cutting funding to

education, cutting funding to health than they are in delivering the services that the  people of NSW voted for when they elected Barry O'Farrell.

JOURNALIST: Where do you specifically understand the health cuts are coming  from?

JOHN ROBERTSON: Well, these health cuts will be across the board. There will be  job cuts, and the only thing that we've heard from the Minister that's set in concrete  is that nurses will be excluded. But allied health professionals will not be excluded,  so radiographers, physiotherapists, doctors, visiting medical officers, catering staff,  cleaning staff, none of those people are exempt from these cuts and that means our  hospitals will be dirtier. It means people will wait longer for surgery and we will  continue to see bed block occur and ambulances queued up outside our hospitals  because funding isn't keeping up with the demand.

JOURNALIST: Minister Garrett, did you hear, or have you seen a transcript of Tony  Abbott's comments today that he couldn't recall what happened 35 years ago at a  Sydney university because it simply didn't happen? Do you believe his version of  events now?

PETER GARRETT: Mr Abbott has always focused on people's character. It's time  that he focused on his own. I find it difficult to reconcile that statement with the  additional statements that have come forward by people who were present at the  time. This is a question for him to front up to and to answer in full.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of his comments that this is a Labor dirt unit  working?

PETER GARRETT: Well, the comments that we've seen have come from people  were participating in student politics at the time. Tony Abbot can't have it both ways.  He can't talk about politics being a test of character and then when his own character  is under test, run away from those claims.

JOURNALIST: Couldn't this be written off as hi-jinks at university?

PETER GARRETT: Well again, the Opposition Leader has always been at pains to  point out that character is a product of the accumulation of experiences over a period  of time that people are in public life. Tony Abbott has been in public life since he was  a student politician. He's now a parliamentarian. People are entitled to know, if these  issues are raised, what the response is likely to be, and given that the fact that we've  had additional people come forward, I don't think that Mr Abbott can just swat it away  like it's a blowie on a summer's day.

JOURNALIST: Can I just go back to NAPLAN for a second? Can you talk about  specifically the NSW results in terms of how well students are tracking?

PETER GARRETT: I think the NAPLAN results today show that NSW students are  generally doing well, certainly in spelling. It's a terrific result for NSW. We've got the  best spellers in the country, and again, particularly in the early years, we're seeing  good results in the areas of literacy. I think that's important to focus on when we look

at the level of cuts that are planned by Premier O'Farrell, because it's only because  we've been able to target resources, and from the Labor government in Canberra's  perspective, our additional support to schools such as this one is bearing fruit. So  NSW should be pleased with the results today. There's still more work to do, but it  won't be possible to do that good work with $1.7 billion worth of cuts up on the  blackboard.

JOURNALIST: To the overall figure of 92 per cent of children reaching or exceeding  minimum standards, how does that compare with last year?

PETER GARRETT: The percentage of students that are at or above minimum  standards is stable, and that is a good result for us, and I think in the early years we  can take great comfort from some of the improvements, the statistical improvements  that we're seeing. Now, it's not entirely a good story. We do need to concentrate and  focus more on the writing tasks, and certainly there are issues around year nine  students and how they are performing generally, and I think that's something that  education authorities in the states would like to look at, but overall, what we can say  is that we are arresting the decline in education that was identified by the Gonski  panel as being underway since 2000.

These NAPLAN results show us that we're able to maintain above 92 per cent of our  student population at or above minimum standards. It's a good result, but there is  more to do, and we've set ourselves that goal of being in the top five nations by  2025. In order to do that, we need to invest more, which this government, the federal  Labor government, is prepared to do, but at the same time, we've got a state Liberal  government that wants to cut education funding. That is not going to help us get  there.

JOURNALIST: Will NAPLAN go backwards in the next few years as a result of the  cuts here in NSW?

PETER GARRETT: Well, there's every danger that that might happen, and I think  parents and teachers would be very concerned at all the hard work that has been put  in by their students and by teachers with the support that we've been able to give  NSW, and by the way in which NSW has approached its task over the last couple of  years. If you start to pull significant amounts of funding out of the school system,  you're likely to see significant impacts on kids in the school system.

JOURNALIST: Looking at some of the NSW results, some of the results on the back  page here see a one, two, three per cent drop backwards.

PETER GARRETT: Look, where there are declines, they're in areas which are small  in percentage, in the most case, and they're areas that require attention. I don't think  there's any doubt that there's an issue that educators are always addressing, and  that's around writing. What I'm pleased to see are the sorts of improvements that  we're seeing in grammar, in punctuation, in other words, and in reading. In literacy,  which is exactly what we saw at this school.

JOURNALIST: Now, you've got here a conclusion that overall, Australia’s school  performance has remained steady since 2008. Now, you've poured hundreds of

millions of dollars into extra literacy programs, et cetera, and what dividend is there?  Just the status quo?

PETER GARRETT: Well, that's absolutely not the case. Arresting educational  decline takes time and takes targeted investment and clear policy, and that's what  we've been providing. Now, remember that there're a million students or so that sit  NAPLAN. It goes across the whole of the nation, and it includes those students in  areas where we know great effort is needed - students in remote and regional  Australia, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students as well.

I look at some of the improvements in places like the ACT where students are doing  well. I look at states like NSW, Victoria, and the ACT, where student performance  generally is improving. I recognise that there are more things to do, but you know  what? Turning school systems around, getting high performance outcomes in  students, takes time. It requires concerted effort, additional targeted resources where  they're needed, and the last thing any government should be contemplating is cuts to  education on the scale that's proposed in NSW.

JOURNALIST: Are you going to take that issue up with Barry O'Farrell?

PETER GARRETT: I'll be meeting with Minister Piccoli this Monday in Canberra, and  just to address another question that was put to the leader of the Opposition here in  NSW, the fact is that under the Howard funding model, under the Howard funding  model formula, if state governments significantly reduce their investment in  education, the flow-on effect for all schools around the country, including non-government and government schools, is less additional funding, supplementary  funding, over time from the Commonwealth.

We will maintain, as a Labor government, our investment in education, and we make  up that supplementation under the indexing arrangements, but the Howard models  indexing arrangements mean that if a state government like NSW significantly  reduces its funding to education, then there will be flow-on effects to schools right  around the country in the future.

JOURNALIST: Do you have a figure on those effects now?

PETER GARRETT: Well, we've seen some estimated figures in the paper yesterday.  The fact is that both treasury to treasury figures have to be delivered through the  treasury, and we have to provide the advice to the non-government school sector,  but the impacts are not insignificant. Thanks everybody.

JOURNALIST: Can I just ask, on Nauru, will asylum seeker children have access to  school education?

PETER GARRETT: Look, on that matter, the Minister will provide you with additional  comment. I think the key thing here is that we are intent on making sure that we  apply the recommendations from the Houston panel. We'll continue to pursue that  matter, to make sure that we can deliver on those recommendations, and Minister  Bowen will address any additional questions on this issue.

JOURNALIST: And finally, can you respond to the story in the Telegraph today  about Midnight Oil doing some stage shows, the possibility of that happening?

PETER GARRETT: Well, look, I saw that piece, but all I can say is yes, they have  put together some music for people to listen to, but there will be no stage shows. I'm  very focused on the education portfolio and I intend to stay doing that. Sorry to  disappoint you.

JOURNALIST: It could be a benefit show.

JOURNALIST: Do it for education. Raise money for education.

PETER GARRETT: Well, you know, the most important thing for the community and  NSW to focus on is what I'm focused on as the Federal Education Minister, and  that's making sure we have the resources in the schools that are needed so that  every kid gets a great education. I think that's the most important show at the  moment.

JOURNALIST: Given you're the Education Minister, will you give an undertaking that  asylum seeker children on Nauru will receive education?

PETER GARRETT: Look, there've always been arrangements in place to the best of  anybody's capacity to make sure that people receive some learning opportunities.  Let me just make one final point about education generally. The reason why this is  an important issue is because for young Australians to get good jobs in the future,  they have to get a good education. That is a very simple fact. And for a state Liberal  government to start cutting education and TAFEs on this level is going against all of  the evidence that tells us that we need to continue to focus our efforts on lifting  education outcomes.

So to that extent, what we're seeing here in NSW is absolutely the opposite of what  we know is needed in our education system and is the opposite of what they  themselves called for when they put their submissions in to the Gonski panel review.  And the Minister for Health is here.

TANYA PLIBERSEK: I'm here today to talk about alarming reports of cuts to the  NSW health budget. It's been reported that NSW will take $3 billion out of its health  budget. This follows on from massive cuts to the Queensland health budget that  have affected front line services in Queensland. This report of $3 billion of cuts to the  NSW health budget is very concerning, because you can't cut $3 billion from the  health budget and not have serious consequences for the health of the residents of  NSW.

The other thing that obviously concerns me is the Commonwealth government is  increasing hospital funding. We're putting an extra $20 billion into hospitals over the  coming decade, and here we have the NSW government cutting funding at the same  time. Part of the extra funding that the Commonwealth will provide to NSW depends  on NSW meeting its targets for elective surgery, for emergency waiting times.

These cuts jeopardise $126 million worth of reward payments to NSW. If NSW  doesn't meet its targets for emergency department waiting times and for elective  surgery, the people of NSW miss out doubly, because they miss out on the services  that the NSW government has cut, but they also miss out on the potential reward  funding from the Federal government.

I want to make a comment, particularly, about the values of a government that is  prepared to cut $3 billion from health while still giving a $1 billion tax cut to the clubs  industry. We're seeing $3 billion cut from the health budget and $1 billion worth of tax  cuts to the clubs industry. I just don't understand the values that would drive that sort  of decision.

We've also got further reports of cuts in QLD. We now hear that as the  Commonwealth government is increasing funding for dental care, including putting  $2.7 billion into a dental scheme for kids for 3.4 million Australian kids, we hear the  QLD government is cutting dental funding for QLD kids. We're hearing that dentists

are being sacked from the Brisbane Dental Hospital and that the dentists that do cleft  palate work on children in Brisbane are also potentially losing their jobs.Again, I  cannot understand how the QLD government can make such massive and cruel cuts  to the QLD health budget.

JOURNALIST: Have you spoken to the NSW Health Minister about the reports  today, and if not, do you plan to?

TANYA PLIBERSEK: I certainly will be speaking to the NSW Health Minister. I've  read the reports this morning and I've asked for an evaluation first from my  department about whether these cuts will result in a reduction of Commonwealth  funding. I'd like to get that information first, and then I'll be ringing the NSW Health  Minister and asking her to explain how she can keep - how she can take $3 billion  from the health budget and still provide the services that the residents of NSW will  need.

JOURNALIST: On the surface, is it possible with no back room people, like we've  heard with education?

TANYA PLIBERSEK: Well, look, I don't believe the claims in education. It's not  possible to take $1.7 billion out of education and not affect educational standards  and services. We know that some of that money is coming from sackings, but some  of it is coming from increased fees to TAFE and reduced services in schools. The  same will happen in health. The idea that you can take $3 billion out of health and  not affect front line services seems extremely far-fetched to me.

When you look at what has happened in QLD there've been doctors sacked, nurses  sacked, pathologists sacked, dentists sacked, and these are front line workers that  will deliver front line services. I cannot see how NSW can pretend that they will not  affect front line services. And, of course, the concern of all of this is that it's a curtain-raiser on Tony Abbott's Australia. You've got Joe Hockey saying that he wants to  sack 20,000 public sector workers.They've got a $70 billion black hole that they need  to fill. The only way they can fill it is by cutting funding to health, by cutting funding to  education. It's a horror show waiting to happen.

JOURNALIST: Now, do you think Tony Abbott's got some explaining to do about his  past and relationships with women?

TANYA PLIBERSEK: Well, I think Tony Abbott has been in witness protection all  week. Tony Abbott is the man who loves to do a press conference every day, and for  a week we've seen nothing of him. Today he walked away from a press conference.  He called on the Prime Minister to answer every question asked of her, and she  stood up for an hour in a press conference and she answered every question asked  of her. Tony Abbott has cut and run.

JOURNALIST: I mean, look, this happened when he was at uni and happened a  long time ago. Should it really be dredged up now?

TANYA PLIBERSEK: Well, where is the double standard here? Tony Abbott for  months has been saying that the Prime Minister should answer questions about a  relationship she had, I don't know, 20 years ago. Two decades ago. That she should  answer questions about her early relationships, her past boyfriends. He's been  saying that she should answer every question, that she's got questions to answer. As  soon as there is any question about Tony Abbott's behaviour, he cuts and runs. He's  been in witness protection all week.

QUESTION: But didn't he answer it quite well today? He says he can't recall  something that didn't occur. If something didn't occur, you certainly can't recall it. It  seems a very blunt answer.

TANYA PLIBERSEK: Well, he says it didn't occur, and several other people say that  it did. I think there's a question in itself.

QUESTION: How do you resolve it? I mean, seriously.

QUESTION: No charges were laid. I mean, isn't Labor just trying to do the kind of  thing that the Libs apparently did on Mark Latham, which is character assassination?

TANYA PLIBERSEK: This is unbelievable. After months and months of Tony Abbott  saying that the Prime Minister has questions to answer and saying that these are  character issues and she should face the public and all the rest of it, the Prime  Minister stood up and did an hour-long press conference, and what's Tony Abbott  done? He's gone on to the TV to speak to one friendly journalist, and when there are  further questions he's cut and run.

He's been in witness protection all week, the man who does a press conference  every day has been nowhere to be seen, and I think that the question about what  actually happened all those years ago - the issue for me, really, is that you've got  Tony Abbott saying one thing and several other people saying something completely  different. I think that that in itself is a question that he should respond to. Thanks  everyone.

ENDS

For more information

Media Contact: media@deewr.gov.au  Non-media queries: 1300 363 079



