UNCLASSIFIED





CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

TUESDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Asylum seeker transfers to Nauru, Malaysia Arrangement, people  smugglers.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you, Marius.

BENSON: Now, is it correct that 50 to 100 asylum seekers will be sent to Nauru this  week?

BOWEN: What I’ve said, Marius, is that subject to the Parliament approving this, we’ll  have our first transfer in the latter part of this week, and that will be followed by further  transfers. Now, you won’t see a particularly large first transfer, but it will be followed by  other transfers after that. Obviously, we will ramp up the centre over time.

Now, I’m not going to provide more operational details just yet. I’ll wait for it to pass the  Parliament. Those preparations are very well advanced, and then obviously during the  week I’ll provide further updates about timing and further details.

BENSON: And do these first arrivals face six months living in tents in Nauru?

BOWEN: Well, it’s no secret, Marius, that the initial accommodation is tents. That’s  been very plain since the beginning. Obviously, we are working to establish the  permanent structure. There’s a lot of work going on about that as well. But yes, tents  will be the initial accommodation.

BENSON: Will unaccompanied minors be sent to Nauru?

BOWEN: Everybody is being sent to Nauru under the Act unless they are exempted by  me as Minister because of any particular vulnerabilities or for any other operational  reasons. But the Act is very clear that there is an obligation on the Department of  Immigration to remove people to Nauru.

Of course, we cannot allow people smugglers to be out there saying, ‘Look, if you send  your children we’ll get them there and then they can be the anchor for you, etc’. Now,  of course, what I’m not providing is an operational breakdown of the first couple of  transfers and who will be in them and who won’t be.

BENSON: But the question is, will you as Minister send unaccompanied minors to  Nauru?

BOWEN: Well, the Act is very clear and the message is very clear that if you come to  Australia by boat, if you are sent to Australia by boat, then we will make sure that you  are processed on Nauru or PNG, or if you’re not processed on Nauru or PNG for any  particular reason the ‘no advantage’ test will continue to apply to you. But of course, I’ll  provide further updates.

Now, obviously the issue of children is a particularly vexed one. We’ve been through this  several times in the public debate. But as other people have pointed out, if you have a  system where you don’t somehow deal with children in a consistent way, then you will  provide people smugglers with the opportunity to say, ‘Look, no worries, we’ll just send  boatloads of kids’. And that is a very, very bad outcome for the children.

BENSON: So you want to send a public message to discourage children being -

BOWEN: It’s not about pubic messages in this regard, Marius, it’s about a consistent  message.

BENSON: Okay. The Opposition spokesman, Scott Morrison, says if you apply the ‘no  advantage’ rule that you say you’re applying, that means an average stay for people  who come to Malaysia and have to match that average stay, five years. Is that your  understanding of the average stay in Malaysia?

BOWEN: Well, Marius, it’s not just about Malaysia, it’s about benchmarking. And if you  look closely at the Houston-Aristotle-L’Estrange Report, it points out that people should  be not resettled into Australia until they would have under normal regional  arrangements. And that will vary from case to case. For example, a single woman who’s  in Jakarta, she might be pregnant, the UNHCR in Australia would work to resettle her  pretty quickly. If you’ve got a different set of arrangements in place, then that would  take quite considerably longer.   So the blanket sort of average rule is not particularly helpful here because the  benchmarking would apply on a case-by-case basis looking at individual circumstances.  And that is something that we’ll continue to work on with our posts and various  stakeholders around the region to establish those benchmarks.

But the very important underlying principle is one of fairness as much as anything else,  is that people who arrive by boat should not be advantaged in terms of their  resettlement options in Australia as opposed to those who would be resettled to  Australia from elsewhere in the region.

BENSON: What will people - some people from what you’re saying must stay there for  years - what will they do?

BOWEN: Well, Marius, yesterday I announced a range of service providers who will be  conducting this centre on our behalf: Transfield Services, IHMS who are a medical  services provider, and the Salvos. We will of course have a range of activities available  for people, as we do in detention across Australia at the moment, you know, a very well  developed process of keeping people active and keeping people in detention in as best a  state as possible, given the circumstances that apply.

BENSON: The boats are still coming. Is there any sign of the flow slowing as a result of  this offshore arrangement you’ve now settled on?  BOWEN: Well, Marius, let’s be clear: this is a policy yet to be implemented. I’ve said all  along that you can sometimes have an announcement effect, as we did with Malaysia,  but more importantly it’s when you actually implement the policy that you begin to see  effects.

BENSON: Have you had an announcement effect with this one?

BOWEN: No, there’s been no announcement effect with this, as opposed to Malaysia.  What we have seen is people smugglers out there, frankly saying to asylum seekers,  ‘Look, you’d better get in quick, the situation is changing and we can get you there’.  Now, people smugglers will spin and will lie and will dissemble all across the region to  make money. That’s the sort of people we’re dealing with and they are trying to paint  this as a closing down sale across the region.

Now, obviously we deal with those challenges every day. I do believe, based on advice,  that when you see a policy being implemented you actually see - not only planes to  Nauru and PNG, but importantly, Marius, all of the 22 recommendations being implanted  - you will see an effect.

BENSON: But the closing down sale is still going on now?

BOWEN: Well, very clearly, Marius, we are continuing to see high arrivals, that’s no  secret. And I do expect that people smugglers will be out there trying to eke every last  dollar out of this pernicious trade for as long as they can.

Ends

UNCLASSIFIED



