ABC, Asia Pacific Focus with Jim Middleton

Sunday, 05 February 2012

Subjects: Australia-Indonesia relations; border protection; Papua New Guinea; the Colombo Plan

E&OE…

JIM MIDDLETON    But first, 2012 promises to be yet another massive year in global politics: Europe

in deep financial trouble, a US election campaign in full swing, rumblings of ructions throughout the

Middle East, foreign forces closer to withdraw from Afghanistan after a decade of decidedly mixed

results in the struggle against the Taliban, Papua New Guinea in crisis, and that is just for starters.

In Australia it is set to be a make or break year for the minority Labor Government of Prime Minister

Julia Gillard. The Opposition has headed the Government in the polls for more than a year. Now,

Opposition Leader Tony Abbott is promising that if he wins the next election he’d have a foreign policy

focusing on Jakarta rather than Geneva, as he puts it. Julie Bishop is Australia’s Shadow Foreign

Minister. Julie Bishop, thanks for joining us.

JULIE BISHOP    My pleasure.

JIM MIDDLETON    A focus on Jakarta rather than Geneva, could you expand on exactly what that

means?

JULIE BISHOP    A Coalition Government would make its priority a focus on our region. It is where

we live, it is where we can make the most difference, it is where much of our foreign aid money is

spent and we would particularly ensure that our relations with our neighbours were repaired. A great

deal of damage has been done to our bilateral relations with our neighbours and one of my first tasks

as the Foreign Minister would be to repair those relationships.

JIM MIDDLETON    On that statement of Mr Abbott’s about Jakarta rather than Geneva, how does

that sit with his instance that if the Coalition does win the next election he would turn back every boat

load of asylum seekers? That is a policy that would have significant implications for Jakarta would it

not?

JULIE BISHOP    It has been our policy for 10 years to turn back boats in circumstances where it is

safe to do so, and that means a great deal of close cooperation with Indonesia. That has been lacking

with this Government. The Government’s treatment of Indonesia, in some instances, has been

nothing short of appalling. For example, its announcement on a ban on the live cattle trade to

Indonesia without giving Indonesia any notice caused enormous disruption and turmoil and concern in

Indonesia.

JIM MIDDLETON    Talking about unilateral announcements, you have said that you’d try to ensure

that there would be no surprises in relations between Australia and Indonesia. On this latest

exposition of Coalition policy from Mr Abbott that you would no longer passively accept the arrival of

asylum seeker boats from Indonesia, how much warning did you give Jakarta of that development?

JULIE BISHOP    Jim that has been our policy for 10 years. We did it in Government and ever since

we have been in Opposition we have been consistent in our policy approach to asylum seekers and

that is we would retain offshore processing on Nauru, that we would turn back boats where it was safe

to do so and that we would introduce temporary protection visas. That has been our policy for the

2007 election, the 2010 election and again for the next election. So there was no surprise in

Indonesia.

JIM MIDDLETON    You saw the Indonesian Ambassador in Canberra during the week, did he

reiterate any of Indonesia’s concerns about Mr Abbott’s insistence that the Coalition would turn back

all boats emanating from Indonesia?

JULIE BISHOP    I meet with a number of Ambassadors on a very regular basis, in fact I try and meet

with all of the Ambassadors that are resident here in Canberra and of course I maintain close contacts

with the Indonesian Ambassador. During the course of our discussion we spoke about a whole range

of issues, it was very productive and I intend to continue this dialogue with Ambassadors, particularly

from countries in our region.

JIM MIDDLETON    Did either he or you raise the question of Mr Abbott’s latest exposition of Coalition

policy on asylum seeker boats?

JULIE BISHOP    We spoke about border protection, we spoke about the close cooperation that will

be needed, we talked about the challenges that Indonesia faces with the influx of people who come

into Indonesia then destroy their travel documents so that they can make the journey to Australia. We

spoke about a whole range of issues, and as I said it was a very fruitful and very productive

discussion, and it will be ongoing.

We do not intend to make the mistakes of the Labor Government by announcing policies that affect

other countries yet we don’t give them notice of it. The Government has made that terrible mistake in

relation to East Timor, announcing its East Timor Solution without contacting the appropriate people

in the East Timorese Government, they announced the Malaysia Solution without informing any of the

countries who would be affected particularly Indonesia, and of course as I said the terrible example of

the live cattle ban without informing Indonesia.

JIM MIDDLETON    But no mention in your latest meeting with the Indonesian Ambassador about the

question of turning back all boats?

JULIE BISHOP    Jim we discussed all our policies in relation to asylum seekers, but I am not going

to go into the detail of confidential discussions that I have with Ambassadors and High

Commissioners from our region.

JIM MIDDLETON    Turning to relations with another of Australia’s closer neighbours, Papua New

Guinea which is in continuing crisis. Would a Coalition Government have done anything different in

trying to forestall this test of strength between Peter O’Neill and Sir Michael Somare?

JULIE BISHOP    Jim what we would do differently is maintain a focus on Papua New Guinea. It has

been, over time, the largest recipient of Australian aid, it is our closest neighbour, we have a shared

history, and I believe that Papua New Guinea should be one of our highest foreign policy priorities.

Kevin Rudd started off with great expectations, he made a visit to Papua New Guinea early in his

Prime Ministership, but since that time his focus has gone from PNG, from the region, and he is now

utterly obsessed and focused with his bid for a temporary seat on the UN Security Council. This has

been noticed in the region and Papua New Guinea is an example.

Given the events of recent weeks, given the political instability and even the natural disasters - the

landslide that occurred in the Southern Highlands, it had quite disastrous consequences - these

events all show that it is absolutely essential that the Australian Government remain focused on

events in PNG. And we should be offering to assist wherever we can, working very closely with PNG

in a whole range of areas whether it is in security, whether it is developing an economic partnership

so that we can move away from the aid donor, aid recipient relationship, we must give PNG our

closest attention.

JIM MIDDLETON    One final subject, you’ve talked extensively and glowingly about the impact of the

Colombo Plan in giving a generation of Asian leaders an enhanced view of Australia. Is it time to set

up a 21st Century version of the Colombo Plan for the next generation of Asian leaders?

JULIE BISHOP    Jim this is a passion of mine. Having spent some time studying overseas I know the

personal benefits that come from spending time in another country. And I think the Colombo Plan is

an exemplary example of public diplomacy where a whole generation, or more, of young people, the

best and brightest from our region, were given an opportunity to undertake study in Australia and

many of those students are now leaders in government and in the public and private sector in

countries in our region. And this exchange of ideas and understanding is invaluable.

From a public policy point of view I would like to see it as a two-way exchange, young Australians

having the opportunity to undertake studies in our region. And I have said in speeches and elsewhere

that I would like to review the Colombo Plan but as a two-way exchange. I can’t think of a better form

of public diplomacy than having a body of young people in our country and young people in countries

in our region who have spent time studying, working, living in another country and it is most certainly

something that I intend to pursue.

JIM MIDDLETON    Julie Bishop, thanks very much for your time.

JULIE BISHOP    It’s been my absolute pleasure Jim, thank you.



J

