ABC Lateline with Tony Jones -Cocos Island and US  aerial surveillance March 28, 2012

TONY JONES, PRESENTER: I was joined just a short time ago from our Perth studio by the Opposition spokesman

on Defence, Senator David Johnston.

David Johnston, thanks for being there.

DAVID JOHNSTON, OPPOSITION DEFENCE SPOKESMAN: Pleasure, Tony.

TONY JONES: Now, do you support the idea of using the Cocos Islands as an air base for US surveillance aircraft?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Oh, absolutely. I think our closest ally, if they're prepared to assist us in the management of

what is a huge maritime frontier, I would welcome that and I know the Coalition would welcome that.

TONY JONES: There does seem to be a plan to either replace or supplement Diego Garcia, to build another version

of it possibly. We should note that the US Navy operates that base in Diego Garcia for warships. It also has a military

air base there under lease from Britain. So would a Coalition government be prepared to undertake a similar

arrangement with the United States in the Cocos Islands?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Oh, that's very - that's very speculative. We'd need to see the details. We wouldn't be doing

anything without thoroughly exploring what that actually means.

But, look, they've got a 20-year option on Diego Garcia. Why would they want to leave? I'm very keen and pleased

that they want to participate in the surveillance of what is a very difficult proposition: managing our economic zone

and our maritime frontier. I think that's a great thing.

TONY JONES: Except that the Americans it seems to me want to surveil further north. I mean, they want to use the

spy planes to look at what China's doing in the South China Sea. Would the Coalition be comfortable with that?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well they've got Guam for that.

Well, the global hawk, which I think is the platform everybody's talking about, is completely unarmed, it is a very good

intelligence gathering platform and would do a lot of good things domestically for Australia in terms of bushfire

management, cyclone damage surveillance.

But look, the Americans have Guam. They can do all sorts of things from Guam and from Japan. Now, the point is: I

think what we can do with the Americans is a - is jointly beneficial. This is a huge maritime environment right across

to Sri Lanka. Now we've seen a lot of boats, we've seen a lot of tragedy, we've seen a lot of problems in this area

because it's so big for our 23 million people to manage. If the Americans want to come to the party and assist us, I

welcome that.

TONY JONES: But, I'll go back to what I was saying before. I mean, they'll be wanting Cocos Islands to look at what

the Chinese are doing essentially. And that's part of their Defence Force posture that's changing to refocus. They

wouldn't necessarily be doing what you want the drones to do.

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well, I'm not sure that they will be doing what you're suggesting they're going to do. They've got

a whole lot of other capability that is very capable in looking at what's happening in our region.

Now, you know, let's not get the cart before the horse here. We, with our closest ally, have a responsibility to look

after particularly this massive investment in the north-west of WA. There's about $400 billion worth of investment in oil

and gas and minerals in WA. Canberra has a responsibility to do something about it. If the Americans want to assist

us in that, in guaranteeing maritime security to our trading partners in East Asia, as I say, I welcome that.

TONY JONES: If the Americans wanted to actually lease the Cocos Islands and run it as their own base, would the

Coalition agree to that?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well I think broadly we would be very positive towards such a proposal. But look, let's look at

the details. I mean, I don't think Australia should do anything in terms of its sovereignty in the nature of a blank

cheque. I am very keen that we welcome the Americans in any shape or form that they want to come and work with

us in our region.

But, you know, let's be a little bit circumspect, let's see what the terms and conditions are and let's do it together.

TONY JONES: So even if they wanted to have their own base on Australian territory as the British have allowed them

to do.

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well they've got more than a dozen joint facilities in Australia now, Tony. One more I think is

neither here nor there to some greater or lesser extent.

TONY JONES: Well, the question is whether it'd be a joint facility and I suppose this is the point that Stephen Smith

kept repeating today. "We don't have US bases in Australia. We're not proposing to have US bases in Australia or on

Australian territory." Does the Coalition feel differently about that? Do you have less qualms about having US bases

on Australian territory?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well probably we do, but I think we're all pretty bipartisan on dealing with our major and most

important ally.

TONY JONES: So, you made the point in your press release today that Stephen Smith has a do nothing approach -that's what you said. One example of it was that he said the Cocos Island upgrade was somewhere off in the future.

Presumably in that case you'd want to accelerate this process, would you?

Page 1 of 3 ABC Lateline with Tony Jones -Cocos Island and US aerial surveillance > David John...

23/11/2012 http://www.senatorjohnston.com.au/Media/OtherMedia/tabid/71/articleType/ArticleV...

initiative - into the election we've taken a broad area maritime surveillance capability. Now, that is effectively probably

the global hawk platform.

We've committed $100 million to that project in the United States and then in 2009 we just pulled out, thus wasting

$100 million. Now, I want to see us get back into that program because with all of these boats arriving, with all of the

things that are happening in terms of our export industries, our maritime supply routes, we need to surveil them

properly.

Now, the broad area maritime surveillance project does that. Stephen Smith has put that out to 2022. In other words,

never. Now I'm very concerned about that. When will Canberra shoulder the responsibility of looking after the

economic future of Australia, and that is, maritime security?

TONY JONES: Well, I mean, I think you committed to buying at least three of these surveillance drones, these

maritime surveillance drones, if you came to government. First of all, would you do that at the expense of other

projects or would you add that on top of the current Defence budget?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well, look, each one is worth about $100 million. This is a $26, $27 billion portfolio. I just see it's

a reordering of priorities and heaven knows we need to do that given the problems we've had.

You know, we're running at $3, $4, $5 billion worth of expenditure for housing and accommodation of people and

running our patrol boats to and from Christmas Island from Darwin. It's a massive problem. We need some

assistance. We need to get real time surveillance into this vast area.

And look, in the scheme of things it's not that expensive and we're not spending any more new money on this project,

we're simply re ordering priorities which I believe we can do effectively and cost effectively.

TONY JONES: So you'd cut some other projects in order to include this $300 million project that you're talking about,

would you?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well I think we'd say, Tony, we'd reorder our priorities given what has gone before.

TONY JONES: That amounts to the same thing, doesn't it? You have to cut something in order to get $300 million.

DAVID JOHNSTON: Maybe. Well we might - some things are more urgent than others.

TONY JONES: Now, would the Coalition support a massive upgrading of the Stirling, HMAS Stirling naval base in

WA as is being suggested to service US aircraft carriers, warships and nuclear submarines?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well, look, let's get something very clear: the channel into Garden Island, Cockburn Sound, will

not accommodate an aircraft carrier. So any aircraft carrier coming to Fremantle will stay out in Gage Roads.

But submarines come and go from HMAS Stirling quite regularly and I see no problems in dealing with frigates and

submarines. Indeed, the Western Australian Government has operated the Australian marine complex. They've built

that infrastructure precisely for that reason. Oil and gas are using it very well. There's a floating dock down there. We

have facilities that will accommodate US Navy interim maintenance procedures.

Now, I think that's a very positive thing. Let's remember most of the things we do in the world, we're interoperable

with the United States. I think it's logical and I welcome it.

TONY JONES: What I guess is being talked about here, particularly in the Washington Post article, is that Stirling

becomes the major US port on the Indian Ocean.

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well, that remains to be seen. These things take a very long time. We'd want to see all of the

detail in that.

But, look, we've had US taskforces through Fremantle for the last 25 years, and I know the Fremantle Chamber of

Commerce absolutely loves them, as do most West Australians and I don't see a problem.

TONY JONES: OK. Including with nuclear submarines?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Including with nuclear submarines, often two nuclear submarines.

TONY JONES: The former Army chief Peter Leahy told us today that Australia is on the verge of overcommitting to

the Joint Strike Fighter aircraft. He says we should buy fewer of them and take that leap, as he says, into buying new

combat drone aircraft, the new technology of the future.

What do you say to that?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well I think I admire Peter Leahy and I listen to what he has to say. He was a very good chief of

Army. I just think we need to be a little bit cautious about banking on technology that isn't quite with us.

Now, the Joint Strike Fighter will come into service over the next 10 to 15 years in Australia. We'll have plenty of time

to reassess how many we're going to get and to look at what other competing, more effective capability is on offer.

But at this stage, the Joint Strike Fighter is a fabulous aircraft, I'm a huge supporter of it, as are nine certain buyers in

terms of countries, with potentially Japan, South Korea and Singapore adding to that group. That's 12 countries.

TONY JONES: OK. I'll just interrupt you there for a minute. Peter Leahy says that 100 Joint Strike Fighter aircraft is

simply too many, that that is Menzies-era thinking. Is he right about that?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well, look, I don't want to contest that with him. He's a senior soldier who I respect greatly. I'm

very interested in his comments, but at this stage my advice is that the white paper has set out 100 for very good

reason. And I'm prepared to rely on what the white paper has said.

TONY JONES: Should we be looking at combat drone aircraft possibly even building them ourselves?

Page 2 of 3 ABC Lateline with Tony Jones -Cocos Island and US aerial surveillance > David John...

23/11/2012 http://www.senatorjohnston.com.au/Media/OtherMedia/tabid/71/articleType/ArticleV...

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well, Tony, I think we should be looking at capability that's cost-effective and that's cutting-edge

and that's regionally dominant at every possible opportunity. Now, you know, I'm not going to close off any options,

particularly when the technology is emerging as it is.

TONY JONES: How many submarines would a Coalition government build in Australia?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well we have endorsed what the white paper says. The white paper has got bipartisan support.

We have said 12. Whether they're built in Australia - because the word used in the white paper is "assembled" in

South Australia. Now that's a very significant word.

Currently - remember the white paper has not been costed. We've seen none of the 30 pages of costings that were

originally in the white paper. Now, ASPI, Australian Strategic Policy Institute has costed these 12 submarines at $36

billion. I've got to tell you that is unrealistic.

TONY JONES: So, what do you think the correct costing is?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well I'd want to know. I mean, this government tells us nothing. Can I tell you anything I know

about Defence I've had to go and find out for myself because this government keeps us all, including the Australian

public, completely in the dark.

TONY JONES: OK, but if you decided it was too expensive, would you be prepared to buy submarines off the shelf,

as it were, buy ready-made submarines and let that manufacturing capability in South Australia die?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Well I wouldn't let the capability die. Remember that one third of the total cost of any platform in

its life is acquisition. So two thirds of the cost will be in sustainment.

Now South Australia is absolutely ideally suited with the infrastructure and the technology and the capability it has to

service and sustain those submarines. So, it's no question of whether we let the capability die. It's a question of what

is the most cost effective way of getting of the best capability for the taxpayer.

TONY JONES: OK. But it sounds like from what you're saying you are prepared to not see them assembled in South

Australia if you think it's cheaper to buy them whole, as it were?

DAVID JOHNSTON: If the Coalition was to think that it's more cost-effective and a better capability to acquire a

ready-made solution, we would certainly be interested in that.

But as I say, I'm completely ignorant as to what Admiral Rowan Moffitt has on his table and what he's advised the

Government. Now, you know, there is an element of bipartisanship here, but I don't want to see the taxpayer paying

$36 billion for 12 unique Australian submarines that are going to cause us the same level of problems that we've had

with the Collins.

TONY JONES: David Johnston, we'll have to leave you there. We've run out of time. We thank you very much for

taking the time to come and talk to us tonight on Lateline.

DAVID JOHNSTON: Always a pleasure, Tony.

Page 3 of 3 ABC Lateline with Tony Jones -Cocos Island and US aerial surveillance > David John...

23/11/2012 http://www.senatorjohnston.com.au/Media/OtherMedia/tabid/71/articleType/ArticleV...

