

Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister

for Foreign Affairs and Trade   Julie Bishop

ABC NewsRadio Marius Benson

23 November 2012

Subjects: AWU slush fund, changes to immigration policy  E&OE…

MARIUS BENSON Well the Prime Minister is today facing new questions over her actions as a lawyer  nearly two decades ago as a former partner of her firm Slater and Gordon.

Nick Styant-Browne last night raised new doubts about her departure from the firm. Mr Styant-Browne  who was a partner in 1995 when Julia Gillard left the firm told 7.30 last night he was speaking out  because he said the official account of Julia Gillard’s departure from that firm was in his words  stunningly incomplete.

The Opposition questioning of the Prime Minister on her actions as a lawyer in the mid 1990s has  been led by the Deputy Opposition Leader and herself a lawyer Julie Bishop and she joins me now.

Julie Bishop, good morning.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning Marius.

MARIUS BENSON These matters are complex, they were long ago, you’ve asked many questions  about them and now there’s this new material. What’s the first, the most important question in your  mind for the Prime Minister to answer today?

JULIE BISHOP The Prime Minister should be honest about her true involvement in what turned out to  be a massive fraud involving hundreds of thousands of dollars of AWU funds that have to this day not  been recovered.

In the last few days two more people from Julia Gillard’s past who have an intimate knowledge of  certain events at the time have come forward and have contradicted the Prime Ministers version of  events surrounding her role. So the first thing she should do is give a full explanation of what she  actually did at the time.

I note that she has given a detailed response to one of the claims made by her former law partner  Nick Styant-Browne yet she refuses to detail other aspects of her role.

MARIUS BENSON A couple of points the Prime Minister consistently makes on this are that she  subjected herself to as long a news conference as anyone has on all of these issues, answered all of  the questions. Another point she says is there are no allegations of wrongdoing. Are you making  allegations of wrongdoing or is this guilt by association?

JULIE BISHOP A number of documents have surfaced since the Prime Minister gave that press  conference on the 23rd of August. I have examined the documents and various statements and it  appears to me that the Prime Minister has been less than honest in the answers that she gave at that  press conference on the 23rd of August.

So we will be testing her version of events. We will be asking questions. This not only goes to her  professional conduct and her ethical standards at the time, but to her honesty and integrity today. If  she’s prepared to mislead people about her true involvement then we’re entitled to ask questions  about it and if as the Prime Minister claims she’s done nothing wrong she should have no difficulty  answering questions asked by the media and by the Opposition in Parliament.

MARIUS BENSON Misleading, less than honest, can you just give a specific example of where she  was misleading?

JULIE BISHOP There are numerous areas.

MARIUS BENSON Just one so we can get a grasp of it.

JULIE BISHOP Her involvement in this conveyancing file. The reason she’s trying to distance herself  from her true involvement as a lawyer in this conveyancing matter is because a hundred thousand  dollars of money from this slush fund was used to purchase a house that her then boyfriend lived in.

And no less a person than her own Cabinet Minister and colleague Bill Shorten said yesterday that  the incorporated body which Ms Gillard set up was unauthorised by the union. He has effectively  accused her of improper conduct as a lawyer in setting up a slush fund that was used for the benefit  of her then boyfriend, rather than for the union.

MARIUS BENSON Well I’m sure that will be taken up when parliament sits for the last sitting week  next week when Question Time rolls around.

Can I just quickly ask you about the other issue that’s in the news politically this morning which is the  reversal by the Opposition on its immigration policy to the extent that you were in favour of increasing  the refugee intake from 13,750 to 20,000 now you’ve reversed that, why?

JULIE BISHOP We support a humanitarian program of 13,750 which is the current level. The Labor  Government cannot keep spending money it doesn’t have. There can be a saving of about $1.3 billion  by not proceeding with the Government’s plan to increase the program to 20,000 people.

The budget is in disarray the Government cannot afford a number of promises it is making and in the  last four budgets there’s been a deficit of about $174 billion. In other words the Government has spent  $170 odd billion dollars more than came in in revenue.

MARIUS BENSON So is this just a saving measure, it’s not a decision that too many refugees would  be coming if the ceiling were 20,000?

JULIE BISHOP The Government itself has admitted that increasing the humanitarian intake will have  no impact on the rate of people arriving by boat and since Labor weakened the border protection laws  over 30,000 people have arrived by boat.

Our border protection laws are in disarray, the budget is in disarray. The Coalition will have to restore  our border protection laws that work and restore the budget to a sustainable level.

MARIUS BENSON Julie Bishop thank you very much.

JULIE BISHOP My pleasure.

MARIUS BENSON Julie Bishop is the deputy opposition leader



