MEDIA RELEASE

Senator Sarah Hanson-Young

Wednesday 18 July 2012



Greens propose ways to save lives now and set up a New Regional Plan of Action

The Australian Greens have made a submission to the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers that  would save lives now and kick start the establishment of a New Regional Plan of Action.

“The Greens are putting forward a third option.  To save lives now and establish a New Regional  Plan of Action to help Australia and our neighbours manage the needs of refugees and  nations,”  said Immigration and Citizenship spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.

“Our two-pronged approach focuses on short and longer term regional actions, by saving lives  immediately through escalated resettlement from Malaysia and Indonesia, whil e working  consistently towards the establishment of a New Regional Plan of Action”.

“We need a regional response that is legal, effective and compassionate. Experts have argued  for it. History has proven it. This policy will work”.

“We also recommended maintaining onshore claims assessment for people who do come to  Australia consistent with the Refugee Convention and our international obligations”.

“The Greens’ submission includes eight key actions that would throw a lifeline to asylum seekers  and refugees in our region without punishing them or breaching Australia’s obligations under  the Refugee Convention”.

“We should immediately raise our humanitarian quota to 25000, assess and resettle thousands  of refugees from Indonesia and Malaysia, delink the onshore and offshore components of the  humanitarian program, improve our safety at sea practices and work within our region to find  safer pathways for people in desperate need of assistance”.

The submission outlines a New Regional Plan of Action, which would be an updated post-Vietnam war response where we process refugees where they currently are in the region before  resettling them in Australia and other safe countries.

“In the past when numbers of asylum seekers needing help were high Australia to ok in tens of  thousands of refugees through a cooperative regional response and those people have enriched  our country ever since” said Senator Hanson-Young.

“Last month federal parliament was asked to choose between two unsustainable, inhumane and  ineffective proposals - punitive offshore processing in either Malaysia or Nauru - neither of  which would save lives, uphold Australia’s obligations or give rise to a genuine regional  response”.

“The people who are drowning at sea are fleeing persecution. Our challenge is to have the  courage to do the right thing by offering hope and sanctuary in Australia so refugees do not  have to risk their lives for the chance of finding safety, certainty and a livelihood for their  family”.



The Greens’ submission can be located here: http://sarah-hanson-young.greensmps.org.au/content/media-releases/australian-greens-submission-expert-panel-asylum-seekers



Media Contact: Kelly Farrow 0427 604 760





