Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

Sky News

Australian Agenda

Tanya Plibersek

24 June 2012



Interview with Tanya Plibersek

Australian Agenda program, 24 June 2012



Peter van Onselen:

Welcome back. This is Australian Agenda and we're joined now by the Health Minister

Tanya Plibersek. Ms Plibersek, thank you for your company.



Tanya Plibersek:

Hi Peter.



Peter van Onselen:

You'll be happy to know we're going to stop talking about ourselves. We're not going to

ask you anything about the media, but I do want to ask you obviously about this

tragedy at sea with boat people. Now there's been a continuing stand-off between the

Government and the Opposition over Nauru versus Malaysia. Do you see any

circumstances under which both sides can come to the table and come to some sort of

compromise which provides a solution or at least a partial solution?



Tanya Plibersek:

Well, it's a terrible tragedy and it comes so soon after that terrible tragedy off

Christmas Island only 18 months ago. I think we have - I mean, as a Government

we've now offered Tony Abbott a compromise that I'm surprised that he's rejected.

We've said that if he supports offshore processing in Malaysia we'll also look at a

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

processing centre on Nauru and we'll have an independent inquiry into whether

temporary protection visas are effective. There's also the compromise that Rob

Oakeshott has proposed that says that countries that have signed the Bali agreement

could be considered for offshore processing. I don't know what Tony Abbott wants that

he hasn't been offered in terms of a compromise.



Peter van Onselen:

I think he wants exactly what the Howard Government had.



Tanya Plibersek:

Well, I think it's pretty unreasonable from Opposition to be dictating in some minute

terms. We have offered Nauru as well as Malaysia. I don't know what he is missing that

he wants for him to accept a compromise in this area. I think he needs to listen to the

people in his own party who are saying it's time to go back to the table.



Paul Kelly:

As a parliamentarian what do you think are the consequences for the parliament if we

continue to fail to reach an effective policy on this issue, given that we just know

there'll be more boats and there'll be more deaths?



Tanya Plibersek:

Well, I think the first thing to say is the consequences for the people involved in these

terrible tragedies should be our first concern, not the consequences for the parliament

or any political party or any parliamentarian. I think the consequences for people who

are risking their lives in this way are unspeakable and I think every Australian is

distressed - distressed when they see such terrible things happen at sea. If there is a

consequence for the public sentiment about this I think it's enormous frustration that -

well, that Tony Abbott won't compromise on this. It's something that has been drifting

for much too long. The Labor Government has moved so far to offer Tony Abbott the

things that he has said he wanted, he needs to take a step forward too, he needs to

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

listen to Malcolm Turnbull, to Mal Washer, to those people in his party who are saying

this has gone on far too long.



Peter van Onselen:

All right Tanya Plibersek, we brought you in here on a Sunday away from your family to

discuss health issues. Now, your promotion into the health portfolio was one of the

major changes in the reshuffle. How important is it to Labor to get health back on

centrestage given that the polling tells us that it's one of the core areas that Labor

derives its support from?



Tanya Plibersek:

I think it - I think it is centrestage in most people's minds. Every Australian has

interaction with the health system many times during the year and particularly for

families we know that families are high users of health services. I'm not sure, I mean,

you were spending the first half of the show talking about the media and I think it

doesn't - it doesn't rate as highly in newspaper terms or television terms but in real

people's lives the things that concern them are being able to get decent health care for

their family, a decent education, the tax cuts that are coming on 1 July make a huge

difference, extra support like the school kids bonus, they're the things that most people

are concerned about day to day and health really is one of those in most people's

day-to-day lives.



Paul Kelly:

But if we just look at one area where you as Minister have been particularly involved,

the Government has announced that major dental policy initiative with a very

substantial amount of funding but of course there is pressure to do more, there's

always pressure to do more. As Minister, how do you see the future? Do you think it's

possible to make a further commitment at some stage down the track, perhaps in an

election context?



Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

Tanya Plibersek:

We're already working on what we can do better in the area of dental. We announced

in the last budget more than half a billion dollars, $515.3 million extra funding for

better dental services. So addressing some of the people who are on waiting lists in

state dental systems, having a waiting list blitz but also building the dental workforce.

If you live in a city area it's not so hard to see a dentist but there's lots of parts of

Australia where it's very hard even to see a dentist even if you've got the money to do

it. So we need that waiting list blitz, we need workforce measures. We're now looking

at what we can do beyond that to provide better dental care to the 20 to 30% of

Australians who miss out because they can't afford to go to the dentist. We've got a

chronic disease dental scheme which is a legacy of the Howard Government which is

going to be costing us close to $1 billion a year soon but is not means tested and is not

targeted. You can be a million and get $4,250 worth of dental work, that is cosmetic -

basically cosmetic dental work. So we need to really redirect our efforts...



Paul Kelly:

So you want to tackle that program...



Tanya Plibersek:

Yes, we want to close that program.



Paul Kelly:

You want to look at that  - okay.



Tanya Plibersek:

And replace it with something that targets the people who are missing out and provides

basic dental services to those people who are missing out. And we know that a lot of

people are missing out including kids. We're actually seeing for the first time again rises

in caries in kids, maybe it's sugary soft drinks, maybe it's people drinking more bottled

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

water than water with fluoride in it but that's a terrible thing for a country as developed

as Australia to be letting down so many of our kids in particular.



Peter van Onselen:

There was an announcement in recent days by the Sports Minister in relation to I guess

a pool of money for organisations to be able to access if they walk away from alcohol

sponsorship. Can I just ask, why not just ban alcohol sponsorship if you're committed

in that direction?



Tanya Plibersek:

Well, because I think banning alcohol sponsorship is a step too far. This provides a

market...



Peter van Onselen:

Are you sure this isn't just a step towards it though?



Tanya Plibersek:

This provides an alternate source of funding for sporting codes that would prefer to be

involved in - prefer not to take alcohol sponsorship money or just want to be involved

in our efforts to tackle binge drinking. This was announced by the Sports Minister and

she had swimming as one of the sports involved, swimmers saying that they're very

happy to be sending a message to young kids that leading a healthy lifestyle, not binge

drinking is part of your success as a sports person. I think that's a strong message to

send, but we're not interested in, you know, over-the-top policing in this area. We

know that a lot of sports depend on alcohol sponsorship. This gives them an alternative

source of funding and we're in partnership with swimming, with cycling, with - I'm not

sure whether to call it soccer or football, the game I always knew as soccer, and a

range of other smaller sports that have very enthusiastic followers.



Paul Kelly:

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

But just on that Minister, can you ever see a time when society might get to the stage

where we do have a ban on alcohol advertising?



Tanya Plibersek:

Look, I think there's a big difference between alcohol and tobacco. You can have safe

consumption of alcohol. You can't have safe consumption of tobacco - every cigarette is

doing you harm. So I think the case for tobacco advertising and the case for alcohol

advertising are slightly different. But we have to be responsible about this. We

shouldn't be sending a message to our young people that the only way to have fun is

to, you know, get smashed on a Saturday night. So there's a balance to be had here.



Peter van Onselen:

But does that mean that you couldn't see a circumstance in which this Government

could one day move to ban alcohol advertising?



Tanya Plibersek:

We've got no intention of banning alcohol advertising.



Peter van Onselen:

In terms of the issue, I wanted to ask you about something in relation to plain

packaging. Now your predecessor as Health Minister really championed this.



Tanya Plibersek:

Yes.



Peter van Onselen:

One of the major arguments in favour of moving to plain packaging is that it would

continue the progress towards reducing the number of people that smoke, yet when

you look at the budget forward estimates the forward estimates show that the

Government is predicting to continue to receive the same amount of money from

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

tobacco taxes that it receives now in the years going forward. How can that be the

case when the commitment to plain packaging is because you're supposed to be

receiving less - people are supposed to smoke less because of it?



Tanya Plibersek:

Well, we are confident that plain packaging will reduce the number of smokers in the

future. It's - the fact that the tobacco companies are taking us to court in every

jurisdiction they can possibly take us to court in I think is a strong signal that they see

it as their last remaining billboard, the front of their package.  We have made other

changes in relation to tobacco income. For example, we've reduced the number of duty

free cigarettes that you can bring with you coming into Australia from 250 to 50

cigarettes. We're confident that the suite of measures that we take, so it's plain

packaging, it's also the increase several years ago in tobacco excises, putting things

like nicotine patches of various strengths on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, it's

the restrictions that state governments and even local governments have made about

where you can smoke, all of these work together and have worked very successfully to

bring down the rates of smoking in Australia. We've got the lowest smoking rates in the

world or amongst the lowest smoking rates in the world so it is a terrific success story

that Australia should be proud of.



Peter van Onselen:

And I appreciate that and I have no doubt that tobacco companies don't like plain

packaging but that's why I asked the question. Why is it that Treasury is claiming in the

forward estimates that revenue from tobacco taxes is not going to change when clearly

everybody, the tobacco industry as well as the Government expects plain packaging to

adjust that yet the Treasury is holding up the forward estimates?



Tanya Plibersek:

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

Well, you have to ask the Treasury about those calculations but, like I say, one huge

change is the change in tobacco products that are able to be brought into Australia

duty free from 250 to 50 cigarettes and that obviously has a budget impact as well.



Paul Kelly:

You're pouring a tremendous amount of money into hospitals in Tasmania. What drove

that? You had a package just a short time ago of another 320 million. What's driving

that? Is that politics or is Tasmania essentially a broken state financially?



Tanya Plibersek:

Tasmania does have some particular problems. You know the problems with the

Tasmanian economy, it's got higher unemployment than the national average. In terms

of its health system it's got the equal oldest and fastest-ageing population in Australia.

It's also got a much higher burden of chronic diseases than the national average.

You've got more people with chronic and complex conditions like diabetes for example.

In the last two Tasmanian budgets the Tasmanian Government have taken money out

of their health system, they've cut right across the board. It's not just health of course,

and this package was an effort to ensure that the patients in Tasmania, the people of

Tasmania continue to have a decent health system. Some of that money is going into

hospitals so there's around $31 million going into elective surgery to provide about an

extra 2,600 elective surgeries but a lot of the money is going into primary health care,

keeping people healthy and out of hospital and also what happens when people leave

hospital. A lot of people are kept in Tasmanian hospitals because there's no stepdown

care for them to return to their community.



Paul Kelly:

But the message surely is the state can't cope, isn't it? I mean, the Government - the

Government rolled out a new hospitals agreement not all that long ago, it's one of the

Government's major achievements when it comes to health and yet it's quite clear that

this is insufficient as far as Tasmania is concerned.

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek



Tanya Plibersek:

You can get the Tasmanian Premier up here and ask her questions about the

Tasmanian budget. It was plain that if the Commonwealth did not take steps in

Tasmania that Tasmanian patients would suffer. There were people waiting too long for

elective surgery and the out-of-hospital supports that we want to put in should take

pressure off their hospital system. We want to see a much better GP care and much

better team care with GPs and allied health professionals keeping people out of hospital

rather than - rather than having people who could better be treated in the community,

instead having to be kept in hospital beds.



Peter van Onselen:

Tanya Plibersek, we're almost out of time but just finally your shadow spokesperson is

Peter Dutton. Now, he was touted as a bit of a rising star of the Liberal Party yet he

doesn't do as much media these days as he used to do. My take on that is that maybe

that's because he's the shadow health person. Do you think that the Opposition are

trying to shy away from this policy area?



Tanya Plibersek:

You'd have to ask them that. I can't...



Peter van Onselen:

But what's your view? I mean it's interesting because Tony Abbott's a former Health

Minister...



Tanya Plibersek:

Yeah.



Peter van Onselen:

Australian Agenda  24 June 2012  Tanya Plibersek

...himself in Government, Peter Dutton is a rising star of the Liberal Party who, you

know, doesn't do as much media as he used to. What's your view?



Tanya Plibersek:

Well, Tony Abbott when he was Health Minister cut $1 billion out of our hospitals. I

don't think it's an area of particular enthusiasm for the Coalition Government. They

haven't really made a mark in health. But let's - I mean I'm not a commentator, I'm a

Health Minister.



Peter van Onselen:

You fear that they'd cut $1 billion out of the projected growth rather than actually

going backwards.



Tanya Plibersek:

And we'll put an extra $20 billion into our public hospitals through activity-based

funding and investment in emergency departments and in elective, in theatre

upgrades - surgical equipment and theatre upgrades. It's a big difference. A billion

dollar cut or a $20 billion investment.



Peter van Onselen:

All right Tanya Plibersek, we are out of time but we appreciate you joining us on this

episode of Australian Agenda. Thanks very much for your company.



Tanya Plibersek:

Thank you Peter.

