Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Expert panel report, Nauru, Malaysia, TPVs,  turning back boats  Tuesday, 14 August 2012

Interview with Ben Fordham, Channel Nine Today

Ben Fordham: Minister, good morning to you.

Chris Bowen: Good morning to you, Ben.

Fordham: Good news: it seems that Scott Morrison and the Opposition have  indicated they are willing to support these recommendations.

Bowen: Well, look, obviously I welcome Mr Morrison's comments this morning. I  recognise they've got a process they need to go through with their shadow cabinet  and party room, and they've got some internal discussions.

Obviously, I think, as I said yesterday, all Australians are looking to the Parliament  today to get this sorted, and the Parliament missed the opportunity last June. That's  why we went through this whole process of appointing this panel as a circuit breaker  to get an outcome, and I'm very hopeful that this week we'll get that outcome.

Fordham: Speaking of missed opportunities, let me take you back to October last  year after the Malaysian deal fell through; there were some emergency meetings  with your Prime Minister. You went into those meetings and said directly to Julia  Gillard and others that Nauru should be open, that the humanitarian intake should be  increased to 20 000. Julia Gillard ignored you. How do you feel now, knowing that  she has back flipped on that?

Bowen: Well, let's look at how we got here, Ben. We offered to the Opposition last  year to open Nauru in conjunction with proceeding with the Malaysia agreement.  Now look, the Parliament couldn't reach a conclusion. So that's why the Prime  Minister and I appointed this expert panel to help the Parliament find its way through  it. And I think the expert panel has done a very good job.

Now, they've called on all sides to compromise. They haven't given a tick to every  element of government policy; they've given a tick to some. They certainly haven't  given a tick to every element of Opposition policy; they haven't recommended TPVs  and they've said that turn backs can't be made operational in the foreseeable future.

So this is a new approach from the expert panel, calling for the Opposition and the  Government to compromise. We've certainly indicated we're up for that because we  want to see this sorted. I do welcome Mr Morrison's comments this morning and let's  hope the Opposition as a whole is up for it as well.

Fordham: Okay, just to be clear, though, you don't deny that the Prime Minister  ignored your recommendation in October last year, do you?

Bowen: No, no, look, there has been a lot of speculation about what may or may not  have been said in Cabinet meetings, but I never confirm or deny what was said in a  Cabinet meeting.

But what I do say is that the government has responded to what have been difficult  circumstances and setbacks, with the High Court changing the interpretation of the  law which would mean that not only was the Malaysia agreement not able to be  implemented but neither could Nauru or PNG without law changes. We went to the  Parliament and said, 'Let's change the law.'

The great irony here, Ben, is that a few people said I'd never be able to convince the  Labor Party that we should have offshore processing. It hasn't been the Labor Party  that has been difficult to convince; it's been the Liberal Party that has been difficult to  convince.

But what we need to do is now move on. We all need to put the yelling and the point  scoring aside. We want to save lives, we want to stop boats arriving in Australia; the  panel has laid out a blueprint to do it. It does call on all sides to change their  approach. We've certainly indicated that we accept the panel's report in principle in  full and we'll work to implement it in detail.

Fordham: Okay, it's taken a couple of years for your side of politics to be convinced  that they should go back to the old policy. What about temporary protection visas?  Because Scott Morrison still mentions TPVs; will you reintroduce them? I know it's  been a sticking point.

Bowen: No, well, let's be clear about this, Ben. Yes, the panel has recommended a  centre on Nauru and a centre on PNG. They recommend quite a different approach  to the past, and the underlying principle of this report is a very sound one, and that is  that everybody should be treated equally. And I think Australians would accept that.  You should not get an advantage by getting on a boat. And they say if you get sent  to Nauru or PNG, you should not be brought to Australia until you would have had  the opportunity to come to Australia if you'd been processed somewhere else in the  region. And that's a very sound principle, and it's very different to the Nauru and  PNG models of the past.

The other point is that they do not recommend TPVs; they explicitly do not  recommend going down the temporary protection visa route. And you can draw the  conclusion that if they thought it was a good idea, they would have recommended it.

So we're accepting this panel's report, and we want to implement the panel's report.

Fordham: Chris Bowen, thank you for your time this morning.

Bowen: Thank you, Ben.

