



Sky News AM Agenda  PM dodges big issues; Labor-Greens war; Gonski review; Labor leadership

Posted on July 16, 2012

SUBJECTS: PM dodges big issues; Labor-Greens war; Gonski review; Labor  leader  ship

E&OE………

Hon Christopher Pyne MP:  Kieran, the Prime Minister’s strategy is utterly transparent and  it’s totally cynical and that is rather than talk about the carbon tax or her failed border  protection policies or the faux stoush of her Labor Party with the Greens she’s created a new  weapon of mass distraction, which is to talk about industrial relations.  But honestly, do the  Australian public really believe that a heated up debate that happened over five years ago is  the best the Government can do or the best the Prime Minister can do when all the challenges  facing Australians at the moment are about cost of living, electricity prices, new taxes like the  carbon tax putting up prices, the fact that our borders are basically open to people smugglers  and the Prime Minister can only come up with a reheated five year old debate.

Kieran Gilbert: The carbon tax is unlikely to be the sole issue though when we arrive at the  next election; likely to be a year on.  I t’s vital the Coalition has a credible alternative on this  including safe guards that match the rhetoric that work choices is dead, with legitimate  policy.  You can see that can’t you?

Pyne: Well, Kieran, of course there will be a comprehensive policy for industrial relations at  the next Federal election, of course there will be policies in absolutely every area of  government policy, but the next election will be a referendum on the carbon tax and there’s  no getting away from that.  As much as the Prime Minister might try and create every  possible distraction for the public in a very cynical way, the truth is the election will be about  the carbon tax because the Opposition is committed to repealing it and the Government is  committed to keeping it.

The other major issue of the election will be about the return of the Howard Solution to the  issue of boat arrivals because the Government has opened the borders and we’ve allowed a  flood gate of asylum seekers to come into Australia and an Abbott Government or a Coalition  Government will obviously return to temporary protection visas, turning back the boats  where it’s safe to do so and reopening Nauru in order to get some efficacy back to our border  protection policies.

Gilbert: But the Prime Minister is not the only one talking about industrial relations and the  need for Mr Abbott to come up with a policy.  Peter Reith, I spoke to him on this programme  on Friday and he was saying Tony Abbott is too cautious on this.  Others inside the  parliament believe Tony Abbott should get on the front foot.  While there’s a vacuum that  remains in terms of this policy, doesn’t it make the Coalition more vulnerable to Labor  attacks?

Pyne: No it doesn’t Kieran, the only policy vacuum at the moment is the Prime Ministers  complete inability yesterday to deal with the issue of the Labor Green alliance.  She is the  only senior Labor figure in Australia who doesn’t have an opinion about whether the Greens  are cannibalising the ALP vote.  Yesterday she went to the New South Wales ALP  conference; she spent all of her speech talking about everything other than the elephant in the  room, in spite of the fact that there has been debate all weekend, and all week from senior  Labor figures about the alliance with the Greens.  Julia Gillard is too weak, far too weak as a  leader and therefore she squibbed that issue and I think Labor people around the country were  very disappointed that their Leader wasn’t able to address the only issue that Labor people  have been talking about for the last seven days.

Gilbert: Of course as well as the Manager of Opposition Business you are the Education  spokesman too for the Coalition.  What do you make of the Greens leader calling for $5  billion increase in education funding to implement the Gonski Review? As a matter of  principle more funds for education, it’s hard to argue against.

Pyne: Well Kieran, Christine Milne knows there isn’t $5 billion available to give to the  education sector as part of the Gonski review.  So what we are really seeing of course is the  next victim of the Labor Greens alliance in Canberra will be non-government schools,  because without that money and even with that money the analysis has been done that non-government schools, Catholics and Independents would be worse off as a result of the Gonski  Review, that school fees will have to rise, some schools will have to close because schools  can’t stay open without Government support and what we’re seeing is Christine Milne as  taking the weakness of Julia Gillard from yesterday’s speech, recognising she has the upper  hand over Julia Gillard and now moving the frontier of Greens policy into education.  The  Greens policy for education is to return to 2003 levels of funding for non-government  schools.  So the Gonski statements that she’s made are a code for saying the Greens new  demand from this Labor Party to keep the alliance will be to hurt non-government schools,  and non-government schools from around Australia, parents, principals and teachers should  be terribly feared that they are the new victims in this Labor Green alliance.

Gilbert: Mr Pyne on a couple of other issues, the carbon tax, Geoff Kitney in the Australian  Financial Review today reports out of some focus groups from both major parties that there

are doubts that Tony Abbott will honour his blood pledge that it is a political tactic and he  won’t deliver it.  What does this say about how sceptical voters are across the board when it  comes to Australian political leadership.

Pyne: My intelligence from my own electorate Kieran is that the Prime Minister and the  Labor Party have lost any credibility with the Australian public at all, but the next election  will be a referendum about the carbon tax.  Tony Abbott has made it absolutely clear that one  parliament can’t bind the next one and if the Senate is still controlled by the Labor-Green  alliance and they refuse to roll back the carbon tax then we will have another election.  We  will have a double dissolution election.  We won’t want to because the Labor Party would be  mad quite frankly to pursue that policy in Opposition, but we’ve made it absolutely clear;  we’re telling the Australian public right up front that we will abolish the carbon tax and if the  Senate doesn’t pass that legislation we will have another election to ensure that happens.  We  couldn’t be any clearer than that.

Gilbert: Finally, Mr Pyne, Tony Abbott says the Prime Minister won’t lie down and die.  He  said that to party room a couple of months ago.  Yesterday to her ALP conference in Sydney  she said, “Too right, I won’t.”  You have many, many differences of opinion with the Prime  Minister, but do you give her credit for resilience?

Pyne: I think Julia Gillard’s speech yesterday was a sad speech, Kieran.  The speech she gave  the ALP National Conference last year was known as the “We Are Us” speech.  I think this  speech will be known as the great nothingness.  She had nothing of any substance to say.  She

sadly had to remind the Labor Party that they are a political party and not a brand, which I  think is terribly depressing for Labor people around the country.  Julia Gillard clings to power  for one reason and one reason only, Kieran and that is the half a dozen Labor figures who  want her job can’t agree on which one should have it and therefore they are all keeping Julia  Gillard in the job until they can sort that out.  She is simply swinging in the breeze and one  day one of the challengers, whether it’s Wayne Swan or  Kevin Rudd or Bill Shorten or Greg  Combet or Steve Smith or any of the others will cut her down and take the Labor leadership  before the next election, as sure as night follows day.

ENDS



