

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

3AW interview with Steve Vizard

31 December 2012

Subjects: 2012 in review, New Year’s Eve, big issues in 2013, New Year’s resolutions

E&OE…

STEVE VIZARD Well it’s possibly been the most, how would you describe it? The most  antagonistic year in Federal politics if not in the last decade, possibly ever. One of the  participants who was right in the middle of it, as indeed were all our elected representatives,  was the deputy of the opposition Julie Bishop who joins me now.

Julie great to talk to you.

JULIE BISHOP Good afternoon Steve, how are you?

STEVE VIZARD Very well thanks. Where do I find you?

JULIE BISHOP I’m in Sydney at present, I’ll be spending time with friends in Sydney for  New Year’s Eve. I think it’s that special time when you want to celebrate the year past and  then welcome in a new year with optimism and good cheer and hope that 2013 will be a year  of achievement and success and happiness, however you might define it.

STEVE VIZARD What are the, I want to talk about next year, but what were the, what are  the things about 2012 you’re most happy to put behind you Julie?

JULIE BISHOP 2012 was a difficult year in the political sense. From the outset the Gillard  government made it clear that they were going to target Tony Abbott personally and there  have been some outrageous allegations made against Tony Abbott, which are patently untrue.

And I guess these personal attacks have been a substitute for a policy debate and that’s what’s  been so frustrating. I can see why Labor wants to avoid a debate where policies will be  scrutinised. You just have to think of the border protection disasters or the cuts to the defence  budget, or the budget deficits and now Labor have walked away from the guaranteed budget  surplus.

But it was a frustrating year because we didn’t get to articulate and debate our competing  visions for the future and I think that’s what the Australian people want to see for 2013.

STEVE VIZARD One of the things that must be of a bit of concern to you is that the carbon  tax issue which was hot at the time is now starting to fall off the agenda. Latest newspolls  suggesting that people aren’t as concerned about the tax, it’s like anything, once it’s in place

it falls off the radar screen. Is that something you think will come back onto the radar screen  in an election year?

JULIE BISHOP I believe that cost of living expenses will be at the centre of the next election  and the carbon tax certainly has an integral role in that. Cost of living is always an issue,  particularly when you’re dealing with a government that can’t deliver a surplus but spent a  $170 billion more than was brought in in revenue. There’s little to show for it - the pink batts  and the overpriced school halls and the like - and while the government’s priorities are  misplaced, people are doing it tough and cost of living will be an issue. The carbon tax is  designed to go up year on year and so electricity prices will continue to increase and I believe  that that will be an issue for people.

STEVE VIZARD What do you think will be the big issues for next year? Obviously crystal  balling, we’ve got border protection still an issue, you’re saying cost of living will be an  issue, as we head toward an election, if you were to say here’s the three big, or four, that we  think are going to be the ones, what do you think they are?

JULIE BISHOP I think economic management, the cost of living, border protection will  continue to be an issue unless the government can embrace some policies that work, or put in  place the policies that were working.

I think overall, budget priorities will come into focus. There’s a very different philosophy  between the two sides of politics. The Liberal Party has long had a history of working to  promote self reliance, freedom and choice. We believe in providing opportunities and giving  people the freedom to live their lives, run their businesses, raise their families without  unnecessary interference. Increasingly we’re seeing that the Labor Party is supporting the  nanny state concept, reaching into our homes and workplaces, and everything we do, to try  and regulate and control.

And I think Australians are generally suspicious of others telling them what to do and so I’d  be urging them to look hard at the different approaches of the two parties as we go into an  election in 2013.

STEVE VIZARD So Julie you’re up in Sydney for New Years Eve. Is that the first time  you’ve had New Years Eve in Sydney?

JULIE BISHOP No it’s not. I’ve been in Sydney before on New Years Eve and it’s a great  place to party there’s no doubt about that. In my home town of Perth they’re suffering a  heatwave.

STEVE VIZARD I saw that, it looked about 40 or something.

JULIE BISHOP Yes about 6/7 days in a row. it will taper off a little but then I think it’s  going to hit the 40s again, so it’s going to be a tough year in WA, but nevertheless Perth  people know how to enjoy themselves, so hot weather or no hot weather they’ll be having a  good time tonight.

STEVE VIZARD There’s a bit of.. the fireworks the big thing up in Sydney are you going to  go out in the harbour and have a look or go to the harbour’s edge and have a squiz?

JULIE BISHOP I think I’ll be well enough positioned to see some of the sky show, the  fireworks. There’s a lot of people in Sydney at present. It seems a lot of people from overseas  are here so it’s an exciting place to be. Sydney is no doubt the party capital of Australia on  New Year’s Eve.

STEVE VIZARD What are you going to do to relax for the rest of the year?

JULIE BISHOP Well I’m not actually going to relax. 2013’s going to be a very.. you mean  the rest of 2012?

STEVE VIZARD Sorry the rest of the holidays.

JULIE BISHOP Ha I thought you meant for the rest of the 2012 - not much.

But 2013 is going to be a very busy year. I will be going to Sri Lanka in January with Scott  Morrison and Michael Keenan to look at the concerns with the number of asylum seekers  who are coming from Sri Lanka. So we’ll be meeting with government officials and others  involved in the attempts to stop the people smuggling trade in Sri Lanka. That’s what we’ll  be doing just before I go back to Parliament.

But in the New Year, I’m hoping to get some of our policies out. I want to be part of a very  positive effort on the part of the Coalition that presents a positive and credible vision for  Australia, so that we’re elected in 2013 to form a government and we can keep faith with the  Australian people so that they can trust us to be a competent government that always acts in  the interests of the Australian people. That’s what I’ll be aiming to do.

STEVE VIZARD Got a New Year’s resolution lined up Julie?

JULIE BISHOP Well I’ve been thinking about that, I’ve got a number but I want to keep  writing my weekly online article. Every Thursday I have been publishing a piece, about 700  words, on a site called Online Opinion. It’s usually on foreign affairs. It’s a really good  discipline and I enjoy doing the research and delving into topics that I hope are of interest to  the readers. But I’m learning a lot about deadlines and having to have it finished every  Wednesday evening for publication on Thursday has meant a lot of very late Wednesday  nights.

STEVE VIZARD So perhaps your resolution is to keep it going, difficult though it is. We  look forward to seeing how that one pans out.

Julie Bishop we wish you a great new years eve tonight and as with all of our politicians we  wish you a great 2013 as well.

JULIE BISHOP All the best to you Steve and to your listeners and I hope it’s a fabulous new  year for everyone.

STEVE VIZARD That’s Julie Bishop the deputy leader of the opposition and up in Sydney,  even though she’s from Perth, celebrating the New Year’s Eve in Sydney.



