UNCLASSIFIED





CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO NATIONAL  BREAKFAST

THURSDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Regional processing, boat arrivals, ‘no advantage’ principle,  Nauru, Green’s hypocrisy.

FRAN KELLY: Chris Bowen, welcome back to RN Breakfast.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good to be back with you, Fran.

KELLY: Minister, does it bother you that critics say your policy is harsher and more  extreme than John Howard’s?

BOWEN: What bothers me is people dying by boat, dying on boats getting to Australia,  Fran. What bothers me is people in refugee camps around the world missing out on a  spot in Australia because those spots are being taken by people who can afford a people  smuggler. I spend time in refugee camps around the world, a lot of people don’t - it’s  not a pleasant place to be, and those people deserve a chance to live in Australia.

So there are tough decisions to be made Fran, there are difficult decisions, I don’t enjoy  making them, but that’s my job. And you do have to make tough decisions if you’re  really serious about saving people’s lives and giving people a better chance at a life in  Australia.

KELLY: Okay, so there is a question about whether the whole policy of deterrence is  working though to persuade people to not get on those boats. But you’ve introduced  these bridging visas for the more than 7,000 asylum seekers - or most of them anyway  - who have arrived since you changed the policy to allow third country processing.  Bridging visas are being likened to Temporary Protection Visas; when your Government

scrapped Temporary Protection Visas you described them as inhumane, unfair and  ineffective. What is the difference between your bridging visa and the TPVs?

BOWEN: Well there are some similarities and differences. I saw yesterday the Greens  say these are just TPVs by another name and the Liberals saying these are nothing like  TPVs -

KELLY: What are you saying?

BOWEN: Well, they’re both wrong. There’s similarities and differences. They’re a  temporary visa, that is the case. The Liberal Party way of implementing TPVs as I  understand it, is that after people are taken to Nauru, after they wait that time then  they’d be given TPVs when they arrive in Australia - that’s not what we’re doing.

We are keeping people on temporary visas, with no family reunion and with, as you say,  restricted access to support - there is some support, very basic support, and that is the  case. Now there are some similarities between those two approaches but there are  some differences as well.

KELLY: Well your Government was quite clear when you were in opposition and when  you came to Government that Temporary Protection Visas didn’t work and in fact they  had the opposite effect, precisely because of that no family reunion element - which is  that they attracted women and children to get on boats to come.

BOWEN: Well, what we’re doing is implementing them as part of a holistic policy,  including the increase in the refugee program to 20,000, the biggest increase in -

KELLY: That bares no relationship to element though, whether women and children will  get on boats?

BOWEN: It does Fran, with respect, because you’ve got to provide people with an  alternative way of getting to Australia. So it’s very convenient, with respect, for you to  just ignore the 20,000 - which makes us the second largest resettlement country in the  world - but it is not the right thing to do. This is part of an entire package; 22  recommendations of the Expert Panel, the implementation of the ‘no advantage’  principle means that this in an entire package. And, yes, there are real challenges here.  That’s what I acknowledged yesterday.

I mean I’ve seen some of the commentary yesterday saying that we’ve walked away  from offshore processing or that it’s a big change - it’s an acknowledgement of the  reality. There’s been a substantial number of people arrive in Australia, they can’t all be  processed on Nauru and Papua New Guinea, there simply isn’t the capacity.

If Mr Abbott is really seriously saying he wants everybody processed on Nauru, is he  going to take 8,000 people to Nauru and double their population? Is that really his  policy? I’d like to see some detail about that.

KELLY: So let’s go to the conditions of these bridging visas. People will be on bridging  visas for up to five years under the no advantage principle. What does that mean? Even  if theyre processed and found to be genuine refugees they will still be kept on a bridging  visa for up to five years, is that right?

BOWEN: Yes, that’s right.

KELLY: If they’re processed and found not to be a genuine refugee, they’ll be sent  home immediately, is that right?

BOWEN: We would work for their return, yes.

KELLY: Okay, so the ones that are left here, there will be, let’s face it, it’ll be the  majority of them, will be kept under pretty harsh conditions; they will not be allowed to  work, they’ll have no work rights, they’ll be living on 89 per cent of the dole.

BOWEN: It’s 89 per cent of the Special Benefit, Fran, yep -

KELLY: Of the Special Benefit, sorry. They won’t be able to bring their family here.  People have looked at that and thought, ‘Why on earth would you treat people like this?’  Isn’t this a recipe for not just creating an underclass and making sure people live in an  environment of destitution? But also risk creating a stigma in the society; of society  looking at these people sitting around not being able to work, not being able to  contribute, why would you do that?

BOWEN: We’ve already had people on bridging visas in the community, Fran, we have  a substantial number of people on bridging visas.

KELLY: And you’re adding a substantial number to them now.

BOWEN: Well is the alternative to keep them in detention; is that what you’re  suggesting?

KELLY: Well I’m suggesting why are you having them on these visas and not allowing  them to work?

BOWEN: Well, there is two things. Firstly, there is a matter of consistency here. If  you’re sent to Nauru or Manus Island, you’re not working. So there is a matter of  consistent treatment. Secondly, you can find people smugglers out there saying, ‘We’ll  get you to Australia, you may or may not be a refugee but you’ll be able to work, you’ll  make more money in Australia than you ever would here in Sri Lanka or elsewhere, and  then you can send that money home; and even if you eventually get sent home then it’s  economically in your interest to move’.

And we are seeing, frankly, a lot of economic migration - attempted economic migration  - from Sri Lanka in particular in the last few months, hence the decisions we’ve taken.  Yesterday’s transfer, 100 people sent back to Sri Lanka, is one of those steps.

So Fran, yes, there are people who will criticise this as being too tough, I fully accept  that. But these are tough decisions that are made as part of a holistic package in what is  a very difficult environment.

KELLY: And in terms of that incentive or not, some would still say that it is an incentive  to pay people welfare benefits…

BOWEN: Well…

KELLY: …to come and stay in Australia, but I wonder about you, because you’ve spent  your life as a politician working against prejudice for migrants or those in a migrant  situation. Are you worried that having people like this, in the community, not working,  will risk raising the stigma, increasing the stigma, attached to these people?

BOWEN: Look I don’t think that’s the issue here Fran. Yes, thank you, I have spent all  of my adult professional life promoting multiculturalism and arguing for migration, both  as a backbencher and then as a Minister, because I come from Australia’s most  multicultural area. I believe in it passionately. But I also believe - and this is probably a  bipartisan approach to be fair - that you’ve got to have public support for the migration  program otherwise you will find people arguing against migration for the wrong reasons.  Part of that is ensuring you have an orderly and fair system. I sit in my electorate office,  on a weekly basis, talking to people who have migrated to Australia, many people who  have refugee relatives in camps around the world, trying to get them safely to Australia.  They believe we need a very tough approach on this; they believe that strongly. It’s not  right Fran with respect to sit around ‘tut tutting’ people who believe we should have a  strong border protection policy, many of those people who came here as refugees  themselves, support migration strongly, but believe in an orderly and fair process.

KELLY: You are listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest this morning is the Immigration  Minister, Chris Bowen. Chris Bowen, if the aim of this toughening up of asylum seeker  policy is deterrence. You’ve been warned many times that deterrence doesn’t work. In  fact when you were in opposition you were saying that deterrence doesn’t work, and  now, don’t we have proof that deterrence isn’t working? Since the new tough policy  more than 7000 people have turned up here by boat.

BOWEN: Well Fran, some people argue that what you’ve got to do - and this is the  Greens party - is all you have to do is increase the Humanitarian program to 20,000 and  that would stop people coming to Australia by boat. Well that’s wrong we’ve done that,  and that’s obviously part of the package. I would like to see, if people believe that  onshore processing and not having a deterrence in place is appropriate then that’s fine I  respect that, but they would need to show either how they can stop people drowning at  sea by doing that, or accept those consequences.

KELLY: But how can you show that your policies are stopping people drowning at sea  when 2000 people a month are arriving by boat?

BOWEN: Because we are doing everything that is possible to try and deter people  coming by boat. People who are arguing that we shouldn’t be doing that need to accept

the ramifications of that, which is that they are effectively saying ‘we accept that more  people will drown at sea’. Now I don’t think that is a morally sustainable position

KELLY: Is it time to accept perhaps that people will move around, that people will move  around seeking asylum in this global world. That actually the numbers coming to  Australia aren’t that many and certainly miniscule compared to what other countries  take in every year, and therefore it’s not such a problem. We need to address how we  think about this not just get tougher and tougher and tougher, which doesn’t seem to  be working?

BOWEN: Well, I’ve made those points about the numbers being small in comparison to  other countries many times myself, Fran. I agree with that. But that doesn’t mean that  this isn’t an important issue. It doesn’t mean that people dying at sea isn’t an important  issue. I mean, I know I’m talking a lot about people dying at sea, Fran, but I know the  media cycle has moved on, but let’s not forget it was only a few months ago that the  Australian people - and I was on your program regularly - were just beside themselves  at the loss of life at sea that we saw back in June and saying to the Australian  Parliament, ‘For God’s sake, sort this out, for God’s sake agree, get some deterrents in  place.’

Now, the media cycle might have moved on, Fran, but the policy cycle hasn’t moved on.  The policy is the same and that is try and find ways to get an orderly and fair system for  people to get that better chance of a life in Australia. I’m proud of the fact that we take  20,000 refugees a year, the second largest number in the world. I think that’s a good  thing. But I’m not proud of the fact that if you have a system whereby people are dying  to get here, you think that’s humanitarian, you think it’s humanitarian to say, ‘If you  want to risk your life to get onto a boat, that gives you the best chance of getting a  better life in Australia.’ I don’t accept that at all.

KELLY: No, but others look at the conditions of people being held in Nauru - we heard  earlier from Graham Thom from Amnesty International, who’s in Nauru looking at the  conditions there, saying what’s humanitarian about this? He says people will spiral into  serious levels of self-harm, there will be suicide attempts. Where’s the humanitarianism  in that?

BOWEN: Well, I respect Amnesty International’s position and certainly we facilitated  their visit. But Amnesty International went to Nauru not agreeing with offshore  processing, being strongly opposed to it, and they’ve come away from Nauru being  strongly opposed to it. I take a different view, the Government takes a different view  because of those issues that we’ve discussed today. You’ve got to take a holistic view.

And as I say, Fran, yes, there are tough decisions to be made. Of course there are.  There’s nothing humanitarian about what we saw at Christmas Island in December  2010, what we saw earlier this year, those heartrending scenes of people dying at sea. I  stood at the memorial at Christmas Island and read the names and ages of the children  who died in the terrible accident under the Howard Government. You can’t do that, you  can’t look at that memorial, you can’t deal with these issues in my view and not support  some tough decisions being made to get a safer system.



KELLY: And in that safer system, as you call it, you now have 19 asylum seekers on  Manus Island in PNG, including seven women and children. The criticism of the  conditions on Nauru, how will Manus compare? I heard the local PNG member for Manus  yesterday saying it’s just ridiculous to think you can leave women and children on that  place for five years. He said it’s like a prison and it’s impossible to think anyone can stay  there that long.

BOWEN: Well, Fran, obviously we have put the measures in place to make sure that  the best care and support that can be provided in a difficult environment and difficult  circumstances is provided. We’ve got the Salvation Army, Save the Children, IHMS, G4S  all doing that, together with of course the Department of Immigration. I’m not  suggesting the system is perfect. Again, this is not something that anybody enjoys. But  if you had a blanket exemption and said we’re not sending kids or families or  unaccompanied minors to offshore processing places, you would create the perverse  incentive to put more children on boats and you would see more of them drown.

KELLY: And just clearing up something, yesterday the Opposition Leader, Tony Abbott,  said and I quote, “People who have come illegally to this country need to know that  they are breaking our laws.” And there’s been a lot of debate about it. Is it illegal to  come to Australia without papers?

BOWEN: No, it is not illegal to come to Australia and claim asylum under Australian law  or international law. That’s been pointed out to Mr Abbott on many occasions; he’s a  serial offender repeating that.

KELLY: Just finally and briefly, the Senate overnight disallowed the motion on some  changes you were making to the implementation of the bridging visas. What will this  mean?

BOWEN: Well, this is just extraordinary. This is just extraordinary. Last night, the  Liberal Party and the Greens party combined to overrule a government regulation  making it easier to provide bridging visas to asylum seekers. Now, the Greens like to  moralise and lecture other people. I want their explanation as to why they are punishing  asylum seekers and overruling a regulation which makes it easier to provide bridging  visas to asylum seekers. Their actions could well mean that they need to be re-detained  before a bridging visa is reissued.

Now, I think Christine Milne and Sarah Hanson-Young have got some serious explaining  to do. If they are making a political point and attempting to punish the Government in a  political way by punishing asylum seekers, they should stop their lecturing and  moralising and reverse their position.

KELLY: Minister, thank you very much for joining us.

BOWEN: Thanks, Fran.

Ends



UNCLASSIFIED







