



Sunrise with Mel and Kochie, Big Guns of Politics

17 August 2012





MEL: Tony has the Government had any contact with Ecuador officials since all of this  has happened.

BURKE - I am not aware of contact. We have put some calls in this morning but we  haven’t been able to establish if any contact has been made. Essentially from Australia’s  perspective, this dispute is between the UK and Ecuador. Julian Assange is an Australian  citizen if he wants consular support, it's offered, it's available, but the legal dispute here  ...



KOCHIE: So he hasn’t asked for consular support?

BURKE: That’s correct.

KOCHIE: But he’s saying he has been sort of left like a shag on a rock by Australia, but  you are saying he hasn’t asked for it.

BURKE: The offer for consular support is still there.

MEL: I think we have got that. But he has basically said it’s the Latin American nation  has stood up for him, not his home country. Should we have been doing more?

HOCKEY: I think the Government has handled this the right way. There are precedents  here and Kochie might remember this one from 1954 the Petrov case and Mrs Petrov  was a Soviet citizen. Do you remember that? Who was escorted out of the country and  Australia intercepted her at the Darwin airport. She was being escorted by soviet  officials and given asylum here in Australia. Now she was given safe passage as a Soviet  citizen, but we intercepted her. So there are precedents cut the other way.

KOCHIE: Have you been contacted by the US to say play hardball on this? His view is  that this has all be set up by the US because he leaked all that stuff about Governments

as well as our Government and he is being set up in Sweden. Have the Americans sort  of contacted you guys and said let’s play hard ball?

BURKE: No. And can I say, I don't understand this part of the argument. America has an  expedition treaty with the UK anyway. So this whole argument that by sending him to  another country, expedition could suddenly happen, with the United Kingdom that’s  already in place so and American has made no attempt to extradite him.

HOCKEY: Except it don’t think it is the UK that prosecutes him for breach of security the  way the US would for espionage, it's because he's been sent to Sweden and the  Americans have a different arrangement with Sweden. There is a third angle there that I  think needs to be flushed out.

MEL: Next topic, there has been a big week obviously with the asylum seeker situation  we have seen the bills passed, Manus Island, Nauru now starting to prepare to see  asylum seekers arriving. Tony is there a time table how long will it take for things to be  up and running?

BURKE: Well things start today. Teams go to Nauru and Manus Island today. There is  effectively for each of the two locations, something in the order of about 15 defence  people and then another 10 from other agencies involved in and establishing the centres  and setting them up.

KOCHIE: Joe are you happy, this is basically what you have wanted all along.

HOCKEY: Well it’s a third of what we wanted. What a terrible. The other two things are,  we want the Government to reintroduce temporary protection visas and we want the  government where it’s possible to turn back the boats. We have three point plan, this is  one point. How sad it is after Kevin Rudd reversed our solution.

KOCHIE: You say this all the time though.

HOCKEY: But it’s true though, 20,000 people on boats but 1000 people have died and  now they realise after having this committee that this is the way to go. This is a sad  episode all round.

BURKE: There are blame lines that can be thrown around, there are things that people  put to me that I can throw back. I just think we are dealing with it.

KOCHIE: What about the news that this latest batch of people that came out on boats  rescued by a freighter and basically held them hostage, the captain, saying take us to  Australia or else. Should we bring back the SAS to do the boardings like the Howard  Government did.

BURKE: The police will deal with this and the police are conducting an investigation.

KOCHIE: Yes I know, but under the Howard Government it was SAS guys who were  meeting the boats. Should we start doing that again?



BURKE: The intention here is to get to a stage where there aren't boats to meet. That’s  the intention to get to.

KOCHIE: Until that time, should we do SAS

BURKE: At the moment, the AFP, the way they are working, I think that’s the right way  to deal with it.

HOCKEY: Look we would have taken a harder line, that’s pretty obvious. We met them  with the SAS on boats and they never got to shore and in this case they got to shore.  It's a different approach that we have to the Government.

MEL: Thanks both for joining us this morning.

HOCKEY: And go the Wallabies.

MEL: I know you have the gold tie.

HOCKEY: I know I borrowed it from Channel 7.

BURKE: He borrows their tie every day, he never turns up with a tie.

MEL: As long as he leaves it at 7.30 that’s ok.

