UNCLASSIFIED





CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT, SKY NEWS

TUESDAY, 17 JULY 2012



SUBJECTS: Expert panel, asylum seeker legislation, Labor Party.

KIERAN GILBERT: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, thanks for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, Kieran.

GILBERT: After the first meeting of the expert panel, have you got any better sense as  to whether or not this is going to reach a compromise or is it going to be a waste of  time?

BOWEN: Well, that’s what the process is all about, to try and reach a compromise, of  course. Now, we had the first meeting of the reference group today. Of course, the  panel has been working very assiduously for the last fortnight, meeting with groups all  across the country, formulating their views.

But it was important that those Members of Parliament willing to be part of the process,  and therefore part of the solution, had the opportunity to talk to the panel today  together. There was a spirit of goodwill in the room. I’m not going to go into details  about who said what, obviously, and obviously everybody came at it in support of their  own policies.

But nevertheless, it’s important that there’s a spirit of good faith and a willingness to  take seriously the recommendations of the panel. That’s certainly our commitment and  that should be the commitment of every political party.

Every political party, of course, will have their own processes and their own way of  working these issues through, but I’d like to think everybody could take seriously the  recommendations of the panel. Certainly, there’s no indication that the Liberal Party’s  prepared to do that, but I am glad that the rest of the Parliament was represented in  that room today.

GILBERT: You talk about taking them seriously, but you’re yet to say as a government  that you will accept the recommendations of this panel. Considering you’ve gone to the  effort of setting it up with three eminent Australians - no one disputes that - wouldn’t it  be a bad look if you didn’t say, ‘Okay, we will accept this lock, stock and barrel?’

BOWEN: Well, we wouldn’t have set it up unless we were going to take their  recommendations very, very seriously, Kieran. Of course we will. We respect every  political party has their own processes, their own caucus processes, Cabinet, shadow  cabinet, executive processes to work through. And we wouldn’t expect anybody to sign  on sight unseen to any particular recommendation.

But our commitment is to take very seriously - in an attempt to break the deadlock -  the recommendations of the panel, just as we have up until now. You know, we’ve put  Nauru on the table for the Opposition, we’ve said we’ll have an independent review of  temporary protection visas. The Government has moved a long way in terms of trying to  get a compromise to get this issue solved. Mr Abbott has refused to move a centimetre,  refused to even send somebody to this meeting today.

GILBERT: But that’s not entirely true, because he is going to contribute to the panel.  He said, ‘I will provide feedback to the Houston panel.’’ He doesn’t have to show up  today.

BOWEN: Yeah, that’s fine to have a meeting with the Houston panel and to try and  lecture the panel. You’ve got to actually give a commitment that you’ll seriously work  with whatever the recommendations of the panel are.

GILBERT: But they’ve also moved in the sense that they’re not demanding TPVs,  they’re not demanding boats be turned back. They’re two key elements of their policy.

BOWEN: Well, the only move that they’ve made was an attempt to try and scuttle a  deal. Their only move was to agree to an increase in the refugee intake to 20,000 - not  to try and get legislation through, Kieran, but to try and stop getting legislation through,  to try and stop one of their own members crossing the floor.

So if they were serious about this, if the Opposition were serious about this, have a  good look at the Government’s proposal here, Kieran. The Government’s proposal is it’s  time to stop arguing, let’s do Malaysia, let’s do Nauru - we don’t think Nauru will work,  but we’re happy to do both - because Kieran -

GILBERT: Yes, I know. What our viewers -

BOWEN: Has anybody sat in this studio and argued to you that if we implemented  Malaysia and Nauru, it wouldn’t save lives?

GILBERT: No, no. And we know that offer from the Government, but it is wrong to say  that Tony Abbott hasn’t moved an inch because they’re not demanding TPVs, they’re not  demanding you turn back the boats. So in that sense, they’ve moved quite substantially.

BOWEN: Kieran, their position has been from the beginning that they will not vote for  this legislation, despite our good faith offer to them, which we have improved over time  in terms of those discussions. They have not come back to the Government in any  genuine attempt to try and get legislation through.

GILBERT: They’ve said they’ll vote for it if you remove Malaysia.

BOWEN: Which, you know, so they’ll vote for legislation providing Government policy  can’t be implemented. That’s just a lecture.

But Kieran, in all seriousness, it’s time to move beyond this. We know where the Liberal  Party stands on this. It’s time to move beyond. I think the Australian people have rightly  had a gutful of the argument. That’s why we’ve put the good faith offers we have  forward. That’s why we tried to break this deadlock by appointing these three eminent  Australians to work with the Parliament to try and get a breakthrough here. I know it  was an unusual move, but I think a justified move in unusual circumstances.

Now, as I say, I just hope that political parties come to this in good faith - as the  Government has done - to say ‘there’s people’s lives at stake here and we all might  need to move away from positions that we’ve held to quite dearly in the past; let’s sit  down and work a way through this’.

As I say, today political parties put forward their points of view but heard each other’s  point of view and the panel heard all the views in the room; and that was a useful  process.

GILBERT: On the criticism that you’ve levelled at the Opposition over Scott Morrison’s  comments on the UN Refugee Convention; he’s not saying that Convention is without  worth, he’s simply saying it needs updating. Isn’t that a fair point to make? If you look  at the UN Refugee Convention, drafted 60 years ago - that it’s not designed for the  modern era; people moving from country to country to find -

BOWEN: Well, let me make a few points -

GILBERT: - where to make, to seek asylum.

BOWEN: When the Convention was written people were moving through countries.  Now of course things have changed. Of course transport is more developed. Of course  the world’s more globalised; people can move further - of course.

But which of the fundamental principles of the Refugee Convention is Mr Morrison  suggesting needs to be rewritten? The principle that people not be returned to countries  where they’ve fled persecution? That’s a fundamental part. The principle that people  should be entitled to processing where they land in a country that is a signatory to the  Refugee Convention, or if they’re taken elsewhere that that processing be made  available to them?

Where’s the detail? He said the Convention needs to be rewritten but he hasn’t said  how. And I want to make this important point -

GILBERT: - he said the fundamental worth remains; and the Opposition has said they  value what the Refugee Convention stands for but it needs to be updated for the  modern era.

BOWEN: He says it needs to be completely rewritten to reflect modern circumstances.  At the same time, Kieran, as they say, ‘This is the stumbling block, we can’t send people  to any country which is not a signatory to the Refugees Convention’ - at the same time  they say it’s out of date.

To me, this just underlines what we said all along: that this is just an excuse to try and  stop the Government of the day from implementing their policies.

GILBERT: But can’t you have a nuance in the argument in saying it’s not without  worth, but it can be improved?

BOWEN: Well then let Mr Morrison put forward a proposal. Let him put it to the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. He could have done that when the High  Commissioner was here a little while ago. He could have put a detailed proposal  forward. He could put this forward. But again, the Convention is actually written in such  a way that it is broad. It is a principles-based document. Every country implements the  document in a different way. We work with the UNHCR in implementing the Convention.  For example, we’ve worked with the UNHCR principles that offshore processing in some  circumstances can be Convention-compliant to save lives, but there are certain things  which need to happen. That’s the sort of principles we’ve worked under.

The Convention is not a prescriptive document. It doesn’t outline that this is the only  way you can do it but it underlines certain fundamental principles. The most important  being nobody should be, in terms of the Convention, ‘refouled’ to a country where  they’re fleeing persecution. What Mr Morrison would do to rewrite that, I’d like to see.

GILBERT: When do you expect the Houston Panel to report?

BOWEN: Well, we’ve asked them to report back before Parliament resumes. It’s  important to -

GILBERT: Is it likely to be sooner, do you think?

BOWEN: Well look, they are completely independent in this process, Kieran. They will  determine their own timeframe. They will determine their own way of developing their  report and releasing their report. It’s important that that be done fully independently of  Government. When they’re in a position to provide more public details, they will.

GILBERT: Joel Fitzgibbon says populism matters in politics and no matter what political  party you’re talking about if leaders remain unpopular long enough they’ll inevitably stop  leading the party. Is that a fair assessment?



BOWEN: Well, Joel’s a good man. I’ve made my views - I had my views in February,  when the Party dealt with this issue. My views were public and clear, but I also said at  that time, ‘This is the time to deal with it and the Party should get behind the leader’,  and that remains my position.

GILBERT: Mr Bowen, thanks.

BOWEN: Thank you

Ends

UNCLASSIFIED



