

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

5AA with Chris Kenny

20 December 2012

Subjects: Asylum seeker policy, foreign aid cuts, customs reform, Tony Abbott

E&OE…

CHRIS KENNY Julie Bishop you’ve been Acting Opposition Leader for most of the week,  but I think Tony Abbott’s back in town today and so you’re back to the Deputy’s position.

JULIE BISHOP That’s right Chris, good morning to you and good morning to your listeners.  I have been Acting Leader for the last week while Tony was overseas visiting our troops in  Afghanistan and then meeting with a number of his counterparts in London, but he’s now  back in Australia.

CHRIS KENNY Indeed, we’ll come to some of those issues at the moment, but the first thing  I wanted to raise with you Julie Bishop was the issue of the asylum seekers and the ongoing  problems the Government is having with stemming the flow of boats into Australia, and the  announcement over the last few days that they’re actually going to shift some money from  our foreign aid budget into this program, that some of our foreign aid, upwards of $300  million of our foreign aid will actually be spent in Australia on caring for and processing  asylum seekers. What’s your view of that arrangement?

JULIE BISHOP Chris this decision to cut the foreign aid budget is bad on so many fronts.  First of all it shows that the overall budget is in crisis. The fact that they had to pinch money  out of the foreign aid budget to prop up their failures in border protection and the border  protection budget has already blown out by $6.5 billion, now I mean these sorts of figures run  off the tongue like telephone numbers, but believe me $6.5 billion in a blowout in border  protection is massive. It’s unheard of so the budget is under enormous stress and I think this  is a sign of a desperate government.

But secondly it doesn’t matter how the Government try to spin it and what excuses they use  there’s no way they can justify taking funding from foreign aid and calling it funding for  refugees because foreign aid funding is for overseas development and this money is not being  spent overseas and it’s not being spent on development.

CHRIS KENNY But back in the days of the Howard Government, didn’t some of the money  that was spent on looking after asylum seekers in Nauru count against the foreign aid budget?

JULIE BISHOP But Chris, that was money being spent in Nauru, that’s overseas and it was  being spent in supporting Nauru so it does fit the description of foreign aid - because it was  overseas and it was for development assistance.

Chris, the other issue is this, first the Government promised foreign aid budget increases to  the Australian people, but secondly it’s trashing our international reputation because this  Government campaigned for a seat on the United Nations Security Council by promising an  increase in the aid budget.

So not only can the Australian people not trust Julia Gillard and her Government, neither can  countries around the world.

CHRIS KENNY I think there’s no doubt that it’s a shambles on many levels and that’s one of  them you point out the fact that we’ve promised this massive increase in our aid budget to  other countries and Australia’s won some kudos for that. I personally don’t agree with it, but  certainly it’s a commitment the Government’s made.

And secondly, of course they’ve got this problem of the asylum seekers arrival because they  relaxed the laws and having an enormous amount of difficulty stemming that tide. So there’s  no doubt it’s a shambles but given all that and even if you forgive all the back flips and  changes in policy, isn’t it perhaps sensible, given that we’re in all sorts of trouble with the  budget, is it not sensible to take some of this money away from the foreign aid budget, which  many people would argue has been ballooning too quickly anyway. Instead of doing further  damage to our own budget, and spend it on this matter. It is after all money that’s going to  help people who have arrived on our shores from overseas.

JULIE BISHOP Chris what it means is that the Gillard Government has now made itself the  third largest recipient of Australia’s foreign aid.

CHRIS KENNY That really is slightly too ludicrous to believe.

JULIE BISHOP Well Indonesia is the largest recipient, Papua New Guinea is the second  largest recipient and now the Australian Government is taking $375 million of foreign aid for  its own purposes. Now had this Government not changed the laws that were in place in 2007,  that stopped the people smuggling trade then, there wouldn’t have been this massive blowout.  What’s happened is the Government has encouraged, by its own lax policies in Australia, has  encouraged the people smuggling trade.

I say that this is the biggest policy failure in a generation. We have seen hundreds of deaths at  sea, 30,000 people try to get to Australia by boat, our detention network is now overcrowded.  We have seen riots on Christmas Island, the Government’s now scrambling around trying to  build detention networks in the region, all because they couldn’t leave well enough alone.

And this is now a battle of wills between the people smugglers on the one hand and the  Gillard Government on the other and the people smugglers are winning.

CHRIS KENNY Well Julie Bishop, look I’m not going to argue with you on that point  because I’m on the record many many times saying that’s exactly what’s transpired here and  the Government of course has reversed its own policies in an attempt to undo the damage it’s  done there.

But what I will put to you now is that there are some signs of hope, that Chris Bowen the  Immigration Minister and with the support of the Government, the new tough measures  they’re trying to put in place to resolve this situation do show some signs of working at least

in regards to Sri Lanka because they’ve been able to forcibly return over 600 people whose  asylum claims have been rejected from Sri Lanka because essentially Sri Lanka is now a  peaceful country and they can’t claim to be refugees by flying them back to Sri Lanka now it  seems that at least, let’s not call it too soon, but there are signs that may have stemmed the  flow of boats from Sri Lanka, we haven’t had any arrivals from that country for almost two  weeks now.

JULIE BISHOP Chris I think that’s right, consistent with our urging for the last seven months  Bob Carr has gone to Sri Lanka, he has met with officials there and he is putting in place the  kind of things that we’ve been urging the Government to consider for seven months. Seven  months ago the Sri Lankan Government began, or their navy, began turning the boats back,  showing that it can be done and we said at the time the Government must give the Sri Lankan  Government all the support they ask for to ensure that they can continue to turn back boats  and stop the flow of people out of Sri Lanka.

Now Bob Carr is renowned for making grandiose statements and announcements and then  not following through. Scott Morrison, Michael Keenan and I will be going to Sri Lanka in  January likewise to talk about border protection measures that we can take, not only in  Australia but assisting in Sri Lanka to stop people taking that dangerous journey to our  shores.

CHRIS KENNY To be blunt about turning back asylum seekers or stopping the flow of boats  from other countries, to be blunt, does what the Government need to do, and perhaps an  incoming government if there’s a change of government next year that you need to be able to  reject some applications from other countries? That is, refugees or people claiming to be  refugees from Pakistan or Afghanistan where it’s much more difficult. But you need to be  able to actually return some people who don’t meet the criteria back to those countries in  order to stem the flow.

JULIE BISHOP Of course, there are a whole range of measures that have to be put in place,  we have been talking for five years about our suite of measures that worked under the  Howard Government. We accept that things change and other measures will be required.

We’ve never claimed that turning back the boats where it’s safe to do so in itself is the  answer. It must be combined with other policies and that includes sending very strong  messages to the people smuggling trade that we won’t be taken for granted, we won’t tolerate  people coming here who are not genuine in their applications and we will take the tough  stand. This is the trouble. The Government is so half hearted it does too little too late and it  shows that it hasn’t got the will, it hasn’t got the resolve to tackle this problem head on.

CHRIS KENNY We’re speaking with Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop on the line  from Perth. Julie I know it’s silly o’clock over there in Perth, but is there any chance you  might be able to stay with us through a commercial break so I can come back to this customs  issue afterwards?

JULIE BISHOP Yes a pleasure to.

CHRIS KENNY Thanks very much, we’ll be back in just a moment.

Ad break

CHRIS KENNY Welcome back to 5AA we’ve been speaking with Deputy Opposition  Leader Julie Bishop about the Government’s ongoing problems with the asylum seeker issue  and the spending of hundreds of millions of dollars of foreign aid money on looking after  asylum seekers in Australia.

Julie Bishop’s still with us now and Julie I wanted to go on to this breaking news story today  regarding customs. Jason Clare the Customs Minister has been out announcing major reforms  and ongoing investigations and reforms of the customs service after it’s revealed that customs  officers have been involved in actually in illegally importing drugs and possibly other  contraband including firearms into the country. You must be concerned about this?

JULIE BISHOP These are deeply disturbing reports of extensive corruption within the  Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. We have to ask the Government just what  is going on? The Government must outline precisely what has happened and how this has  happened but it appears from the report that the corruption is widespread and systemic in  nature.

I have to say Chris it does bring into question the massive funding and personnel cuts that the  Labor Government have inflicted on Customs since coming into office. You might recall that  in the 2009/10 budget Labor cut nearly $60 million for cargo screening so that less of the  cargo coming into our country was being inspected and these are such damning revelations,  you really have to question Labor’s priorities.

They can spend billions of dollars on pink batts and overpriced school halls and cash  giveaways, yet Labor’s funding cuts to Customs operations leaves the agency vulnerable to  infiltration by criminal syndicates it would seem.

CHRIS KENNY Yes it’s quite an amazing story and it’s unfolding and more details emerging  today and we’ll be across that story on 5AA throughout the day.

I do want to raise a couple of other issues with you Julie Bishop while you’re there. Firstly,  the Slipper/Ashby affair, Tony Abbott’s been caught out overseas while he strongly defended  the new candidate, the now candidate for the Seat of Fisher, the former Howard Government  Minister Mal Brough and Tony Abbott’s been strongly supporting him saying he’s been  upfront and transparent about his involvement in this affair, even though the judgment was  highly critical of Mal Brough but Tony Abbott was forced to admit that he had not actually  read the judgment. Now Julie Bishop, Deputy Opposition Leader, have you read the  judgment?

JULIE BISHOP Yes I have, I read it in detail on the day that it was handed down because I  was Acting Leader on that day. Tony was in fact on a plane and then in Afghanistan when the  judgment was handed down, I was the Acting Leader, I read the judgment, there was no  finding against Mal Brough and Tony has been briefed by his staff but he hasn’t read the  judgment. So what?

I ask have the Labor Ministers who are confecting this outrage about Tony reading or not  reading a judgment, have they read the opinion of the former West Australian Corruption  Commissioner who believes that Julia Gillard could have been charged with breaking the law  over her role in the AWU slush fund scandal?

CHRIS KENNY Now this was going to be my next question to you.

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s some reading that I suggest that the Labor Ministers should  undertake.

CHRIS KENNY It might be interesting reading for the Attorney General or for the Prime  Minister herself to bring the listeners up to date with that.

Terry O’Conner QC who was the former head of the West Australian Corruption  Commission has written a detailed article published in the Australian yesterday where he says  that in the light of the AWU affair that caused Julia Gillard so much grief in the Parliament  over the past couple of months he says there’s a prima facie case there that the Prime  Minister could have broken the law. Now this of course Julie Bishop is what Tony Abbott  suggested in Parliament and I think Christopher Pyne suggested outside of Parliament, it  suggests that it’s got some substantial legal weight behind that now, is this something the  Opposition rather than run away from are going to pursue?

JULIE BISHOP Well, when a senior and highly respected lawyer, who headed up Western  Australia’s Anti-Corruption Commission at the time of Julia Gillard’s conduct, when he says  that Julia Gillard has a case to answer and that she could have been charged with breaking  West Australian law including the Criminal Code, then it’s a damning indictment of Julia  Gillard’s conduct.

There are still many questions for her to answer because hundreds of thousands of dollars  went missing through the AWU slush fund scandal, no one has been held to account for it and  the Prime Minister refused to answer legitimate questions during Question Time about her  role, and this is relevant to her attitude today, to her honesty, her integrity and her attitude to  union corruption.

She’s been mired in it, it seems all her professional career, the Craig Thomson issue, the  Michael Williamson issue, Eddie Obeid, all of these are becoming household names, but they  are all union officials who have been found to be or who have alleged to have been involved  in high level corruption and that is taking union members funds and using them for their own  purposes.

CHRIS KENNY This is pretty hardball politics, to be talking like that is very aggressive  politics, and both sides of politics have been at that over the past few months and certainly its  done the Prime Minister some damage politically and looks like it will continue to do so, but  also Tony Abbott has suffered politically, you end the year with the Opposition leading in the  polls but with Tony Abbott polling terribly in terms of his personal support. One of the most  unpopular Opposition leaders we’ve ever see, Julie Bishop. Do you think that’s a direct result  of these sorts of highly charged and even personal attacks in politics?

JULIE BISHOP Well first Chris, I should point out that it wasn’t Tony Abbott or the  Coalition who raised the AWU slush fund scandal in the first place. It was raised by a Labor  backbencher. There have been calls for an inquiry by union officials, documents are  emerging from Julia Gillard’s former law partners and so we are asking the questions that the  AWU officials and her law partners wanted answered at the time and as I said, it does go to  Julia Gillard’s integrity and honesty.

In relation to the tone of the year, the tone of the debate, the fact is the Prime Minister is in  the privileged position of setting the tone of the Parliament. How the Prime Minister responds  in Question Time sets the tone and the demeanour of the debate. You will recall when John  Howard was Prime Minister there was a particular standard and tone of debate, but Julia  Gillard has been invariably snarly and offensive and evasive and it really does infect the  standard of parliamentary debate.

I know Julia Gillard blames Tony Abbott for her poor performance. In her last interview  before she went on leave she mentioned Tony Abbott 24 times..

CHRIS KENNY She does seem to be slightly obsessed.

JULIE BISHOP ..in a ten minute interview she mentioned him 24 times. Now of course Tony  Abbott has been putting pressure on Julia Gillard to keep her promises, to fix border  protection, to deliver a surplus. Instead of moaning about Tony Abbott I don’t know why she  just doesn’t get on with it.

Tony Abbott has set out what we propose to do over the next 12 months, or in the lead up to  the election. You have three years in Opposition. In the first year we were holding the  Government to account over its election promises, infamously the promise that there would  be “no carbon tax under the government I lead”. In the second year, which is this year, we’ve  been still focussing on the Government’s incompetence and inability to implement policy and  quite frankly they’ve given us so much to work with it’s almost overwhelming. But we’ve  also set out the direction in which we intend to take the country should we be elected. Now  our third year, which we are coming into in 2013 we’ll set out our detailed election policies  that will be costed, once we can see the true state of the budget and Tony will be leading that  charge.

So I believe that the people will see Tony Abbott as an alternative Prime Minister as he sets  out the positive direction that he wants to take the country, by strengthening our economy,  strengthening our borders and ensuring that people who want a job, get a job, they’re the kind  of issues that we’re looking at.

CHRIS KENNY Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop, thanks very much for your time,  you’ve been generous with your time today, have a good Christmas and New Year ready for  the election year ahead.

JULIE BISHOP Well I intend to be in Adelaide over Christmas, my Dad lives up in the  Adelaide Hills, a cherry grower, so I’m coming home for some South Australian cherries.

CHRIS KENNY There you go, thanks very much Julie Bishop.

- Ends -



