THE HON. JASON CLARE MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

MINISTER FOR JUSTICE



Transcript

Interview with Kieran Gilbert  Sky News  Sunday 12 February 2012

TOPICS:  Australian Crime Commission firearms tracing, asylum seekers

KIERAN GILBERT:            Minister for Home Affairs and Justice, Jason  Clare. Thank you very much for your time. You’ve announced a National  Intelligence Assessment into the firearm black market. What exactly will that  involve?

JASON CLARE:      Well, Kieran, you’re aware of the drive-by shootings that  have been happening in western Sydney as well as the shootings that have  been happening in South Australia. What I have announced is that I’ve asked  the Australian Crime Commission to do a tracing analysis of all of the  shootings that have been happening across Australia over the last twelve  months, as well as an analysis of all of the firearms that have been seized  over the last year.

That will help to build a better intelligence picture of what the firearms black  market looks like and provide better information to state police and territory  police all across the country. And as you know, police rely on information.  That’s the key to making arrests and better information about how the  firearms black market works will help to arrest more criminals involved in  using firearms as well as the ones who are supplying them to gangs and other  criminals in Australia.

KIERAN GILBERT:            Has there been a lack of sharing or of intelligence  information across the state police jurisdictions to this point?

JASON CLARE:      Well, Kieran, there is a lot of good work that’s done  between the police forces across the country. The Crime Commission’s  working right now with New South Wales Police, doing tracing analysis of  what’s happening in western Sydney. We’ve also got what the Crime  Commission calls a fusion centre, which brings together Crime Commission  experts, Australian Federal Police, as well as people from the tax office and  Centrelink.

They’re helping New South Wales police to identify people of interest in these  drive-by shootings. In addition to that, the Crime Commission is using its  coercive powers to help extract additional information to help South Australian  police. And all of that information does get shared across the country, but the  fact is that we are dealing with a black market that is constantly changing.

As police seize more weapons from criminals across the country, they change  their ways in which they get access to weapons. The advice I’ve got from the  Crime Commission is that most of the weapons that we see on the street,  most of the weapons that are in this black market, are weapons that have

been around since before the Howard gun law reforms. They don’t have a  use-by date, so we do see a lot of old weapons there.

But the market changes as police seize more weapons and we need to make  sure that we’ve got the best information on how that market works and share  that information with all the police forces right across the country.

KIERAN GILBERT:            You mentioned the spate of shootings in Sydney,  Operation Spartan is the investigation by the New South Wales Police.  Obviously you can’t go into too much detail and it’s not entirely your  responsibility specifically, but tell me, what’s the sense you get from your  counterparts at state level? Has there been some significant progress made?

JASON CLARE:      Kieran, as you know, what’s happening in western  Sydney is extremely serious. I’m worried like everyone is worried that we’re  going to have a situation where someone is going to fire a weapon at a house  and it’ll kill an innocent person. Children that might be running around the  house.

You know, this is an area that you know very well. It’s an area I know very  well. I think that the New South Wales Police are doing a good job. They’ve  made a number of arrests, they’ve seized a number of weapons over the  course of the last few weeks. That sort of information is going to help us. It’s  going to help the Crime Commission to knit together a clearer picture of how  the black market works.

Ultimately, you can’t do this on your own. New South Wales is not an island.  We do need to work together at a federal and a state level and what I’ve  announced today is a good example of a Federal Government and a State  government working together and for that matter, a Labor Government and a  Liberal Government working together.

That’s what the people of Australia expect. They expect us to sit down and  work through these tough issues and find out where we can come together  and help each other and that’s what I’ve done today.

KIERAN GILBERT:            And one final issue, Minister, if I can, on the issue  of asylum seekers. Another boat has arrived. Yesterday you and your  counterpart Chris Bowen issued a news release in which you said this is the  first boat arrival since Tony Abbott said no to a compromise, putting his  negativity, you argued, and political interest ahead of the national interest.

But isn’t this the Government that needs to take responsibility for this, that this  is one of many dozens and dozens of boats that have arrived because you, as  a Government, have not been able to come up with an effective issue -  solution to deal with this issue?

JASON CLARE:      Well, Kieran, what I’ve announced today is a good  example of the Labor Party and the Liberal Party working together to target  criminals, make it more difficult for criminals to get access to firearms. To be  frank, we need the same approach when it comes to boats, when it comes to  dealing with the challenge on our borders.

Remember what this is all about. We’ve had two hundred people die off the  coast of Indonesia just before Christmas. A hundred bodies were washed up  onto the shore.

We expect that there’s about another hundred at the bottom of the Java Sea.  Last week, more people died. Off the coast of Malaysia we had another boat  capsize and eleven people died there.

It’s not well-known, but the fact is, another boat capsized off the coast of  Indonesia last week, as well. In that circumstance, forty-seven people went  into the water and fortunately all of those people were rescued.

Now, fixing this problem, trying to make sure that we don’t have people  getting on boats and dying at sea is within our grasp, but it requires us to work  together.

It requires Tony Abbott to stop saying no. We’ve got legislation that’s in the  Parliament that will implement off-shore processing.

Now, the Labor Party supports off-shore processing. The Liberal Party  supports off-shore processing and I can understand people watching this  scratching their heads saying if both parties support off-shore processing,  then why isn’t it being done?

The fact is, this legislation will allow Tony Abbott to implement his own policy,  Nauru, that he’s been campaigning for and supporting for ten years.

So we’re prepared to do Nauru, to do Manus and Malaysia, to introduce off-shore processing to remove the incentive for people that want to get onto a  boat to get to Australia because they’ll end up somewhere else. But it does  require Tony Abbott to stop saying no, to work together with us to implement  off-shore processing.

KIERAN GILBERT:            Jason Clare, thanks very much for your time  today. Appreciate it.

JASON CLARE:      Thanks, Kieran.



- ENDS -





