Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Boat tragedy, asylum seeker legislation  Thursday, 28 June 2012

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Breakfast

Fran Kelly: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, is in our Parliament House studio.  Minister, good morning.

Chris Bowen: Good morning, Fran.

Kelly: Minister, before we get to the events of yesterday, what's the latest on the  rescue of those asylum seekers yesterday? Do we know yet how many people  have been lost at sea?

Bowen: Well, Fran, one body has been recovered and 130 survivors have been  recovered. We understand there were 134 people on board, so that obviously  means there are still three people missing. Obviously, Jason Clare will provide  further updates if he's in a position to today.

Kelly: Okay, but the news is it looks as though four people have died. This is the  second fatal maritime disaster in a week.

Bowen: That's right, that's right, Fran.

Kelly: And overnight, another boat arrival? Can you update us on this one?

Bowen: Yes, we've had a boat arrive overnight with 100 people on it and you  referred to a distress call earlier, Fran. I am aware of that, but obviously further  details will be provided by Jason Clare again during the day. Obviously, we get  different reports as these things develop.

Kelly: But they're two separate things? One boat arrival and one distress call from  another boat still close to Indonesia?

Bowen: Yeah, I understand that's the case, yes, Fran.

Kelly: Which brings into sharp relief the actions in the Parliament yesterday and  today.

Bowen: Absolutely.

Kelly: A Parliament in paralysis: that's the common headline today. What happens  now, Minister?

Bowen: Well, Fran, yesterday we saw the House of Representatives pass a Bill, a  compromise Bill, a Bill the Government wanted to see pass because we want to  see action. Now, it was a significant day, but it is not the culmination. The Senate

now needs to pass this Bill. Now, yesterday, many people would have said this Bill  could not pass the House, the government would not have the support to pass it  through the House. We did. We saw Independents who'd previously said they'd  oppose it vote for it. We saw a Liberal MP indicate he was willing to cross the floor.

So these things are important. It is important that the Senate deeply reflects today  on what's at stake. What's at stake here is saving people's lives. That's why the  government has moved and compromised to get this through. And we do call on  every Senator from every party to consider that and to consider acting in the  national interest.

Kelly: As you said, some MPs who voted for the Rob Oakeshott Bill yesterday  voted really against their personal values and beliefs. They'd indicated previously  they wouldn't vote for it. They did it to save lives. If this is going to get through the  Senate today, it is clear to everybody more compromise is needed and that means  it seems the only answer is dropping Malaysia for now. To save lives, will you do  that?

Bowen: Well, Fran, let's go through what the government has done. We began  these negotiations last year, we initiated these negotiations. We then offered to  open a detention centre at Nauru, not something that sits particularly well with many  in the Labor Party. But we did it to save lives. We did it because we wanted to see a  breakthrough. We've made significant moves to implement policies across the  board, as the Liberal Party has been calling for, in an attempt to see this  breakthrough.

And yet we have still to see, we are still to see one centimetre of movement from  the Liberal Party to see this matter resolved. So we are putting the legislation up,  we've passed it through the House of Representatives. This is legislation which  would allow the government to implement policies, the government of the day to  implement its policies. It would allow the Liberal Party to implement Nauru, just as  we would implement Nauru as a complement to Malaysia.

So we are asking today, as John Howard asked Kim Beazley in 2001, to pass this  through the Senate. We are asking the Liberal Party no more, no more than what  John Howard asked Kim Beazley to do and Kim Beazley agreed to do. Nauru would  never have been operative without the support of the Labor Party in Opposition.  The Labor Party said, 'We don't agree with all of it, but we will pass the policy to  save lives'. That's what we're calling for the Liberal Party to do today.

Kelly: With respect, Minister, you gave us that very same answer on Tuesday and  it may very well be accurate.

Bowen: It is accurate, Fran. The situation hasn't changed.

Kelly: But the point is, it's not going to make a difference now. So is there more  compromise you're prepared to make?

Bowen: Well, it doesn't have to be this way, Fran. It does not have to be this way.  We could see a significant breakthrough today.

Kelly: How?

Bowen: Well, the same way we saw a significant breakthrough in the House of  Representatives yesterday, by people of goodwill acting, by people like Mal Washer  acting. And it is not too late for the Liberal Party as a whole to act, to say that they  will deal with the government and compromise and act in the national interest.

It is before the Senate for a vote today. It is not too late. That's what we're focused  on. Yesterday, as I was focused on getting it through the House. Today, the  government will be focusing on the Senate because it will not become law and lives  will not be saved - there is only one Bill that can pass the Parliament today and that  is Mr Oakeshott's Bill and that is the Bill which represents a significant compromise  on behalf of the government. We call on the Opposition to come to the table as well.

Kelly: The challenge you face today is not a challenge of minority government; it's  a challenge many, many governments face of not having the numbers, not having a  majority in the Senate. This is now for you to negotiate. Tony Abbott has said he will  not compromise. The Greens, who hold the balance of power in the Senate, will not  compromise. So you're putting up a Bill now into the Senate which you know will  not go through. Is that it, nothing more to be done?

Bowen: Well, Fran, we're putting up a Bill which represents good policy and that's  the job of governments.

Kelly: The job of governments is to get policy through, to make policy work. And it's  not always perfect, let's put it that way.

Bowen: Well, and that is why we've compromised this far, Fran. And that is why  we've said we'd implement Nauru, that is why we've offered an independent inquiry  into temporary protection visas. These are things, as I say, Fran, not done because  they're the course of least resistance by the government or the Labor Party. They're  done because we believe them to be necessary to see a breakthrough. We want to  see a breakthrough and these are very big issues - these are human lives at stake  - and the time for the politicking and the point-scoring is over. It is time to come  together and pass this Bill.

Kelly: Have you spent the evening in talks with Opposition Senators or Greens  Senators?

Bowen: No, but the Prime Minister will obviously be happy to speak to any  individual senator who wants to discuss their vote. The Prime Minister or I would be  available to discuss any issues that senators may raise.

Kelly: You'd think you'd be a bit more proactive than that. Are you going knocking  on doors?

Bowen: Well, obviously, Fran, we will be talking to people about their votes. We are  available to talk to people of all parties about how they want to see this issue  progressed through the Parliament. We've shown that this far, frankly, we've shown  that - by instigating the discussions with the Opposition, we've shown that by my  discussions with Mr Wilkie, the government's discussions, Mr Oakeshott's  discussions with Dr Washer, the cross-parliamentary group which convened  yesterday - we've shown that we are open to sensible discussions to see a  breakthrough.

Now, unfortunately this far the Liberal Party has not. I hope that changes today; it  can change today, it is not too late for it to change today.

Kelly: You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest this morning is the Immigration  Minister, Chris Bowen. Chris Bowen, Malcolm Turnbull put an offer to the Prime  Minister in the debate yesterday. He said why not just go with Nauru now, if it  doesn't work then you can put up Malaysia?

Bowen: Well, as I say, Fran, I mean, that was something Mr Turnbull said, it is not  something the Liberal Party has said. If the Liberal Party -

Kelly: Well, what do you think of the idea?

Bowen: If the Liberal Party has an offer to make they can make it. Now, we've put  our policy very clearly, and it is the job of governments, as I say Fran, to put forward  good policy and we've put forward policy - painstakingly negotiated, based on  expert advice, the same people who advised the Liberal Party when they were in  government, many of the same people who were involved in setting up the Pacific  Solution, who now say it won't work now, it won't work now. These are the same  people - these are not Labor Party stooges - these are national security and  immigration experts. We've made them available to the Opposition; the Opposition's  had the same briefings. We've chosen to listen to them. Thus far the Opposition  has chosen to reject them.

Kelly: Okay, if we look at a way forward, as I understand it, Minister, last year when  the High Court knocked out the Malaysian transfer agreement, you said to your  Cabinet ministers, Cabinet colleagues, 'Why don't we go with Nauru now, get  something going, if it fails then we'll have a stronger hand for Malaysia.' Why not go  to Tony Abbott today and say, 'Listen, our compromise is this: we will craft a Bill  that has Nauru first, and if it fails then it will be written into the Bill that Malaysia is  open for business'?

Bowen: Well, Fran, our policy is clear, and we have said repeatedly, repeatedly, we  are happy to talk to the Opposition about a way through. They have refused to  come to the table, Fran. You cannot have negotiation when the other party refuses  to come to the table. They broke off the negotiations last year through the media,  they leaked correspondence and broke off the negotiations through the media. So -  and we said at that time - we wrote back and said, 'We are happy to negotiate  further', and we have been and we remain so, and hence all the concessions the  government has made to this point.

But you are asking me, Fran, to put forward a policy which I regard as second best,  I regard as something which would not have the impact that we need to save lives,  and what I'm doing is prosecuting the case to you that the policy that we've got  before the Parliament is the best one and the Bill we have before the Senate today  is the only one that can pass.

Kelly: The Greens have said they won't support offshore processing and the  Opposition says they won't support Malaysia. Tony Abbott also talked about  increasing the intake, the refugee intake, to 20 000. He also talked about another  element of compromise, setting up the Multi-Party Committee on this. Would you  consider putting a proposal that has Nauru and Malaysia and bringing in temporary  protection visas - not just an inquiry about them - and increasing the refugee intake  and setting up formally the Multi-Party Committee on this issue?

Bowen: Well, let me say a couple of things about that, Fran. Firstly, in relation to  the refugee intake, I first proposed the increase in the refugee intake. I made it  Labor Party policy at the National Conference when I asked the Labor Party  National Conference to adopt the policy of an aspiration of 20 000 as a refugee  intake, which would make us the second highest intake country in the world in  absolute terms and of course we'd remain the highest per capita. I did that because  it's the right thing to do. I want to see more people with a better chance of life in  Australia, out of the desperate situations they're in.

Now, Tony Abbott did it yesterday to try and lock down a Liberal vote that he was  going to lose. It was a pretty desperate measure, but I welcome his conversion,  despite all the criticisms that Scott Morrison has made of my policy of approaching  20 000. He has criticised it in the past as being irresponsible and desperate and  yesterday he switched to it. Now I welcome that, but that wasn't something  designed to get a compromise with the Labor Party or a compromise with the  government, or even a compromise with the Greens. It was designed to ensure that  a Liberal didn't cross the floor.

Kelly: Okay.

Bowen: Now, secondly on the Multi-Party Committee. Now, the reference has been  made to the Climate Change Multi-Party Committee. Now, the Climate Change  Multi-Party Committee worked because the people on it a) believed in climate  change, and b) believed in a price on carbon. If you're going to have discussions of  goodwill, they need to be with people who a) believe that we should stop people  making the dangerous boat journey to Australia, and b) believe that offshore  processing is an important way of doing it.

Now, we've had the discussions with the Opposition; we're more than happy to  have further discussions with the Opposition and other parties to see this impasse  broken. That's why we've done it so much up until now, but people have got to be  willing to come to the party. There is legislation before the Parliament. Senators  have a choice today: they can act in the national interest, they can pass legislation,  they can see policies that the Liberal Party has called for for years be implemented  in relation to Nauru; or they can stick to the old copybook, the old play and they can  reject it.

The Liberal Party has a chance to show that they can do something different today;  they can actually vote for something positively rather than opposing it. We all know  that this Liberal Party can oppose. They have a chance today to do something  different and I really do implore them to do so.

Kelly: Minister, we'll leave you there, you've obviously got a lot of talking and  negotiating to be doing. Thank you very much for joining us.

Bowen: Pleasure, Fran.



