Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Expert panel report, offshore processing  legislation, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Malaysia,  refugee intake  Tuesday, 14 August 2012

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Breakfast

Fran Kelly: Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen, is in our Parliament House studio.  Minister, thanks very much for joining us.

Chris Bowen: Good morning, Fran, pleasure.

Kelly: Chris Bowen, when will legislation for offshore processing be introduced to the  Parliament? Will it come in this afternoon?

Bowen: Yes, I'll introduce the legislation later this afternoon, after Question Time  and it will then go through the normal processes of Parliament. But the debate will  begin this afternoon because it is obviously the priority for the government.

Kelly: Now, we heard the Opposition spokesperson, Scott Morrison, say this  morning the Opposition will support it, provided there is no - in his words - 'back door  Malaysia Bill', no Malaysia clause attached. So can you guarantee that?

Bowen: Well, I welcome his comments. But the Bill we introduce will be the one  recommended by the Houston Panel and that Bill says that the Minister for  Immigration can designate a country for offshore processing, but then the Parliament  can disallow that. Now, there's no excuse really for voting against this because what  it means is that the Parliament, either House of the Parliament, will be able to look at  any designation and make its views known accordingly. So it really is an enhanced  measure of parliamentary scrutiny over and above anything that, Frankly, we'd  proposed or the Opposition had proposed when they were in government in terms of  allowing the Parliament to review any designation made by the minister.

Kelly: And in this Bill you introduce, will the Bill only be designating PNG and  Nauru?

Bowen: Well, the Bill as it stands doesn't designate countries, as I say, Fran.

Kelly: So that's another procedure?

Bowen: The Houston Panel recommended that the Minister for Immigration be able  to designate a country and then that be disallowable by the Parliament. Now, what  we've indicated is that we would move quickly to designate Nauru and PNG; they  would be the first designations.

Kelly: Assuming that legislation passes, how soon can these Pacific processing  centres be up and running?

Bowen: Well, we've got a bit of work to do, Fran. Let's not get the cart before the  horse. While I welcome Mr Morrison's comments, we've got to pass the legislation  through the Parliament. We have to have discussions with other countries; you  flagged some of those in your introduction then. I'll leave the Prime Minister to  comment on her conversations with other leaders, but there will be some  negotiations obviously with both Nauru and PNG. And then there's a whole lot of  operational work.

Now, one of the things that I think has been lacking in this debate is there's been a  strong view put by some that Nauru is ready to go. Well, that's not right. Last  December, when I offered to open a detention centre on Nauru to the Opposition,  obviously I sent a team of Immigration officials to Nauru to do the work to see how  quickly and what sort of work needed to be done. There is a substantial amount of  work that would need to be done on Nauru, but obviously we'd get it done as quickly  as possible and the Prime Minister obviously would have a range of government  instrumentalities available to her to ensure that that work is done as quickly as  possible.

Kelly: And so as quickly as possible, what did your team recommend in December?  They recommended a cost, I think, that was $980 million over four years for a 1500  person facility, not including the infrastructure spend, is that right?

Bowen: Yes, that's right.

Kelly: So how much to get it going?

Bowen: Well, the capital costs would be very substantial, as they would be with  PNG.

Kelly: Like what?

Bowen: Well, the total cost for Nauru over the forward estimates, we're looking at  about $2 billion and for PNG you're looking at about $900 million.

Kelly: To build it, capital costs?

Bowen: No, that's capital and operational together. That's assuming a centre of  1500 people on Nauru.

Kelly: And just to the timeline again, did your panel of experts tell you how quickly  they could build it?

Bowen: Well, no, the panel of experts didn't go to that level of detail. The  Department of Immigration, when they were there, did a lot of work on how long it  would take. But of course, as I say, Fran, I'm not going to pre-empt any other work  that the Prime Minister might be contemplating, but of course the government has a  range of options available to it to do the work as quickly as possible, including using

departments and agencies other than the Department of Immigration, to get the work  done as quickly as possible.

Kelly: Minister, away from the nuts and bolts and to the policy itself, why are Manus  Island and Nauru more of a deterrent than Christmas Island? Because Angus  Houston told us this morning asylum seekers will not be held in detention in these  places and they are currently held in detention on Christmas Island.

Bowen: Well, because you've got to look at the fundamental underlying principle of  this report, and I think it's a very sound one. The fundamental underlying principle of  this report is that people who come to Australia by boat should not receive an  advantage over the many thousands of other people who can't afford a people  smuggler who want resettlement in Australia.

And this is a point I've made on your show countless times, Fran: that if you're  having a debate about refugees you've got to have a mind to those refugees who are  out of sight, and they shouldn't be out of mind; those in camps around the world.  Now, what the report recommends is that if you come to Australia by boat you should  be processed regionally. But the important thing is not where you're processed or  how you're processed, it's when you're resettled into Australia.

And the report recommends something quite different to the operation of Nauru and  PNG in the past, and that is you should be resettled into Australia at a time roughly  when you would have been able to be resettled if you hadn't come by boat. So that  means you can be classified as a refugee, but not immediately resettled into  Australia. And this is the criticism I've made of Nauru in the past: that really it's a  Christmas Island further away and therefore you wouldn't have the deterrent. Now,  they've recommended a different model here. It's the same principle, if you like, that  underlined the Malaysia agreement that we attempted to implement before it was  derailed by the High Court; that if you come to Australia by boat, you should be  processed in that instance along with the 100 000 other asylum seekers in Malaysia,  many of whom would love the chance of life in Australia and wouldn't be able to  afford or contemplate a people smuggler.

At the same time and very importantly, the Panel's recommended the increase to 20  000, which of course I first flagged at the Labor Party National Conference last  December. I said we should be working towards this because we can and should  give more people, more souls a chance of a better life in Australia, but there has to  be a more orderly system. And if you say to people, look, we're going to increase our  program, going to give you a better chance of a spot in Australia if you are  somewhere in our region or around the world waiting for resettlement, so if you like  that chance improves, but if you come to Australia by boat then you are not going to  gain any advantage. And that is the fundamental principle which underlines every  single recommendation in this report.

Kelly: Well, Minister, that's important, and just to decode that, does that mean  because we know amongst those 100 000 people in Malaysia, for instance, some  have been there for five years. Does that mean people could be stuck on Nauru for  five years? Is that what you're prepared to say?

Bowen: Well, what the government would do - of course the Panel has left some of  the detail down to the government - is establish a mechanism for determining how  we would establish when somebody would have been resettled. Now, there are  some people, for example -

Kelly: But that's the corollary to what you're saying, isn't it?

Bowen: Fran, if you'd just let me finish the answer to the question you've posed to  me. Now, there are people, say, in Indonesia who don't wait all that long for  resettlement in Australia because the pool of refugees in Indonesia is not as large.  There are people who wait a lot longer in Malaysia. There are people who wait a lot  longer in Pakistan and in Jordan and Oman, for example, for resettlement in  Australia. And not everybody is referred for resettlement by the UNHCR. There's 43  million displaced people in the world, but a tiny fraction of resettlement places  available, of which we are the third largest and would become the second largest if  we moved to 20 000.

So we would look at the whole range of circumstances and of course the Panel  makes it clear we don't want to be harsh or punitive, that is not what this is about.  But if you're saying that somebody who comes by boat should get an advantage over  those who don't come by boat, then you and I would disagree about that.

Kelly: Yes, but Minister, just trying to get this clear because in the past you have  said - I'm quoting you - 'Nauru is no silver bullet, it does not break the people  smuggling trade, we know Nauru won't work and we know that it's expensive as  well.'

Bowen: Yes.

Kelly: Now you're saying it will work because of this no advantage test. That  suggests your silver bullet is to make Nauru a tougher option than it was under the  Pacific Solution.

Bowen: Well, I'm not talking about silver bullets, Fran, because this report makes  clear every single recommendation is necessary and vital. This is a package. The  Panel has recommended this as a package. They're not saying just do Nauru and it  will fix everything. Now, this is a different model of Nauru, but yes, Fran, as I said  yesterday, you can go through and you can point out this is not entirely consistent  with what everybody has said all through their political careers. That's what the Panel  has called for, they've called for compromise from us and from the Opposition.

It's pointed out that by not recommending TPVs, TPVs don't have efficacy, which is a  part of the Opposition's policy. It's suggested changes and improvements to  Malaysia. We're happy to take that on board. The Panel has called, if you like, for a  fresh approach. Now, we're up for it. We want to deliver that because too many  people have died at sea, Fran. I mean, we've talked about this ad infinitum. If you go  to Christmas Island you can see the memorials to the children and the women  who've died at sea and I challenge anybody to do that or to deal with these issues on  a day-to-day basis and not take every opportunity to save lives at sea in a fair way

and provide a better chance for those who are in camps around the world, living in  difficult circumstances around the world, who Australia should not forget.

Kelly: It's 19 to eight on Breakfast. Our guest this morning is Immigration Minister,  Chris Bowen. Minister, I know your time is tight this morning, but to go to the  Malaysia deal, the Panel has recommended that the government basically fix that  up, that the current protections as mooted in the original plan are inadequate. And  Angus Houston told us this morning you'd need essentially an MoU, a Memorandum  of Understanding with the Malaysian Government. How long before the Malaysia  transfer agreement can be put to Parliament? Because you tried to get that before  and failed, haven't you?

Bowen: No, that's not right, Fran. Let's put this in context. I welcome the fact that the  Panel has found the Malaysia agreement was important and that work with Malaysia  vital. And Mr Houston has said that he found the agreement with Malaysia a good  one and an important building block. And I've made this point regularly, that Malaysia  was the building block for more regional work and the underlying principle was one  of no advantage, which was the underlying advantage of what we saw over other  options at that time.

Now, the Panel has said a couple of things about Malaysia, and I'm more than happy  to take their feedback on board because, again, I think that's what needs to happen  to get a fresh approach. They've suggested that some of the things we've spoken to  Malaysia and the UNHCR about in terms of treatment of unaccompanied minors and  other vulnerable people be more codified, clearer in the agreement, and we're happy  to work towards that. They've also said something like an MoU could be worked  towards over time, as you work with Malaysia and other countries in the region. The  Panel makes it very clear in their report that we cannot only deal with countries that  are signatories to the Refugee Convention. You can't call for a regional solution,  Fran, and then say but we shouldn't work with countries in our region who aren't  signatories. That is just not a feasible option going forward.

Malaysia has made great strides in their treatment of refugees and asylum seekers  in recent years. We want to work with them to improve that. The breakthrough  agreement with Malaysia was a significant one. The UNHCR recognised that, that's  why they were involved with it. Malaysia has had the biggest increase in asylum  seekers on its shores in the world, of any other country. And I'm more than happy to  continue to work with them on these issues and for Australia to play a role in  resettling more people out of Malaysia. That was the first step, with the 1000 extra.  Of course, when we go to 20 000, of course Malaysia and Indonesia would figure  very prominently in that increase to 20 000. And so, look, we'll have those  discussions. Some of the work can be done by us in terms of pre-transfer  agreements -

Kelly: But do you accept -

Bowen: Hang on, Fran, some of the work can be done by us in pre-transfer  agreements, pre-transfer guidelines, on which a lot of work has been done. We can  better codify that. And of course, we can talk to UNHCR and Malaysia about how we  go forward.

Kelly: Do you accept the committee's argument that the Malaysia deal doesn't have  enough human rights protections and are you confident that you can discuss this  with Malaysia and get the changes that the committee require to say this deal would  now work?

Bowen: No, the Panel went through all the protections and recognised the  protections in the agreement. It made some suggestions about how some more  could be better codified and that's fine, we can work towards that. Now, our first  priority of course will be - as the Panel recommends - a circuit breaker. We need a  very strong message to the region, to asylum seekers and the people smugglers,  very quickly and the first step would be the implementation of PNG and Nauru. But  the Panel also makes clear and they've said in the public commentary as well that  Malaysia is vital going forward, that it's a package and the Malaysia agreement  needs to be pursued and built upon and elements of it need to be clarified.

Kelly: Minister, thank you very much for joining us.

Bowen: Thank you, Fran.

