Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Malaysia Arrangement, Indonesia,  turning back the boats, Australian  Labor Party, Budget, Defence reviews Sunday, 11 March 2012

Interview with Paul Bongiorno, Stefanie Balogh and Mark  Kenny, Meet The Press, Channel Ten

Paul Bongiorno: Welcome back to the program, Chris Bowen.  Good morning, Minister.

Chris Bowen: Good morning to you Paul.

Bongiorno: Well, the stalemate over the Malaysia solution —  there's no end in sight, is there?

Bowen: Well, look, the Malaysia agreement is a huge step  forward, as John Menadue said during the week. We have  legislation before the Parliament; the Opposition appears hell bent  on blocking that. We have tried to negotiate with them in good faith  to see that legislation passed — we'll continue to prosecute the  case.

The other point is, of course, Paul, we are not the only ones with  legislation before the Parliament — Mr Oakeshott has moved a  Private Members' Bill to allow offshore processing. That shows the  sort of good faith that people can bring to the table. Mr Oakshott is  an independent member saying, 'Look both sides support offshore  processing, we should be able to see this implemented through  law'. I'll be recommending to the Labor Caucus we support Mr  Oakeshott's bill, for example, as a significant step forward. The  Australian people want this sorted out. They say both sides of  politics support offshore processing and surely both sides of  politics should be able to vote for it.

Bongiorno: The bill in one sense is stating the obvious. But can I  put it to you that the Malaysian solution is a dead duck. Because  even if Labor wins the next election, it won't control the Senate, the  Greens will still have the balance of power and you will be blocked  there as well. So don't you have to start all over again, rethink this?

Bowen: Well, Paul, what we have got here is an agreement with  Malaysia where Malaysia says, 'We will work with Australia to  implement a deterrent to offshore - to boat arrivals in Australia.' So  there is three differences between the Malaysia agreement and  turning back the boats: A) Malaysia has agreed —

Bongiorno: But before you go there —

Bowen: — Indonesia hasn't. But B) UNHCR has said it is  workable, the UNHCR says turning back the boats is not. And C)  Malaysia can be implemented without endangering the lives of  Australian service personnel, which turning back the boats can't.

Well, let me go to your point, Paul. We will argue for the types of  arrangements that we have implemented and will continue to point  out that we need a long-term regional solution which removes the  incentive to come to Australia by boat and involves Australia  resettling more refugees from around the world, just as the  Malaysia agreement did. Now, we will put that case. If the Liberal  party is saying they won't respect the mandate of the government if

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 4 Malaysia Arrangement, Indonesia, turning back the boats, Australian Labor Party, Bu...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb183699.htm

we are re-elected and will continue to block it in the Senate, well  that's a matter that they will need to justify to the Australian people.

Bongiorno: Well, of course in the meantime, it is the onshore  processing that is the go. But look, early in the year, Tony Abbott  was quoted in 'The Australian' as saying that core policy for border  protection is turning back the boats. This morning, the Shadow  Minister Scott Morrison brushed aside the Indonesian  Ambassador's concerns about that. Here he is:

SCOTT MORRISON, SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER  (TODAY, SKY AGENDA): We've had a very strong relationship  with Indonesia over the period of time we've implemented that  policy. So, I have the same confidence about our ability to achieve  this again.

Bongiorno: Well, the argument is pretty straightforward. They did  it before so can they do it again?

Bowen: Well, what we have got here is an Opposition in denial. I  mean, the Indonesian Ambassador's powerful intervention is the  latest in a long line of indications from Jakarta that they do not  support this policy of turning back the boats and they will not  cooperate with it. The Foreign Minister of Indonesia, Mr  Natalegawa, has said it himself. We've seen it said by very senior  Indonesian officials, including the Ambassador. And the Opposition  just shrugs their shoulders and says, 'Oh well, it will be alright on  the night, we will sort it out.'

They are in denial about the fact that Indonesia will not cooperate  with this policy. I mean, Mr Abbott says he wants a foreign and  migration policy with more of a focus on Jakarta than Geneva. Well  Jakarta said 'No'. Jakarta has said, 'We are not going to cooperate  with this policy'.

Bongiorno: So are you saying that when Tony Abbott says, 'We  will turn back all the boats, when it is safe to do so', he is using  political weasel words?

Bowen: Well look, we have seen Mr Abbott all over the shop on  this. Remember at the election, he said that he'd have a 'boat  phone' — he'd be sitting at Kirribilli, giving the orders as to whether

an individual boat should be turned around. Now we're told it is an  operational decision for people on the ground. Mr Abbott goes  around and beats his chest in The Australian saying, 'We will turn  around every boat' and 'This is a major step forward'. Then the  Deputy Leader of the Opposition says to the Indonesian  Ambassador, 'Oh, you don't actually need to believe that, we will  talk to you about which ones we turn around and which ones we  don't.'

I mean they are all over the shop on this. They're in denial about  the unworkability of this policy. They're in denial when the Navy  and Border Protection says it will risk Australian lives. They're in  denial when the UNHCR says it breaches international  conventions and they are in denial when Jakarta says, 'We are not  going to cooperate in this backward policy which is simply not  regional cooperation.' They say, 'Don't worry about it, it will be  okay.' Well, it won't.

BREAK

Bongiorno: You are on Meet the Press with Immigration Minister,  Chris Bowen. And welcome to the panel, Mark Kenny from The  Advertiser and Stefanie Balogh from The Australian. Good morning  Mark and Stefanie.

In the overheated run to Labor's leadership showdown, Kevin  Rudd told us what he really thought about the Gillard government's  asylum seeker policy. He described the East Timor solution and  the Malaysia solution as 'a walk on the policy wild side'.

KEVIN RUDD, FORMER FOREIGN MINISTER (24 FEBRUARY):

Page 2 of 4 Malaysia Arrangement, Indonesia, turning back the boats, Australian Labor Party, Bu...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb183699.htm

It wasn't K-Rudd or anything to do with the East Timor solution or  the Malaysia solution.

SCOTT MORRISON, SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER  (TODAY): The Minister for Immigration, Mr Speaker, was so  convinced by the former Foreign Minister's arguments on this that  he decided to vote for him in the Caucus! He decided to vote  effectively against his own Malaysian people-swap.

Stefanie Balogh: Minister, Scott Morrison has a point doesn't he?  You voted for Kevin Rudd in the leadership ballot, weren't you  voting against your Malaysian solution?

Bowen: No; and the leadership ballot was obviously an entirely  different matter about entirely different issues. I think Kevin was —  in the context of arguments around the leadership ballot and  allegations being made against him - making a broader point. The  Malaysia agreement was taken through the Cabinet processes. I  proposed it. I'm proud of it. I believe in it. It was taken through all  the normal and necessary Cabinet processes.

Balogh: With the Malaysian solution, are the Malaysians still on  board and how long do you expect them to be patient while this  drags on? I mean, they can't be patient forever, can they?

Bowen: Well, the Malaysian government is very committed to this.  I remain in regular contact with my ministerial counterpart, Minister  Hishammuddin. They see this as a significant step forward in  breaking the people smugglers' business model. They understand  Australian domestic politics, they understand the Australian legal  system and they are obviously very sympathetic to us and the  obstacles that have been put in our way. But they remain  committed to this and remain committed to working with the  Australian government to implement it if we are able to pass our  legislation.

Mark Kenny: Mr Bowen, just going back to the leadership  question. Now that that has been resolved, is that been fully put to  bed? Do you guarantee, for example, that Kevin Rudd won't at any  time in the future be leader of the Labor Party?

Bowen: The matter has been resolved, Mark. I said that in the  lead-up to the leadership ballot that the Labor Party had to make a  decision and then stick to that decision - that's my very firm view.  The Labor Party made the decision and we now stick to that  decision. We all support the Prime Minister. We all work for her  and we all provide our all in making sure that we put the best case  forward for the next election. That is my very clear position and I  think it is the position of the Cabinet and the Caucus.

Balogh: Given the leadership issues, one of the third-party  candidates' names who was tossed up is Stephen Smith. Now  Stephen Smith is now under heavy fire from both the Opposition  and the Defence. It is a good look for the government to have a  Minister at war with his department?

Bowen: Well, I don't accept the premise of your question in linking  it to a leadership question, but I say this about Stephen Smith: I sit  with Stephen Smith on the National Security Committee of the  Cabinet. I talk to him almost every day. He believes in our troops.  He supports our troops and he respects our troops, and any  suggestion to the otherwise is just wrong.

Now, Stephen Smith, I think, took a courageous decision last year  in relation to the so-called Skype affair, to make sure that a young,  vulnerable woman, received the necessary protection and support  and defence from her minister. Now that wouldn't be a universally  popular thing for him to do. But I think Australians can be proud of  the fact we've got a minister with the courage and the passion that  Stephen Smith brings to this portfolio. He doesn't mind making  tough decisions and he doesn't see himself, his role, as being the  most popular Defence Minister in Australian history; but he does

Page 3 of 4 Malaysia Arrangement, Indonesia, turning back the boats, Australian Labor Party, Bu...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb183699.htm

respect our troops, he does support our troops and it drives him -  and I see that every day of the week when he goes about his daily  duties.

KENNY: Mr Bowen, the government is obviously preparing for an  extremely tough budget coming in May. Your department has  obviously experienced some expenditure blowouts over managing  the offshore program and so forth, are you preparing for cuts, as

well as everyone else?

Bowen: Well, like every other minister in the government, I have to  justify my budget to my colleagues through the expenditure review  committee process. We have a very robust process. We have had  since we came to office, and as we should.

Every minister has to justify every dollar worth of expenditure and  every minister in a tough fiscal environment has to contemplate  which area they will cut; and I'm no different. And that's as it should  be. This is a tough budget. What the difference in the approach  that we take, as opposed to the Opposition - they will need to  bring in swinging cuts, they won't tell us what they are. They say,  'Well, we'll have a commission of audit after the election' — after  the election to fund, what are very significant black holes. I mean,  they have a $70 billion hole, which is the equivalent of the age  pension for two years, and yet they say they will be able to do that  — well, they have a very big fiscal credibility problem going  forward.

Bongiorno: Minister, just before we go, there is a very strong  argument, especially put by the Greens, that in fact onshore  processing is cheaper than offshore processing. Will you be saving  money in the next year?

Bowen: No. Because the ultimate way to save money is to have  offshore processing because it is the deterrent to coming to  Australia by boat in the first place—

Bongiorno: Okay.

Bowen: Yes, offshore processing can be expensive. But if it is  done properly and it is a part of a regional framework, then it is a  proper disincentive and you don't have the sort of costs which go

with the number of people arriving. So, I think the Greens don't get  that argument and they are in a completely parallel sort of  arrangement when it comes to this. They don't accept, they don't  accept that offshore processing, A) saves lives and is a proper  deterrent if done proper properly.

Bongiorno: Thank you very much for being with us today,  Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb183699.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 13 March 2012 at 10:32 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 4 of 4 Malaysia Arrangement, Indonesia, turning back the boats, Australian Labor Party, Bu...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb183699.htm

