

ABC News Breakfast, Interview with  Karina Carvalho  Transcript, E&OE, proof only

25 September 2012

We can take you to New York now where Australia is pushing for that spot on the UN  Security Council.

Richard Marles is Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Richard how is the Prime  Minister doing?

RICHARD MARLES: The Prime Minister has been ill, as people know, but I think she is  getting up and about. She did participate in the Clinton Foundation function today.  Obviously, it is disappointing for her but she will be up and about in no time, I'm sure, and  very much a part of this week's activities.

KARINA CARVALHO: Will she attend the dinner with President Barack Obama tonight?

RICHARD MARLES: I'm not sure yet as to whether or not she'll be attending that.  Obviously, it's a disappointment. Julia Gillard is very strong and feisty person so to be laid  low like this means she has had a pretty significant bout of tummy troubles. But the important  thing is people understand the situation and she is absolutely going to be a part of this week's  activities.

KARINA CARVALHO: If we CAN talk about Australia's bid for a seat on the UN Security  Council, European countries are likely to back the bids of Luxembourg and Finland.  Australia is now courting the votes of African nations. What have they said they want to say  from Australia?

RICHARD MARLES: I think in relation to Africa, what is important to understand is that  we have a growing relationship with Africa. It is a relationship which has a very strong  private sector component to it. Mining in Africa is a significant interest that many Australian  mining operators and companies have. We are backing that in with a number of aid initiatives

around mining. We have announced the mining for development initiative last year at the  Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and that has been very well received by all  the African nations. We are now offering a number of scholarships across the African  continent, a full 1,000 in a year. That is a very important indication that we are going play an  increasing role in Africa. That has been well received.

KARINA CARVALHO: The UNHCR recently criticised some aspects of Australia's  offshore processing policy, in particular the no-advantage test for asylum seekers. Do you  think this issue will be a factor when the vote takes place next month?

RICHARD MARLES: I don't think this is going to be a significant factor. The important  point to understand in terms of Australia's international reputation when it comes to asylum  seekers is that we provide a significant number of places to asylum seekers who are seeking  refuge. We are now increasing that to 20,000 a year. That places us right near the top and  easily at the top per head of population of those countries which offer places for asylum. This  is something that the world knows in terms of the way in which Australia operates. In terms  of the Houston plan and putting that into place, we have been in close contact with the  UNHCR. The world absolutely knows that the way we go about our business is to consult  with the UNHCR in terms of everything we are doing and we will continue with that. I don't  see that as a significant issue here in terms of which way countries decide to vote in relation  to the UN Security Council.

KARINA CARVALHO: Richard Marles, the wire services are reporting that Bob Carr has  already been forced to defend the Government's policy in this area when he was asked about  it at the speech he gave earlier today?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, people may have curiosity about it but I can tell you I've met  with a number of foreign ministers today and a number of heads of state today and it has not  been a question that has been raised once with me. I think people are much more concerned  about the role that Australia plays in terms of our peace keeping role, our peace building role  and indeed or development assistance throughout the world in the context of a growing  development assistance budget. That really is a global effort which has been very well  received. This has been a very important campaign in terms of getting a sense of how the  world regards Australia and that has been very positive indeed.

KARINA CARVALHO: How do you think our bid will go? The Foreign Affairs Minister,  Bob Carr, has been downplaying, trying to limit people's expectations?

RICHARD MARLES: It is a close call. The answer to the question is we're in the hunt and  we're a real chance but this is going to go down to the wire and it would be foolish for any of  us to predict an outcome now. What we know is that we are doing everything we can to put  our best foot forward. We have a very good story to tell. Australia is being very well received  by the world in terms of the contribution that we're making. Something like 3,000 Australian  personnel are currently serving under UN Security Council mandates. We haven't served on  the UN Security Council since the 1980s. It is reasonable in the context of making such a  contribution on the ground that we do take our turn on that body that makes the decision  about the deployment of such people. Since the beginning of the UN, we have committed  something like 60,000 people serving under UN mandates. That is a record which is very  much admired by the world and it is something that puts us in good stead to lay a claim to  serve on the Security Council for the first time in almost a quarter of a century.

Richard Marles, the Opposition Leader, Abbott, will give a speech in Sydney today outlining  the Coalition's defence policy, including an aspiration to restore the 3% real growth in  defence spending, what's Labor's response to that?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, the first point to make here is that this is going to be another  layer of Opposition incoherence when it comes to defence policy. We know nothing in terms  of what Tony Abbott will say today about the timing of the increase in defence spending. We  know nothing about how he is going to pay for that. What we do know is that doubt now  shrouds the submarine program and all those workers who are in South Australia today will  feel an absolute sense of vulnerability when they hear Tony Abbott's words. This is a state of  confusion when it comes to defence policy on the part of the opposition. Tony Abbott is  simply going to add to that at lunchtime today.

KARINA CARVALHO: Richard Marles, we will leave it there. Thanks for your time.

RICHARD MARLES: Thanks Karina.

Media enquiries

 Parliamentary Secretary's Office: (02) 6277 4330   Departmental Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



