



CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

DOORSTOP, SYDNEY

SATURDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Group of Sri Lankans returned home, removing family reunion  concessions, health services on Nauru, detention centre upgrades.

CHRIS BOWEN: Thanks for coming everybody. I wanted to announce a couple of things  today. Firstly, I wanted to announce that at 8.15 Christmas Island time this morning - that’s  11.15 eastern standard time - a plane carrying 18 Sri Lankan males left Christmas Island  bound for Sri Lanka. These individuals had requested not to pursue their claims in Australia  but instead to be returned to Sri Lanka.

Sixteen out of the 18 people arrived in Australia after August 13th. They are not to be  transferred to Nauru, but instead to be transferred to their homeland of Sri Lanka - and that  has been arranged and facilitated. Members of the media should be aware that footage of  the transfer will be available from the Department of Immigration later this afternoon.

This, I think, tells the lie yet again to the rhetoric of the people smugglers. These people  had been misled by people smugglers to believe that a visa would be available on their  arrival to Australia.

I think what this transfer does, together with our transfers to Nauru over the last week,  show that if you come to Australia by boat you risk your life and you throw your money  away.

Now the second thing I wanted to announce today was that the Government had accepted  the recommendation of the Expert Panel to make changes to the concessions under the  Special Humanitarian Program for family reunion. Of course I have previously announced  that the Government accepted all recommendations in principle. I have now signed the  regulations which would implement this recommendation; subject now only to the  agreement of Her Excellency the Governor General, this will come into force.

What this does is say to people arriving in Australia by boat that family reunion will only be  available through the normal channels. There will be no special concessions.

Up until now it had been possible for people who arrived in Australia by boat to sponsor  family members and not to show that the other requirements for coming to Australia under  the Special Humanitarian Program were met. And of course we’ve also accepted the  recommendation of the expert panel to increase the normal family program by 4,000 places  to ensure that this change does not put undue pressure on the family reunion program.

I’m happy to answer some questions.

JOURNALIST:  Does this show that you really should have adopted the Opposition’s  policies a long time ago considering how successful it was going back?

BOWEN: This was a policy of course that was available several months ago - available last  year. This could have been implemented; the Government made that offer to the  Opposition. But the Opposition is still saying that they don’t want to accept the 22  recommendations of the Expert Panel. We are the only party, the Labor Party is the only  party that is implementing the recommendations of the Expert Panel.

Now there is still some way to go here. There is still some way to go and I am sure that  people smugglers will continue to test the will and resolve of the Government. But I think,  as I say, these steps today underline that that will and resolve is very clear.

JOURNALIST: The Greens have been critical of the counselling services available to asylum  seekers on Nauru, what do you have in place?

BOWEN: Well the Greens are wrong. The Greens are wrong and they don’t understand the  counselling services that are available. The IHMS contract makes it clear that the counselling  services that are available on Nauru consist of a minimum of two counsellors and two  medically-trained professionals regardless of the numbers of Nauru at any particular time.

We want to ensure that the services available for mental health on Nauru are appropriate  and broadly comparable to those that are available in Australia. I mean the Greens are  continually complaining and continually criticising while we’re getting on and implementing  the policy in a way which recognises the challenges and does so in a way which assists  people through a very difficult process.

JOURNALIST:  What percentage though, how many have arrived and how many have  gone back?

BOWEN: Sorry the percentage of…?

JOURNALIST: What’s the ballpark figure? How many have come since August 13 - I think  the date was - and how many are returning? What is the percentage?

BOWEN: Well this is the first transfer home to Sri Lanka. Of course we continue talk to  people about their options, which include return home for some people - that’s something  that will continue.

This is the first transfer. It’s a very significant transfer. It’s a sign that people are obviously  weighing up their options and that they have been misled by people smugglers. Now the  first transfer of 18 people, I think, is a very significant step.

JOURNALIST: Are you still expecting more boats?

BOWEN: Well I expect that people smugglers will continue to test the resolve - and I think  they’ll continue to mislead people. But we will continue to communicate in the region, in  source countries and tell people that if you come to Australia by boat, you risk your life and  you throw your money away.

JOURNALIST: Do you have any indication that the advertising campaign has had any  effect?

BOWEN: Well clearly the advertising campaign - the communications campaign throughout  the region is cutting through and is being noticed. But we’re up against people smugglers  who are prepared to lie to people who are in desperate situation. I expect that will continue  but I do think that there are indications that our communications campaign is cutting  through, yes.

JOURNALIST: So you hope more people will return. But how many actually have arrived?

BOWEN: Well those figures are on the public record. Those figures are out there and on  the public record - and of course about 2,000 people arrived since August 13. That’s a  matter of public record.

JOURNALIST: How much does it cost to charter a flight?

BOWEN: Charter costs are always expensive but of course this is a very important deterrent  and it does show people that what they hope to achieve by arrival in Australia is not there.  So it’s money well spent. Okay -

JOURNALIST: Is there any substance to reports this morning that you’re pouring resources  to upgrade detention centres in Australia?

BOWEN: We are simply implementing the recommendations of the independent review  following the disturbances of last year - nothing more, nothing less. It’s already on the  public record.

JOURNALIST: Sorry we didn’t receive your alert earlier and we missed the first part of the  presser. So the Greens are saying that the psychiatric assistance on Nauru -

BOWEN: Well, the Greens are wrong. There will be psychological support available on  Nauru as is outlined in the contract with IHMS. That support is broadly consistent with what  would be available in Australia and it consists of two medical professionals and two  counsellors at any given time regardless of the numbers on Nauru.

So I think the Greens are just simply making political points.

JOURNALIST: Have you got a target for how many you’d like to return?

BOWEN: No, this is not a matter of targets. This is about talking to people about their  options and people deciding that return was a better option than being processed under the  new arrangements.

Thank you.

Ends

