Minister for Defence - Interview with George Roberts, ABC News Breakfast

5 September 2012

TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH GEORGE ROBERTS, ABC NEWS  BREAKFAST

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 5 SEPTEMBER 2012

TOPICS: Indonesian relationship

PAUL KENNEDY: The Defence Minister, Stephen Smith, is in Jakarta for  talks with the Indonesian Government, and spoke to Indonesia  correspondent George Roberts.

GEORGE ROBERTS: Before we get into the details of the plan, isn’t even  the existence of increased cooperation on rescues an admission that the  current policy hasn’t stopped boats leaving and hasn’t stopped people  drowning?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, I don’t think anyone in the Government is denying  that we needed to do more to stop people taking high risk journeys over  the seas and put themselves at risk, and put themselves in search and  rescue situations. That’s why we’ve embarked upon offshore processing,  both at Nauru and at Papua New Guinea.

GEORGE ROBERTS: Isn’t it the case that this policy and the threat of  going to Nauru or Manus Island hasn’t stopped people taking [indistinct]-

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, I have always been of the view that there will be  what the experts describe here as a demonstration effect that once Nauru  is up and running, once Manus is up and running, and people smugglers  and their unfortunate clients see the outcomes, that that will stem or stop  the flow.

GEORGE ROBERTS: Asylum seekers have told us, here in Indonesia, they  don’t have another option. They face a ten month waiting list to get an  interview with the UNHCR, another year perhaps, before they get refugee  status. When do you expect the new policy will start working for those  people?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, for those people who are here in Indonesia, we  say don’t risk your life on a small boat on the high seas, don’t put yourself  in that position. We’re making changes to our onshore humanitarian and  refugee programs that will open up additional places, which will see our  program go to 20,000, and we’ve already indicated an additional 400  immediately. So we’ve also made it clear that there will be no advantage  from getting on a boat and embarking upon a dangerous journey.

GEORGE ROBERTS: Indonesia’s search and rescue organisation  BASARNAS has said it just simply doesn’t have the capability. Last week,  its helicopters couldn’t reach the search zone. Its boats were too small to  go out into big waves. And they say they just can’t do ocean rescues. So  these six points don’t help Indonesia effect a better rescue if they don’t  have the right equipment.

STEPHEN SMITH: Indonesia is thousands of islands on an archipelago. It  takes you five and a half hours to fly from the east to the west. So they  have enormous challenges, enormous challenges. And an additional ship  here or an additional plane there won’t necessarily help. What will help is  growing their capacity, growing their capability, fixing their systems and  providing them with the best possible chance of instantaneous  communication and instantaneous access. But you’re not going to solve  Indonesian search and rescue problems overnight because of the vast  maritime space that they have to deal with.

GEORGE ROBERTS: Just looking at the tragedy from last week again, the  55 survivors who were transferred from HMAS Maitland and other ships,  you transferred them into a country that hasn’t signed the Refugee  Convention. Doesn’t that go against everything that your party has said  about not turning boats back and not sending people back to a country  that hasn’t signed the Refugee Convention?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, they were transferred on the high seas by people  who made a judgment that they were in desperate need of medical  assistance, and the best place and the closest place and most appropriate  place to receive that medical assistance was in Indonesia.

GEORGE ROBERTS: With respect though, nonetheless you still transferred  people back to a country which hasn’t signed the Refugee Convention.  Doesn’t that go against everything you’ve said?

STEPHEN SMITH: But with the greatest of respect, you were dealing there  with a search and rescue operation, people badly injured, in desperate

need of medical assistance. It wasn’t a decision made by a Minister of the  Crown sitting in Canberra or anywhere else. It was made by people on the  ground, on the high seas, making a judgment about the safety, welfare  and security of people in enormous distress. That is 1,000 miles away  from the Opposition, who say that they would, against the advice of the  Chief of Navy, pretend that they could turn the boats back.

GEORGE ROBERTS: That decision was made underneath your command  effectively, and it goes against what your party have said in the past, that  you wouldn’t send people back to Indonesia.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, with the greatest of respect, frankly, I think you’re  missing the point. And Minister Clare made the same point to you three  occasions at our press conference today. These were operational decisions  made by people who had one thing in mind - rescuing people from a  circumstance where they were in great danger. They weren’t judgments  made by me, they weren’t judgments made by you - they were made by  people on the spot, trying to save lives. And it doesn’t cut across any of  the things that we have said about the way in which it is unsafe to seek to  tow boats back or turn them away.

GEORGE ROBERTS: They did ask for asylum in Australia though, and  requested of Australian authorities they be taken to Australia. Doesn’t  that then, as the Australian Government, give you some onus of  responsibility?

STEPHEN SMITH: [Indistinct] -They also asked to be rescued from the  high seas, they also asked to be rescued from sharks that were attacking  them, they also asked that their fellow colleagues be given desperately  needed, urgent medical attention and that’s what they received. And they  were decisions made by people on the spot. And with the greatest of  respect, it’s not for you to think you have some luxury of making a  judgment after the event.

KARINA CARVALHO: That’s the Defence Minister, Stephen Smith,  speaking to Indonesia correspondent George Roberts in Jakarta.



