





CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

WEDNESDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Changes to Migration Act.

MARIUS BENSON: Chris Bowen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you, Marius.

BENSON: What impact do you expect this excision, if it goes ahead, to have?

BOWEN: Well, it’s an important recommendation from the Houston Panel in order to stop  people continuing on a boat journey to try and get around Christmas Island and Ashmore  Reef to strike the mainland. Now, the numbers that have come to the mainland are  relatively small compared to -

BENSON: How big?

BOWEN: Well, we’ve had 1,500 people since 2008 either get close to the mainland or reach  the mainland. And there have been just over 200 who have actually made it and have been  regarded as mainland arrivals.

BENSON: Two hundred?

BOWEN: So those numbers are small.

BENSON: Two hundred out of how many total over that period?

BOWEN: Again, Marius, 1,500 -

BENSON: No, no, of the total arrivals on non-mainland.

BOWEN: Let me finish my sentence, please, Marius.

BENSON: Sure.

BOWEN: Now, 1,500 who have attempted to make it to the mainland and come very close.  Two hundred who have succeeded in getting to the mainland. Now, that is a small  proportion of the total numbers, but there has also been less incentive for people to strike  the mainland because for a long part of that period there was not that much difference in  the way those groups were treated.

But when you look at, when you have a quite different set of arrangements in place - that is  if you get to Christmas Island or Ashmore Reef you can be taken to Nauru or PNG, but if  you make it to the mainland you wouldn’t - then you do create a perverse incentive to make  it to the mainland and that is an incentive to stay on a boat for maybe three or four more  days, to risk your life three or four days longer, and risk that tragedy occurring.

BENSON: So that was an unintended consequence of your changes to offshore processing,  that you made the mainland that much more attractive?

BOWEN: No, again, recommendation 15 of the expert panel was very clear: it said you  should reintroduce Nauru and Manus Island as offshore processing places, you should work  to introduce Malaysia, but you should also do this to make sure you don’t create that  perverse incentive to continue. So we’ve said for a long time, Marius, that we would accept  all the recommendations of the Houston Panel and that is what we’re implementing by this  legislation.

BENSON: The charge, one charge against you from the Opposition and others is of  hypocrisy. Are you guilty of being hypocritical, given the extremely - some say  sanctimonious - criticisms you made of the Howard Government when it attempted the  same measure in 2006? Are you a hypocrite?

BOWEN: Let me make a couple of points, Marius. Firstly, I’ve changed my mind and this is  a change in the Labor Party position, that’s very clear, based on the evidence, based on  trying to save people’s lives. If I have a choice between saving somebody’s life and being  entirely consistent with something I said in 2006, well, I’ll go for saving the life, thanks very  much.

Secondly, this is part of an integrated package. This is not just a one-off measure like the  Howard Government proposed in 2006. This is part of a package of increasing the refugee  intake to 20,000, giving more people the chance of a life in Australia. Last week I was in  refugee camps in Lebanon talking to people who wouldn’t dream of having the money to get  to Australia by boat, but would love the chance of resettlement in Australia. There’s many  hundreds of thousands of people like that around the world. So this is part of an integrated  package which gives people a safer way to come to Australia. As well, gives people the  chance who would never dream of having the money to come to Australia by boat a chance  of a life in Australia, unlike that one-off measure that the Howard Government proposed in  2006.

But yes, Marius, as Minister for Immigration, I have said consistently that we need to take a  different approach, that we need to do everything possible to save lives. And you know  what? I wish the Opposition would do that as well. I wish they would say, ‘Well, we  previously opposed Malaysia, we’re going to change our minds to save lives’. I think that

would get them credit. You’ve got a choice here: you take the evidence into account, you  take the changed circumstances into account, and you do what you can to make people’s  lives safer at sea trying to get to Australia.

BENSON: In 2006, you said excising the mainland would be ‘a stain on our national  character’. Do you see it that way now?

BOWEN: Look, very clearly, Marius, as I just said, I’ve changed my mind. The Labor Party’s  changed its position. I don’t hide that for one second. I recommended to the Government  that we take a flexible approach to try and do what we can to get a more orderly approach  to people arriving in Australia and to save lives.

BENSON: Will this stand up legally, because you previously relied on legal advice that the  Malaysian Solution would be successful in the High Court and that proved untrue? Are you  more confident this time?

BOWEN: Yes, yes, very clearly, we’ve always, for a long time had the case that people who  arrive by boat had an excised place, had a different set of arrangements than those who  arrived by plane with a valid visa and then later claimed asylum. So if you arrive by boat  without a visa, yes, there’s a different arrangement in place than for those who arrive by  plan with a visa and then claim asylum.

That is consistent with the Refugee Convention and what this change does is actually make  the treatment of people more consistent, so that there’s no difference as to whether you  arrive at Christmas Island or you arrive at Darwin or Broome or anywhere else; you will get  treated the same way. So this is entirely consistent with the Refugee Convention. You know  what, Marius? The Refugee Convention is often quoted, but little read. It’s often quoted by  people who say, ‘Oh, this is a breach of the Refugee Convention’. But I would suggest that if  you actually read the Refugee Convention, you’d see that this is consistent with it.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

BOWEN: Thank you, Marius.

Ends



