CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH PETER VAN ONSELEN, PAUL KELLY AND  DENNIS SHANAHAN

SKY NEWS AUSTRALIAN AGENDA

SUNDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2012





SUBJECTS: Australian Labor Party, Malaysia Arrangement.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: We’re joined now by the Immigration Minister, Chris  Bowen. Mr Bowen, thanks for your company.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, good morning.

VAN ONSELEN: You’re always saying that you’d like to talk about something  other than asylum seekers; I’m willing to bet that we’re going to talk about a  range of other things in the Labor leadership space, obviously. Now you’re  backing Kevin Rudd, is that right?

BOWEN: That’s correct, I’ll be voting for Kevin on Monday.

VAN ONSELEN: And how do you feel about some of the commentary by  senior ministerial colleagues of yours about him? About his character, his  Labor values and the dysfunction of last time he was Prime Minister?

BOWEN: Well look, I said on Thursday, at the beginning of this process, that  it was important that we treat each other with respect, that we have two very  good candidates here, and it should be - and is - a hard choice for the

Caucus: two good people, two good people who’ve been good Prime Minister.  And I think its important that we treat this debate in a mature way and with  respect for the qualities that each of them brings to the table as a candidate  for the Labor leadership.

PAUL KELLY: Mr Bowen, on Friday afternoon Kevin Rudd said that Julia  Gillard had lost the trust of the Australian people. Is that your view?

BOWEN: Look, I think Kevin is putting his case. As I’ve said, I think both are  putting their case as to why they should lead the Labor Party. Now both are  entitled to put that case. The reason I’m supporting Kevin is that I believe he  represents the best chance for Labor victory at the next election.

I think each generation of Labor senior figures owes it to the Party and owes

it to the nation to make sure we’re putting our best team forward. I think  Kevin is our most formidable campaigner. He defeated a man many regarded  as invincible. I remember having discussions about John Howard and the  consensus in the body politic being John Howard would not be defeated until  he retired. Kevin Rudd proved that to be wrong in a massive election victory  in 2007 and I think the man who beat John Howard is best placed to beat  Tony Abbott.

KELLY: Do you therefore believe that Julia Gillard has no prospect of winning  the next election?

BOWEN: No, I think every election is winnable and I don’t think any election  should be written-off, but I do think that Kevin represents the best chance at  the next election. That’s the very strong feedback to me from my electorate,  from around the country, and it is reflected in the opinion polls we’ve seen in  recent days.

VAN ONSELEN: But even Julia Gillard concedes that he’s a good  campaigner, the issue seems to be from Julia Gillard to Wayne Swan to Nicola  Roxon to Stephen Conroy, all of these senior ministers say that he was  dysfunctional as a Prime Minister.

BOWEN: Well I can only call it as I see it, I don’t speak for others, I speak  for myself. I was a member of Kevin Rudd’s Cabinet: I was a junior minister  in the early years of the Government and then was elevated to Cabinet in  2009. I found Kevin Rudd to be a good Prime Minister, a good chair of  Cabinet, I found him accessible, I found him consultative.

That’s my experience and I’ll give you one example. When I entered the  Cabinet I was made Minister for Superannuation. I developed a proposal to  take superannuation from nine per cent to 12 per cent, it was a big reform. It  went through the Cabinet: he needed to be convinced of the policy  arguments at each level -

VAN ONSELEN: Let me ask it this way then though: from Julia Gillard  through to those names that I mentioned - Wayne Swan and so forth - did  any of them ever express to you, over two and a half years that Kevin Rudd  was Prime Minister, other than say in the last three months when the coup  was developing against him, that they had reservations about his style and  his functionality?

BOWEN: Well obviously I’m not going to go into Cabinet discussions or  discussions with colleagues, but I am reflecting on my own experience, and  my own experience as a member of Kevin Rudd’s Cabinet was that he was  open, accessible and consultative.



VAN ONSELEN: This is an important question, because if they didn’t - if that  wasn’t the view being promulgated around the place over that two years,

then they were sitting silently by and saying nothing, or they are gilding the  lily now when they say how bad he was.

BOWEN: Well people can justify their own comments. What I won’t do is get  into a commentary or a slanging match with any of my colleagues. I think  some of the commentary over the last week has been very unfortunate - it  has not been good for Labor’s legacy, it has not been good in terms of  reminding the Australian people of what has been a very significant reform  program under two Prime Ministers over four years in office. And I think some  of the commentary over the last few days has made that difficult.

VAN ONSELEN: You say some of the commentary, and chief amongst that  must be the statement by Wayne Swan. Let’s just play some comments from  Wayne Swan that he made before this showdown this week.

Clip of Wayne Swan’s comments.

VAN ONSELEN: Now that was Wayne Swan before, but then in the  statement that he issued he said that, “For too long Kevin Rudd has been  putting his own self interest ahead of the interests of the broader labour  movement and the country as a whole. He had dysfunctional decision making  and he was deeply demeaning towards other people”.

BOWEN: Well I’m only going to speak from my own experience, I’m not  going to get into a slanging match with colleagues. What I will say is that  after Monday we need to unite behind the winner - whoever that is - and we  need to restore the unity and respect which has been the hallmark of the

Labor Party in the past and needs to return immediately.

DENNIS SHANAHAN: Mr Bowen, you set the tone with your statements as  a Rudd supporter, expressing respect for both sides, ensuring that whoever  won there wouldn’t be the recordings that the Liberal Party will run now. But  on your own experience, do you believe Kevin Rudd has changed since he  was leader, when there have been clearly criticisms of his management style,  even micro-management style. Do you think he is a different person?

BOWEN: Look, I think a number of us who are supporting Kevin have put  that to him, have asked him about what he’s reflected on over the last 18  months - and I think he has reflected over the last 18 months. I’m not  suggesting he was perfect in the Prime Ministership, I don’t think he would  suggest that. I think he would suggest that he has recognised that maybe he  would need to do some things differently. And, you know, when he’s been  through a bruising experience like he has over the last 18 months, he would  be - it wouldn’t be natural if he didn’t do that.

As I say, I reflect on my experience of him, working with him as Prime  Minister, and it was a positive one. Others have different views and I think he  would’ve reflected on people’s views and reflected on, maybe, his

management-style and how he would do some things differently. And he’s  already done that by, for example, saying he thought the - giving the leader  of the Labor Party the opportunity to appoint the ministry was a mistake and  he would move to reverse that should he return to the Labor leadership.

I think that is what has happened - that he has reflected on those things and  that you would see him taking a different approach to some issues. Also  bearing in mind it takes a while for every new Prime Minister to find their  feet, particularly when you’re dealing with a global financial crisis - the  biggest economic crisis to hit us in 70 years - and that there was a lot going  on and that perhaps along the way some processes and some consultation

maybe wouldn’t be as strong as it would be under other circumstances where  the need for swift action wasn’t as apparent.

KELLY: But if Rudd comes back as leader, how can he possibly unite the  party? I mean, we’ve had all these comments from senior ministers - Nicola  Roxon’s indicated she’ll go to the backbench, Wayne Swan clearly can’t serve  under Kevin Rudd - I mean, what’s going to happen to the party? I mean,  how can he possibly unite Labor?

BOWEN: Well I think Kevin has indicated he would want a Government of all  the talents and he would invite senior ministers, or ministers, to continue to  serve. I also think that if Kevin was to return to the Prime Ministership that he  would be encouraging some of those people to reflect and to talk to him and  work out how they could work together. I’m sure that would be the case.  Now how they respond to that would be a matter for them.

Personally, I think there’s an obligation on those of us at the Cabinet- level to  continue to serve regardless of whether our preferred candidate -

KELLY: But isn’t it the truth these people have crossed the Rubicon? I mean  there’s no way someone like Nicola Roxon or Wayne Swan can change their  mind and change their assessments after what they’ve said, isn’t that the  truth?

BOWEN: Well that’s a matter for them. Should Kevin Rudd return to the  Prime Ministership, that would be a matter for them. I know that Kevin would  be seeking them out, trying to establish how they could work together going  forward, in the best interest of the Government.



VAN ONSELEN: I wanted to ask you about what Kevin Rudd said in one of  his press conferences about the ‘Malaysian Solution’. Now he ridiculed it,  essentially, as a joke. Now this was a solution that you came up with.

BOWEN: No, I don’t accept your analysis of Kevin’s views, expressed there.  The Malaysia agreement was -

VAN ONSELEN: - He said it was wrong.



BOWEN: Well, no. I don’t think that’s right. I don’t think that’s right - he has  indicated it had challenges. Now, I initiated the Malaysian agreement because  I believe it is the right policy. I continue to believe that and I will always  believe that.

It went through the Cabinet processes. Now, I think Kevin was making a  broader point. He was responding to the allegation that somehow  backgrounding, and his presence in the Government, was causing the  problems of the Government. He was making the point, I think, that’s it is  pretty hard to argue that if he wasn’t in Parliament the Government’s  prospects would be a whole lot better.

VAN ONSELEN: In making that point though he also said he had nothing to  do with it. That’s not true is it? He was not just part of Cabinet, but he was  specifically part of the Ministerial grouping that came up with - that approved  the idea.

BOWEN: Well, the Malaysia agreement and the entire regional framework  went through the normal Cabinet processes, including the National Security  Committee of the Cabinet. And of course, Kevin Rudd and I negotiated the  Bali framework through the Bali Process - he as Chair of the Bali Process and  me as the head of the Australian delegation.

KELLY: Isn’t the truth here that Kevin Rudd doesn’t support the Malaysian  deal. Do you accept that if he becomes Prime Minister, this deal is finished?

BOWEN: Well I’m not spokesman for Kevin Rudd, I’m a supporter of Kevin  Rudd. He’ll make his own statements about policy -

KELLY: Well surely he’s discussed this with you, he’s discussed the Malaysian  deal in public - I mean it’s not a secret about what he thinks.

BOWEN: Well look, as I say, he can speak for himself. As Immigration  Minister, I had the task of developing a Regional Framework and developing  an agreement which many people said could not be done - many people said  the Malaysia agreement would never be able to be delivered because you’d  never get a major country in our region to agree to work with us. Well that  turned out to be wrong.

Now yes, of course, then the High Court changed the law and Tony Abbott  has taken a negative approach - which I think will not stand him in good  stead if he ever returns to office. Because then he’ll find, I think he might  reflect and regret not supporting the legislation to give the Government of the

day the chance to implement its own policy.

VAN ONSELEN: Given that we have ended up talking about asylum seekers,  but it’s interesting -



BOWEN: Yes, you’ve breached your promise there, you’ve breached your  promise -

VAN ONSELEN: - It is interesting Mr Bowen, because most of the Kevin  Rudd supporters are part of the Left, which opposed at National Conference  the whole ‘Malaysian Solution’ idea, yet you’re one of the most senior people  supporting Kevin Rudd and you’re the architect of the Malaysian deal.

I have to ask you this straight up because Gillard supporters are suggesting  this constantly on background: Have you got a deal with Kevin Rudd to  become Treasurer if he wins?

BOWEN: No. I’ve seen that speculation, and it’s just plain wrong. I have no  commitment, no offers of any position. I’ve even seen speculation I’d be  Deputy Prime Minister - I think some people are just talking out of their hat.  There are no circumstances in which that would be the case.

KELLY: But are you looking forward to becoming Treasurer?

BOWEN: No. No, I would hope that Wayne Swan would continue to be  Treasurer.

VAN ONSELEN: Under Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister?

BOWEN: Well look, that’s a matter for them. Let’s be serious about this.  There’s no doubt that Kevin Rudd would regard me as a significant figure in  the Cabinet and would want me in a senior role. As, I would hope, Julia  Gillard would want to see me continue in the Cabinet. But that would entirely  be a matter for the Prime Minister of the day and I will serve in any Cabinet  capacity for either of them.

SHANAHAN: Mr Bowen, both leaders have said that they would not have a  second challenge - they’d both go to the back bench if they lose. What do  you think about the prospect of a third candidate down the track challenging  either Julia Gillard or Kevin Rudd closer to the election? If the polls continue  as they are, Julia Gillard can’t win as leader, even if she wins Monday’s ballot.  What do you think of another candidate?

BOWEN: I think we sort this out on Monday. Two candidates have put their  names forward. Whichever one gets the majority, wins. Whichever one does  that then takes us to the election.

KELLY: Well let me just ask a follow up: If Julia Gillard wins on Monday, as  far as you’re concerned - as a very prominent supporter of Kevin Rudd - is  that the end of it?

BOWEN: - Yes.



KELLY: - Does that mean you rule out a second challenge?

BOWEN: It’s not me, I’m not the challenger. Kevin Rudd has ruled out a  second challenge.

KELLY: Sure, but what you’re saying is presumably, you would support  Gillard leading the party to election. Is that your position?

BOWEN: Kevin Rudd has said he would not initiate another challenge -

KELLY: - Is that your position? Yes or no?

BOWEN: Yes. Whoever wins on Monday will remain as leader.

VAN ONSELEN: So just to be clear: No matter what happens in the opinion  polls, if Julia Gillard wins on Monday by not matter what margin, if she carries  enough votes as a majority, you will back her 100 per cent till the next  election?

BOWEN: Well, we sort this out on Monday. Monday is the opportunity. Now I  think Kevin Rudd gives us the best chance of winning the next election. If we  don’t take that opportunity on Monday, in my view that opportunity then  passes. The party must unite behind the leader.

SHANAHAN: Mr Bowen, one other point, again back to this issue of respect  and how the two people - and in fact half the Cabinet can continue to work  with each other - how is it that Kevin Rudd is the best option and yet others  are speaking of Bill Shorten and so forth? Can this happen?

BOWEN: Again your question, can there be a third candidate?

SHANAHAN: Yes.

BOWEN: No, look I think - as I say - two people have put their names  forward. If anybody else wants to put their name forward, they can do so on  Monday. It’s not too late, you can do so at 10 o’clock on Monday morning.  They can stand up - the way the Labor Party works is the returning officer  calls for nominations and individuals stand up and nominate themselves.  There is 103 of us and any of us can do it. I suspect only two will do it. If  anybody else wants to run, Monday is their opportunity.

VAN ONSELEN: Alright, Chris Bowen we will let you go, but one quick final  question. Like Anthony Albanese, would you like to see a genuine secret  ballot here, no [inaudible] or anything like that?

BOWEN: Yes, I think so, I think that’s the best process. That people should  be able to vote in a secret ballot, I certainly think that should be the case.



VAN ONSELEN: So the Prime Minister needs to declare that, or how do you  make that happen?

BOWEN: It’s a matter for the Caucus, of course. I’ve been in a few ballots in  the Labor Party, in the Labor Party Caucus, and they’re conducted in a certain  way. But I think that if there’s an agreement going forward that people can  go to a private place and conduct their ballot and then put it in the ballot box,  then that’s the appropriate way.

VAN ONSELEN: Okay, Chris Bowen thanks for joining us on Australian  Agenda. Much appreciated.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you.

Ends



