CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH LEON BYNER, 5AA

FRIDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2012



SUBJECTS: Community detention, resettlement, offshore processing,  asylum claims, Individual Allowance Points, Government measures to  ease cost of living pressures, set top boxes.

LEON BYNER: Chris, thank you for calling in this morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: That’s okay, Leon. Always nice to talk to you.

BYNER: Now, look, I’m going to be devil’s advocate here, because I think a lot  of Australians are very concerned on two fronts. First of all, the people that  you’re giving these packages to are people who have not yet been classified as  refugees, alright. Those that are don’t get these packages.

But another point is the people awaiting classification that you’re giving these  packages to - paid for by us - came here paying people smugglers, whereas  those who come here via normal channels don’t necessarily get this. Now, I  guess the logical conclusion would then have to be doesn’t this draw people, that  if they’ve got the resources to pay a people smuggler, they’re better off if they  do it that way?

BOWEN: Well, look, there’s several points there, Leon, so I want to make  several points in response.

BYNER: Please.

BOWEN: I actually agree with much of what you say, but I do just want to lay  out the facts. As you said in your introduction, I don’t want people to have the  impression that people who are held in what’s called community detention are  given this package of goods, which is their start in life, and they take it away  with them. That is simply not the case. What we do do - and it’s a decision we  made which I don’t apologise for because I think it’s the right one - is that  detention centres aren’t generally the right place to hold children. Detention  centres have their place and they’re important, but regardless of what you think  about the politics and who’s right and who’s wrong, it’s not children’s fault and

we do need to care for children in whatever circumstances they’re in.

So what we did is said, well, we’ll work with the Red Cross and we’ll maintain  families and children in the community. Now, when they move into a house, yes,  there are basic furnishings in there. There’s a lounge, there’s a fridge, there’s a  television; if there’s a baby we provide a cot. I think you’d criticise me, Leon, if  we dropped people at the train station and said, ‘You go and find a house and,  you know, we don’t care if you’ve got a baby, there’s no blankets.’ They are very  basic provisions. Ten thousand dollars, for example, would be what would be  involved for a family of nine, you know, much less than that for smaller families.  And the point is, when they’re processed, if they’re processed as a refugee then  their status changes, they leave that house and the goods stay behind for the  next family. That’s a very important point.

The second point I’d make is that when we take refugees from camps around  the world and they’re settled in Australia, there is also support. It’s a different  package of support, it’s quite a different thing, it’s called the Humanitarian  Settlement Scheme.

BYNER: Is it at the same value here, because see, I’ve got a list the Opposition  - and you’ve probably seen this list - many of the things in the Household Goods  Formation Package are goods, DVDs, telephones, 21-inch digital TV, all this other  stuff, vacuum cleaners. A lot of these things we will assume are standard goods  in a middle-class house. But my point is simply this, though: why are we  advantaging or appearing to advantage a group of people who are still awaiting  processing when those that are from refugee camps are probably arguably  treated less generously?

BOWEN: Well, look, they are quite different schemes, so it’s very hard to  compare, quite frankly, the Humanitarian Support Scheme with community  detention. But I don’t want you to have the impression that if you take  somebody out of a camp we don’t support them; we do. I see it every day, even  here in my electorate in western Sydney, there is support provided and there’s  English language training etcetera in -

BYNER: Okay. Now Chris, I’ll tell you another problem that’s becoming -

BOWEN: And sorry, Leon, I really don’t want to interrupt you, but we’ve  recently had Antonio Guterres, the boss of the UN’s refugee section, if you like,  the High Commissioner for Refugees, and he says we do this better than any  other country in the world in terms of how we provide that settlement.

BYNER: I’m sure we do. But there’s a point here and that is that right now the  Federal Budget is under huge pressure. The Government have got to make some  very tough decisions to get the Budget reined in so they can deliver a surplus.

The one area that I observe seems to have no limits is that on border protection,  because I think you would be the first to admit, Chris, that the cost of this has  just ballooned out beyond where anybody would have anticipated.

BOWEN: Well, there certainly have been increases in costs, Leon, that’s  absolutely right. And I also agree with your other point: we need to make sure -  and this is a point I often make and I think I’ve probably made it on your  program before - we need to make sure that the people who are in refugee  camps around the world don’t miss out and also there’s a much better way of

doing this. The much better way of doing this is taking this money and spending  it either on taking genuine refugees out of camps or on other programs.

Now, that’s why many people would criticise me for being, if you like, too harsh  by saying we should have offshore processing in Australia, we should be  processing people in other countries. That would stop people coming to Australia  by boat.

BYNER: Well, we don’t need to do that because the UNHCR have already done  that. There are people sitting waiting to be accepted.

BOWEN: Correct, absolutely correct. But my point is, for people who come to  Australia by boat, I would prefer they are then processed just in line with those  other people, whether it be in Malaysia or elsewhere.

BYNER: Can I ask you, why would you when you’ve got people coming here  paying people smugglers who destroy documents, who don’t appear to have  documents, yet would have needed them to fly to Indonesia to get on a boat,  why wouldn’t you presume against their refugee status?

BOWEN: You can’t, you simply can’t do that, Leon. Somebody’s either a refugee  or they’re not. I agree with you, it’s a problem, but you can’t under the Refugee  Convention -

BYNER: Because see, now, which part of the Refugee Convention are you  referring to?

BOWEN: Well, the Refugee Convention says that people are entitled to make a  case for asylum and at the end of the day, somebody’s got to assess that case  and there is nothing - and the UNHCR has said this themselves - if somebody’s  [inaudible] got documents, then that can be presumed against them. Now, it can  be taken into account and it is taken into account in determining their credibility,  so are they telling the truth. And we do have a pretty rigorous process here and  people are rejected -

BYNER: Yeah, but see, that’s the very process that takes the time for which

governments get criticised.

BOWEN: Correct, absolutely.

BYNER: Because they don’t have their documentation, so the checking process  takes longer so they’re in detention longer and governments get the blame for  this when the real reason, the culprit is they haven’t brought any papers with  them.

BOWEN: Absolutely, it makes it a lot harder. The people who work in the  Department of Immigration do a pretty good job in pretty tough circumstances.  They have to assess a) not whether these people are refugees or not but who  they are, whether their identity is correct, then they have to go through their  refugee claims and then we do what’s called character and security checks. So it  does take time and it’s particularly hard when they don’t have documents.

BYNER: Okay. Chris, can I put to you another anomaly? It came out a while ago  that we supply cigarettes to people who are in these detention centres, whether  they smoke or not. Yet at the same time, we’re about to launch a policy to hit  tourists to pay more money for cigarettes and furthermore, Nicola Roxon  announced a while ago that we’re going to donate some money to an  international fund to encourage people in other countries not to smoke.

BOWEN: Well, we don’t give cigarettes out to people whether they smoke or  not.

BYNER: You don’t?

BOWEN: No, what we’ve got is a scheme where people in detention centres  accumulate points and then they can use those points to buy cigarettes if they  wish, or, you know, sweets or confectionary or other -

BYNER: How do you accumulate points in a detention centre?

BOWEN: Well, you accumulate points through good behaviour, in effect.

BYNER: So it’s a method by which to try and keep people settled while you’re  hearing their claim?

BOWEN: Well, it’s a process by which we say, ‘Look, if you are behaving well,  then you accumulate certain points and then you can use those to purchase  goods.’ And by the way, this has been a scheme that’s been in place for years  under John Howard and continued by us. It’s always been the case in detention  centres.



BYNER: Alright. So what do you say to Aussies who say, ‘We’re spending all this  money advantaging with a lot of mod cons people who are having their claims  heard, yet I live here, I pay taxes and I can barely afford my utility bill’? What do  you say to them?

BOWEN: Well, I say a couple of things, Leon. Firstly, I completely understand  people’s points of view. I share the point of view that we should be discouraging  people from coming to Australia by boat.

BYNER: How are we doing that? How are we discouraging them?

BOWEN: Well, we should be doing it by having offshore processing and that’s  why I want my legislation passed through the Parliament which Tony Abbott’s  opposing.

The second point I’d make is this, Leon: we understand, I understand cost of  living pressures. That’s why we’ve increased the Age Pension, introduced the  Education Tax Rebate, increased the Childcare Rebate, increased the Family  Allowance for teenagers. I mean, I think it’s easy to forget some of the things  this Government’s done.

But what we will do is where you’ve got a situation, as I say, where you’re  dealing with kids and families, we’ll treat people with appropriate respect. We  don’t provide luxuries, we don’t provide things that are over the top.

BYNER: Well, hang on. Come on.

BOWEN: But if we put them into a house, then there will be a lounge or a fridge  there.

BYNER: Yeah. A DVD player or a special television set, some would call luxury.

BOWEN: Well, Leon, I mean, you know, I do visit some of these families and I  see them, and I can’t put my hand on my heart and tell you I think they’re living  in luxury.

BYNER: No, that’s not what I said. You know, staple items are things to cook  with, to wash, to clean, to be able to boil water, do things, have a washing  machine.

BOWEN: Sure.

BYNER: But you know, it’s like this set top box fiasco, which I know is not your  portfolio. Do you know, on the cost that you guys have announced the set top  box is going to be, you could actually buy a high definition television for less

money?

BOWEN: Well, as you say, it’s not my area, but as I understand it, Leon, that’s  not actually right. There’s a lot of misinformation about that. I’m sure Steve  Conroy would love to spend a lot of time talking to you about that because he’s  actually very proud of how many set top boxes we’ve rolled out across the  country.

BYNER: Yeah, the price is right, though. The price I’ve quoted you is correct,  though.

BOWEN: Well, how about I have a chat to Steve and get him on your show  because I’m sure he’d love to talk about it. He’s quite proud of it.

BYNER: Please, absolutely, I’d love to. Well, Chris, thank you for calling in this  morning .

Ends





