Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Refugee intake, asylum seeker legislation, 457  visas  Thursday, 28 June 2012

Interview with Leon Byner, 5AA Mornings

Leon Byner: Let's talk to Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen. Chris, thanks for  being available this morning.

Chris Bowen: That's alright, Leon, good morning. Good to talk to you again.

Byner: So have we lifted the immigration numbers of refugees or is it still at 13  000?

Bowen: Still at 13 750. When we negotiated the Malaysia agreement, we wanted to  increase it by 1000 to give more people a chance to come to Australia without  getting on a boat, the genuine refugees, mainly people who fled Burma and the  pretty ordinary regime that was run in Burma.

Now, Tony Abbott yesterday said he wanted to increase it to 20 000. That wasn't an  offer to the government, that was trying to get one of his own members not to cross  the floor and vote for us in the legislation. So it was actually designed to try and  stop the Bill passing, not to get some sort of compromise with the government.

And I previously said that it would be good to get the refugee intake to 20 000 and  the Liberal Party had criticised me for it. They said it was irresponsible, it was too  many, and then yesterday they agreed to do it in order to get one of their own  members to vote with them.

Byner: Wouldn't the Greens agree to that and therefore you -

Bowen: No, no. The Greens won't support any offshore processing, even if you  increase the refugee intake. They're very clear on that. They think we should  increase the refugee intake, but they don't support processing people in another  country. Now, I, like you, think that is fundamentally wrong. I think that is  encouraging people to risk their lives to come to Australia and I think the Greens  are naive about that. I accept they genuinely hold that view, that's their genuine  world view. I just think it's wrong.

Now, my frustration is the Labor Party supports offshore processing, the Liberal  Party supports offshore processing; so the two parties that can get together and do  this are Labor and Liberal. We offered negotiations with the Liberals, we've had  negotiations with the Liberals. But the Liberals refuse to vote for it.

Byner: Alright. Can I ask you this: Chris, why is Malaysia off the table as a  negotiation tool? What is it that drives you and the government to say, 'Whatever  we talk about has got to include Malaysia'?

Bowen: Well, because it's not about Malaysia as such, Leon. Whether it's in Nauru  or Malaysia or anywhere else is not really the key issue. The key issue is what  happens to people. Now, a lot of people ask me what's the difference between  Malaysia and Nauru? You know, a lot of people would think they're the same  model. They're actually very different things.

On Nauru, the Liberal Party model is that Nauru would be a processing centre, a  detention centre, and people get their claims assessed and if they're refugees  they're brought to Australia and if they're not refugees they are not brought to  Australia. Now, that is the difference and that is why we say, well, Nauru is not  really a deterrent because people know if you're a refugee - which almost all these  people think they are even if they're not, they genuinely think they're refugees - they  get brought to Australia.

Now, the difference with Malaysia that we negotiated is quite different. With  Malaysia, if you're classed as a refugee, you're not brought to Australia. You're just  in line with the other 100 000 asylum seekers that are currently in Malaysia and we  say, 'The UNHCR will process you and you'll be referred to another country where  the UNHCR, the United Nations, decides that you're the priority case, but you don't  get any special treatment because you've come to Australia by boat.' And that's the  fundamental difference between Malaysia and Nauru, the two different models.

But can I say this, Leon: the Liberals say they don't like Malaysia; we say we don't  like Nauru. This has been going on too long for that sort of discussion. Our position  is let's do Malaysia, let's do Nauru - we've adopted that element of Liberal Party  policy to try and get a breakthrough here - can anybody seriously suggest to you  that if you did Malaysia and Nauru together it wouldn't work? Nobody, I don't think  anybody could seriously suggest that. So we're saying let's stop arguing, let's get  on and do both. Unfortunately, the Liberal Party's not agreeing to that. They're  saying no.

Byner: Alright, I accept that. You're only going to do 800 to Malaysia and as I  understand it, the numbers are that I think Treasury was expecting 470 a month. It's  now up to probably much more than that.

Bowen: The numbers have been very high recently. And I'd say this, Leon: yes,  Malaysia has a cap of 800; Nauru has a cap too, by the way. Nauru's capacity was  1200. Nauru got full last time and they had to open Manus Island as well because  people kept coming. Now, everything's got a cap, everything's got a limit. Now, the  Malaysians have said once we got to 800 they'd be happy to keep talking. But the  point is this: everything's got a limit. If you did Malaysia and Nauru together,  obviously you've got a higher limit.

And also, there's the impact we're looking at. You know, we've had higher arrivals.  If you pay your money to the people smuggler, you pay your $20 000, you come to  Australia by boat, then you get taken back to Malaysia, it's not a very attractive  proposition. So people are going to stop coming in very large numbers.

Byner: Okay. So let's be clear: so you say this primarily is what you want because  it's a deterrent, is that correct?

Bowen: Yes, that's right. That's correct.

Byner: Okay. What of the issue of those who say that the human rights record of  this country is not good and that you would be placing the asylum seeker in  unnecessary danger of treatment that we would never consider?

Bowen: No, I don't accept that, Leon. We negotiated this agreement with Malaysia  and with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who is the guardian  of refugees around the world, in effect. And what we did was we said, 'Well, if we  do this in Malaysia we will need certain protections in place. They'll need to be in  Malaysia lawfully so they can't be detained. They'll need work rights. They'll need  access to health and education'. We did all that. That's in the agreement, in black  and white, the signed agreement.

The second point is this: the Liberals say it must be a Refugee signatory country.  Well, forgive me for being cynical. Nauru wasn't a Refugee signatory country when  they sent people there. Their current policy is to tow boats to Indonesia, which is  not a Refugee signatory country, with no protections negotiated.

And the final point is, being a Refugee signatory country is a good thing, but it's not  the be all and end all. There's some pretty ordinary countries that are signatories to  the Refugee Convention.

Byner: I do point that out. Another one I want to ask you is the cost of this has  increased over what we expected by nearly $5 billion over the last few years. We  can't continue to afford this.

Bowen: No, no, and this is why I want a breakthrough Leon. I mean, look, Nauru is  expensive, Malaysia costs money as well but we need a breakthrough, and I'd like  to spend the money on other things, I don't want to be spending the money on  offshore - on onshore processing and detention centres: it's money that could be  better spent -

Byner: Alright.

Bowen: - one of the reasons we want a breakthrough here.

Byner: Can I get you to explain this to people: for every person that comes here by  boat, paid a people smuggler, that gets in as a refugee, does somebody else miss  out?

Bowen: Yes.

Byner: They do.

Bowen: That's our policy and that's a bipartisan policy between Labor and Liberal.  So, sometimes you get people saying, 'Oh look, all these people coming by boat,  you know, it increases our population'. Well actually, no, that's not right, it doesn't,  because it's one less we take from a camp. So the total number is the same.

But what really concerns me is these poor people in camps Leon, who, you know,  never would dream of having money to pay a people smuggler. These are people  who are stuck in Africa, in Burma, in - all through Asia, in the Middle East, in

Jordan, in Syria; these are good people who'd never have the chance to raise that  sort of money, they wouldn't dream of having, you know, anything approaching that.

Byner: So the people who pay the people smugglers right now, displace -

Bowen: Yes -

Byner: - somebody come from a camp?

Bowen: Yes, and the reason we do that is because as you said, we believe that  you should be able to set the number. You know, the Greens would say just let  everybody in and don't not take one less from a camp, but we say, 'Well hang on, -

Byner: Do you take - do you take them seriously?

Bowen: Well, I disagree with them. I disagree, I think they are fundamentally  wrong. They're - I agree - I accept that they believe this, the Greens, I accept that,  you know, this is part of their world view, but I think it is a naive view and I  fundamentally disagree with the Greens approach on refugee policy because I just  don't think you can see the sorts of things we've seen over the last week -

Byner: Alright, now -

Bowen: - and think that's acceptable.

Byner: Paul Kelly, the editor-at-large of The Australian, wrote an article you'd be  aware of a couple of weeks ago, pointing out that the UNHCR's numbers of people  who get in, who follow the criteria of the United Nations Refugee Convention are  much lower than what they are when they're processed here. What would the  reason for that be if we are both using the same rules?

Bowen: Well, there's different - you get different approval ratings around the world  and different approval ratings for different countries and methods of arrival. You  know, and if you look at people who arrive by plane, they are very different  countries. People who arrive by plane and then claim asylum, about the same  number that arrive by boat, there's a couple of differences: they come with visas  usually and then they claim asylum when they're here -

Byner: Do you deport many of those?

Bowen: Yes, we do -

Byner: This was put in to making sure that if people overstay, you send them out?

Bowen: Oh yes, oh yes, there's a lot of removals and, you know, the numbers  we're talking about are frankly - they're not so many - not always asylum seekers,  these are just visa over-stayers, you know, people who have come under a  particular visa and chosen never to go home, and I've actually launched a bit of a  crackdown on people employing them because they can undercut wages, because  they're normally employed illegally as well.

And so the numbers we're talking about there are actually much bigger, and we do  have - we do have removals of those people -

Byner: So you're hoping today to get the Liberals to agree -

Bowen: Look, I'd love too, I'd hope so. Look, it's - you know, it's tough, but really I  think the Australian people have had a gutful: they're sick of the talk, Labor and  Liberal both say we should have offshore processing, let's do it. Let's - it's not easy  for the Labor Party to accept Nauru, I mean, I had to convince the Labor Party to do  that - not easy, but it was the right thing to do. The Liberal Party should swallow  their pride and accept Malaysia and we can all get on with it.

Byner: Ok, just one other question. There was an investigation into certain rumours  in the finance sector - in fact they were more than rumours, I think a lot of people  have made complaints - that some financial institutions were using the 457 visas in  ways that were not intended, in other words, bringing people over here to be trained  by those who were being made redundant. Have we made any progress on this?

Bowen: Yes, that's an ongoing issue. Steve Georganas, the Member for  Hindmarsh, has been very active on that and been raising it with me, and I have  ordered a full investigation in that because I am very concerned. 457's are  important for Australia - you know, they are important for filling the skills gap - but  they are not - they are not designed and not allowed to be used to bring people in to  learn on the job and then get them to do the job elsewhere. Now, it can be difficult  to prove that, I can't give you an update today on the investigation, but I'd be happy  to come in to talk to you at another time and give you an update, because this is an  issue which does concern me.

Byner: Chris Bowen, thank you.



