



MEDIA RELEASE

23 August 2012

PM AGREES TO PROGRESS REPORT ON REGIONAL APPROACH TO PEOPLE  SMUGGLING

THE Prime Minister has agreed that progress on the regional cooperation framework  necessary to the success of Australia’s asylum seeker policy should be reported annually to  the Parliament.

Independent Lyne MP Rob Oakeshott sought the Prime Minister’s commitment to the  regional elements of the Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers report, and to reporting on  implementation.

“Like the Expert Panel, I am certain that regional cooperation and bilateral agreements will  be central to the success of offshore assessment processes and to protect against loss of life  at sea,” Mr Oakeshott said.

Early this year Mr Oakeshott proposed amendments to the Migration Act that would have  required an annual report on progress made under the regional cooperation framework  known as the Bali Process.

“The Expert Panel’s review lent strong support to the view that working through the Bali  Process can build regional support for Australian asylum seeker policy, and the Australian  Government accepted all Expert Panel recommendations.

“That is why I wrote to the Prime Minister - to revive support for a mechanism that could  assure Parliament that the Bali Process will be progressed - and I am pleased with the  Prime Minister’s response,” Mr Oakeshott said.

“Annual reporting will help to assure Parliament that cooperation with our Asia-Pacific  neighbours on asylum seekers remains the focus after the immediate policy response is  implemented.”

ENDS

Media Contacts: Sharon Fuller - 0429 787320

PRIME  MINISTER

CANBERRA

Reference: C12/53985

Mr Robert Oakeshott MP  Member for Lyne  2,1

PO Box 1112  PORT MACQUARIE  NSW  2444

Dear Mr Oakeshott

Thank you for your letter of 16 August 2012 regarding your proposal that the  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship produce an annual report on progress  made under the Bali Process and the Regional Cooperation  Framework.

I recall that you first raised this proposal with me through correspondence  earlier  this year following your introduction of the Migration Legislation Amendment (The  Bali Process) Bill 2012 into Parliament.

I agree that an annual report on progress made under the Bali Process and  the  Regional Cooperation Framework would provide a helpful  mechanism for  considering Australia's asylum seeker policy and ensure that appropriate attention is  given to cooperation with regional stakeholders.

I have written to the Minister for Immigration and Citizenship advising of my  agreement to your  proposal.

Thank you for your contribution to resolve this complex policy issue.  I look  forward  to working with you towards an effective  outcome for  Australia and those in need of  protection.

Yours sincerely

