



THE HON MARK BUTLER MP

Minister for Mental Health and Ageing

Minister for Social Inclusion

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Mental Health Reform

Transcript

Door Stop: Healthy Kids Check   Adelaide   10 June 2012



Butler   Thanks for coming out this morning. There’s been quite a bit of discussion this morning about one of the  very important elements of our record mental health reform package that we released last year. And that  is the decision that the Government made then to change the healthy kids check from four years old to  three years old and also to broaden it to incorporate social and emotional wellbeing elements - so not just  the physical health checks that doctors have been doing for some years under our health program to  check hearing, to check eyesight, to check physical development - but also recognising that the social  and emotional development of children in their first five years is a very important foundation for good  mental health and good development in later years of childhood, adolescence and, ultimately, adulthood  as well

Journalist   Is there a danger of misdiagnosis or oversubscribing?

Butler   Well there is always a danger in these areas. And that’s why we’ve had a very high level expert group  incorporating paediatricians, early childhood education experts, general health experts look at this for  some months to make sure that we get the design of that tool precisely right so that parents can be  confident that when they go to a GP or a practice nurse in a GP surgery to check that just before their  child starts pre-school or steps into primary school, that they’re developing in a way that we all hope and  expect that they will be.

Journalist   Isn’t three a little young to be screening for mental health issues?

Butler   Well, it’s not screening for mental health issues, its screening to make sure that their social and emotional  development is tracking as we hope and expect it will be. Now that’s a very important foundation for good  mental health later in life. But this was the very clear advice of the expert group that I pulled together for  some months before the mental health reform package was released last year, which incorporated a  range of elements for childhood mental health, it incorporated a range of elements in adolescent mental  health, rolling out headspace services and early psychosis services. But this was a very clear, strongly  held piece of advice that we got from experts and we accepted that advice.

Journalist   What impact do you think it will have in terms of diagnosing people with issues?

Butler   Well that’s a matter to direct to clinicians. But what we do hope is that parents and the community  generally will have a level of confidence now that they have somewhere to go to check that their child is  tracking in physical and emotional terms at three in a way that we all hope and expect they will be able to.  So that if there are some concerns they will be picked up early, they’re dealt with so that the child can  continue to develop and take those really important steps into preschool and primary school in the best  position possible.

Journalist   Will this be able to be supported by the Government and will it be properly resourced?

Butler   This is part of our $2.2 billion reform package - the largest ever mental health reform package we  released last year. It builds on the healthy kids check program that our Government has had in place for  some years now where children are able to be checked, as I said, for hearting, eyesight and other  physical health issues. So it simply expands that program at the cost of about $11 million over the period  of the package but it’s very clearly budgeted for, paid for and it’s in the forward estimates and we’re just  working very carefully with experts to make sure that the design of the check is precisely right and that  GPs and practice nurses are trained to be able to deliver the check.

Journalist   Is the money also for psychiatrists and so forth or is it just for GPs?

Butler   It’s for the check itself which will be overwhelmingly be done in GPs surgeries under the Medicare  system, whether by a GP or in some cases, I suspect, by practice nurses who are trained to do the check  as well, in the same way that the Healthy Kids Check is currently conducted for, as I’ve said, things like  hearing, eyesight and other physical development issues.

Journalist   So, once it’s in the hands of clinicians and the like to then decide what to do, is the Government going to  check up on these cases as well. I mean, what if psychiatrists then decide to start prescribing anti-psychotic drugs and the like?

Butler   Well, the experts who have been designing this tool have made it very clear that their overriding objective  has been to do no harm. The overriding objective has been to provide a positive opportunity to families to  take their children - at that critical time of three years of age - to take those children to their GP - their  family doctor or family practice nurse - and just check that their physical development and their emotional  development is tracking how we all would hope and expect it will be at that critical age before they start to  take those steps into pre-school and primary education.   So, this is a wonderful opportunity families are embracing. Obviously we need to make sure through the  advice of the clinical experts that its  conducted in the best way possible and that there’s not an  overreaction, but I’m very confident that the people we have around the table designing this piece of work  have that absolutely at the front of their mind.

Journalist   [Question indistinct]

Butler  [indistinct] … it will provide the Department with advice about how to provide the best possible mental  health support for those people in those early periods of immigration, including immigration detention.

Journalist   Are you worried about the rate of people arriving and do you want it to stop?

Butler   Well we’ve got a very clear policy about how that can stop and that is a policy of offshore processing  which has been the advice at a very high level from the Department of Immigration but which Tony Abbot  for base political reasons just won’t accept.

Journalist   On the kids health check, have you taken in the concerns of groups like the AMA?

Butler   Yes, we have and we’ve got very high level clinical advice working on the design of this check and I think  broadly we’ve seen broad support for the check. Of course, there are people who want to sound a note of  caution to make sure the check doesn’t go too far and I think that’s a responsible thing for groups like the  AMA to do and we listen to those notes of caution very carefully.

Journalist   Is there a risk that kids will be labelled with mental health conditions?

Butler   We’re very conscious not to do that. This is a positive opportunity for families to check the emotional and  social development of children at a critical age - the critical age of three years old before they start to  take those steps out of the family environment into preschool and then primary school. This is a wonderful  opportunity for families to check that the physical and emotional development of their children is tracking  as we all hope and expect that it will.

Journalist   Just back on asylum seekers, you made reference to Tony Abbott’s comments, I mean, were you  concerned about the demonization of asylum seekers that we’ve seen over the past week?

Butler   Look, these are really questions that you should direct to the immigration Minister.   Thanks very much.

(ends)



