Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

ABC News Radio Subjects: NDIS, Nielsen poll, carbon pricing, leadership.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

27 July 2012

MARIUS BENSON: Let's go to politics now. And the Federal Government seems to be  winning in its bid to introduce a National Disability Insurance Scheme, one of the big projects  for the Gillard Government. But Labor's troubles continue, with boat arrival numbers growing  and a new opinion poll today, the Nielsen poll, showing the Government is making little  headway. For a Government view on those issues, I'm joined by the Trade Minister Craig  Emerson. Craig Emerson, good morning.

CRAIG EMERSON: And a very good morning to you, Marius.

BENSON: Now, let's just begin with the NDIS. It's still a little unclear; it's still a trial program.  But we had Andrew Robb yesterday committing the Opposition to it and the states seem to be  getting onside or onside - so, quite an optimistic outlook from your point of view.

EMERSON: There has been progress in the latter part of last week. One area where we  haven't seen progress is the State of Queensland. Unfortunately, Campbell Newman has  likened the State of Queensland to Spain - an absurd comparison. He says that they can't  find $20 million, when the Federal Government is putting on the table $1,000 million. This is a  disgrace, and we will continue to campaign on behalf of people with disabilities in Queensland  for Mr Newman to do what Mr Baillieu and Mr O'Farrell have done - and that is come to the  table, make a decent offer, and support the most vulnerable people in this country.

BENSON: Okay. Can I go to the Nielsen poll now, because there seems to be good news  and bad news there for Labor? The lived experience of the carbon tax over the last month  seems to have turned people a bit … or they're less concerned about it. Fifty-one per cent of  people a month ago thought they'd be worse off under the carbon tax. A month of living with  it, 38 per cent now is that figure that feels they'll be worse off under the carbon tax. But it  doesn't actually seem to be doing your vote much good: you've gone up to a dizzying 30 per  cent in your primary vote.

EMERSON: Well, let's discuss the carbon price first. Mr Abbott said the sky would fall to the  ground. The only thing that's fallen to the ground is Mr Abbott's scare campaign and Mr  Abbott's personal credibility. He said he would stake his career on this campaign against the  implementation of a carbon price. On that basis, he's not doing all that well at this stage,  because the Australian people have come to appreciate that he engaged in the mother of all  scare campaigns - tried to terrify them, to smash business confidence, to smash consumer

confidence - all for his own personal political gain. This is a big turnaround in people's

Page 1 of 3 ABC News Radio, transcript, 30 July 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Compet...

27/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120730.html

attitude, and it does indicate what Labor has been saying for a long time: that in the lived  experience, the carbon price would have a much, much more modest effect on the cost of  living than Mr Abbott's terrifying scare campaign would have people believe.

BENSON: But for all that lack of fear about carbon, people don't like you any better. You're  still bobbing around 28 per cent in Newspoll, now 30 per cent in the Nielsen poll in the Age  and the Sydney Morning Herald. People just don't like Labor.

EMERSON: Well, this is the difference between Labor and the Coalition. Labor is prepared to  make the hard decisions under the leadership of Julia Gillard. They are not always the most  popular decisions. But if we changed our benchmark and said that the important thing is to  win the opinion polls every week or every fortnight, and to chop and change policy  accordingly, the Australian people actually would punish that. And so what we're doing is the  right thing …

BENSON: But it's not actually the tough decisions, Mr Emerson. It's not actually the tough  decisions …

EMERSON: It is the tough decisions.

BENSON:… because your fortunes started sinking rapidly when you abandoned Kevin  Rudd's carbon proposals - the carbon reduction plan. That's when things really went  skewwhiff for Labor. It's really squibbing the tough decisions that cost Labor.

EMERSON: Whatever your allegations made against the Prime Minister of Australia, I have  not heard anyone making an allegation that the Prime Minister squibs tough decisions. We're  doing the right thing by the future of this country. And what the Coalition's saying is either they  don't believe in climate change - that it's 'absolute crap', which is what Mr Abbott has said - or 'why put off to tomorrow what you can put off forever? Let's just book this up to future  generations'. This is not what the Government is going to do. In implementing this price, we  accept that this generation has a responsibility to begin the process of reducing carbon  emissions into the atmosphere on behalf not only of this generation, but future generations.

BENSON: Okay. The numbers for Labor now: 30 per cent your primary vote. Julia Gillard  undertook to reshape the Government at 38 per cent. Is it time to say it was a mistake to sack  Kevin Rudd?

EMERSON: What it's time to do is to continue to make the tough decisions, but necessary  decisions, for this country.

BENSON: But was it a mistake?

EMERSON: You've asked me this question many times before and I'll answer it: no it was not  a mistake, because Labor in its DNA is a reforming Government; it is a reforming party. And  what we won't do is roll out of bed and check the opinion polls, and change policy. Julia  Gillard has shown the fortitude to press ahead with these tough reforms and, yes Marius, it is  true that that can have an effect on an opinion poll. The election is not next week; it's not the  week after. It will be in the latter part of next year. And by then we expect to be competitive in  the federal elections. I wrote an opinion piece in November of last year saying that Labor  would be very competitive in the next election. But that doesn't mean that we're competitive  week after week in opinion polls. It is not a contest for winning opinion polls; it is a contest for  winning on behalf of Australia, to make the right decisions for this country. And then the poll  that does count, that is the next election, will take care of itself. But we will not shirk these  decisions.

Page 2 of 3 ABC News Radio, transcript, 30 July 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Compet...

27/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120730.html

BENSON: Craig Emerson, many thanks.

EMERSON: Okay, thanks a lot. Thanks.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 3 of 3 ABC News Radio, transcript, 30 July 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Compet...

27/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120730.html

