Radio Australia, Connect Asia with Joanna McCarthy

Thursday, 23 February 2012

Subjects: Labor leadership; Australia-Indonesia relations

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP    The Government is dysfunctional and it is teetering on collapse. It is a shocking

state of affairs when the Foreign Minister resigns while on official duties overseas because he can’t

work with the Prime Minister. But his resignation won’t resolve the deep crisis that is engulfing the

Gillard Government.



JOANNA McCARTHY    You have spent a lot of time over the last year touring the region, how are

these tensions being perceived by our neighbours?



JULIE BISHOP    Well beyond the turmoil and uncertainty that this increasingly chaotic Government

is creating in Australia, there are actually serious problems arising from the fact that the Prime

Minister and the then Foreign Minister haven’t been talking to each other. And it has had an impact on

relations in our region. Even Kevin Rudd said in his resignation speech that this crisis within the Labor

Government had the potential to damage Australia’s international reputation. That is why the only way

to restore certainty and stability to the national government is to hold an election.



JOANNA McCARTHY    Kevin Rudd did say he is deeply proud of his record as Foreign Minister and

he cited his re-engagement with Europe and Africa and Latin-America as his proudest achievements.

Do you give Kevin Rudd credit for what he has achieved on the world stage?



JULIE BISHOP    Kevin Rudd has certainly been an active Foreign Minister, there is no question

about that, but the fact that the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister were so often not on the same

page has damaged our international relations and our reputation. Kevin Rudd, for example, made it

quite clear he wasn’t consulted before the Government took the unilateral decision to ban the live

cattle trade to Indonesia, and that panicked decision did damage not only our live cattle industry but

had the residual effect of Indonesia halving this important trade to northern Australia. And so there

have been many instances where the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister haven’t been on the

same page. As former Foreign Minister Stephen Smith said, there shouldn’t be a "crack of light"

between a Prime Minister and a Foreign Minister to ensure Australia’s national interests and

reputation is protected. But the relationship between Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd has been so

poisonous that the situation is now untenable. It has now exploded into open conflict.



JOANNA McCARTHY    Tony Abbott writes in The Age newspaper this morning that an Abbott

Government would have a Jakarta focus rather than a Geneva one, but the Coalition’s plans to turn

boats back to Indonesia would almost certainly inflame tensions with Jakarta. How does that go

towards repairing the relationship?



JULIE BISHOP    What we will do is work very carefully and consistently with Indonesia behind the

scenes. We will not use the megaphone diplomacy that has been a hallmark of the Gillard

Government when dealing with our friends and neighbours in the region. We will work with Indonesia

on a whole range of matters of mutual interest and we have already started making contact with

Indonesian officials to assure them that the Coalition would work constructively with them.



JOANNA McCARTHY    But do you accept it would spark a backlash from Indonesia, this turning the

boats back policy?



JULIE BISHOP    No I do not accept that because we have already been talking to Indonesian

officials about it, they understand what we are seeking to do. We worked cooperatively with Indonesia

in the past when John Howard was in Government, we had a policy then of turning back the boats,

and we were able to do it on at least seven occasions. But that is not the only aspect of our asylum

seeker policy that will need to be put in place. If we get into Government we will reintroduce the

policies that worked under the Howard Government and that will include working quietly and

methodically with Indonesia and other countries in the region and not making announcements that

affect them as the Gillard Government has done without consulting with them.



JOANNA McCARTHY    Julie Bishop, you have travelled with Kevin Rudd, you know him well and

you have seen these brutal attacks from his Ministerial colleagues, his former Ministerial colleagues,

does this leadership battle come down to differences over Kevin Rudd’s personality rather than

questions of policy or ideology?



JULIE BISHOP    It seems that the dispute, the conflict, is purely based on ego, ambition and

personalities. It is not about competing policy ideas, it is not a battle of ideas or different philosophical

positions. Kevin Rudd is now casting himself as the victim, the aggrieved in this drama, and portraying

Julia Gillard as the scheming betrayer who is ready to stab him in the back a second time. And so it is

not about an ideological divide, it is about revenge and that is why it is such a bitter and personal

conflict, and we have seen senior Cabinet Ministers attacking other Cabinet Ministers. The

Government is entirely dysfunctional, it is teetering on collapse. I think it is one of the biggest crises in

Government since the Whitlam crisis of 1975, and that is why we are saying the only way to restore

certainty and stability is to hold an election.



JOANNA McCARTHY    Well on that point, Kevin Rudd has framed this contest in terms of who is

most likely to beat Tony Abbott. Who would you rather go up against at an election, Julia Gillard or

Kevin Rudd?



JULIE BISHOP    It doesn’t matter who leads the Labor Party if they both cling to the same bad

policies. They both support the carbon tax, neither have any policy to address the people smuggling

issue, neither of them have any plans to reduce the burgeoning government debt. So it is a question

of the policy platform that whoever leads the Labor Party takes to the next election that will be

important and that is what the people should judge them on. The next election will be a referendum on

the carbon tax, and both Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd appear wedded to it.

