Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

People smuggling, offshore processing,  Enterprise Migration Agreements  Tuesday, 05 June 2012

Interview with Alexandra Kirk, The World Today, ABC Radio

Alexandra Kirk: Mr Bowen, good afternoon.

Chris Bowen: Good afternoon Alex.

Kirk: Firstly, what are you doing, what is the government doing about this case of  Mr Ali al-Abassi, also known as Captain Emad?

Bowen: Well firstly there were allegations made on television last night which went  to his veracity in terms of his refugee status and people smuggling activities.  Obviously I've asked my department to examine whether there's a case to answer  for his refugee status to be revoked. This does happen that where refugee status is  granted and protection visa is granted, if new information comes to light which  brings into question the information that was previously provided then those sorts of  actions can be taken.

It's happened before and I've asked for an examination as to this case. Obviously  these are allegations I must stress, which need to be thoroughly examined.

Kirk: Do you know where he is and have you sought to interview him?

Bowen: Well obviously I can't comment on what status - the Australian Federal  Police may have an interest in him. The Australian Federal Police has a very active  people smuggling program in terms of making charges and investigations. As to  who is currently the subject of inquiries is not something I can comment on for very  obvious reasons.

What I can say is that up to 14 people have been charged with people smuggling  activities in Australia, I mean organisers of people smuggling, not necessarily crew  members and that's led to five people being imprisoned for seven years. So this is  something which is taken very seriously. As to the status of any AFP investigation  into any individual for obvious reasons I can't comment.

Kirk: Well there is a suggestion that the Federal Police were already onto Mr al  Abassi. Now that it's been exposed and apparently he's disappeared, are you  worried that he may have gone underground?

Bowen: Well look, as I say, firstly I would never comment on AFP operational  matters, the AFP is actually not in my portfolio and even if it was, we wouldn't  comment on operational matters. The AFP has a number of active investigations  going on at any one particular time, and because I don't want to interfere in the

effectiveness of those operations I can't comment on them - what status they have,  what stage they're at, et cetera.

But I can stress the AFP has a lot of resources devoted to this. It has resulted in a  number of successful prosecutions and serious prison penalties being imposed.

Kirk: Now his daughter has told the ABC this morning or a little while ago that she  hasn't had any contact with her father for some time, she hasn't seen him. Do you  know where he is?

Bowen: Well I'm not able to comment on any particular AFP knowledge as to  where he may be.

Kirk: Do you think he's still in the country?

Bowen: Well look, Alex, I'm not going to go through obviously any information  provided to ministers by law enforcement agencies on individuals.

Kirk: Can you say that you're in control of this, or the authorities are?

Bowen: Well Lyndal, allegations have been made last night on a television  program. They're allegations which need to be thoroughly tested both in terms of  his refugee status and any potential criminal prosecution. There's a process in  place for dealing with it, there are a number of successful prosecutions which have  been conducted and this information has been made public last night. That  happens from time to time as well, but the law enforcement agencies need to deal  with it appropriately.

Kirk: Your colleague the Home Affairs Minister Jason Clare has said today that the  Four Corners program came as no surprise to him. How many people smugglers  does the government believe are currently operating in Australia?

Bowen: Well Jason pointed out in that interview, where he said it was no surprise,  it was no surprise because we've successfully prosecuted a number of people and  there's been 14 charges laid for people smuggling activities in Australia since 2008.  That's what Jason was referring to, the track record of successful prosecutions.  Now in addition to that there would be at any given time a number of very active  investigations underway. So they are dealt with by the AFP in the appropriate way  then referred to the DPP and prosecutions are launched and a number of them  have been successful.

A number of others are still on foot in terms of not being concluded in the courts. So  we do know that this activity occurs and Jason was referring to the successful  prosecution of a number of people and five people being sentenced to seven year  jail terms for people smuggling.

Kirk: One of the people smugglers captured on camera by Four Corners sitting in a  Sydney café boasting about how many people he'd brought to Australia since he  got here, another who came here as a refugee a couple of years ago, apparently  according to Four Corners, his wife works for the Department of Immigration. Does  she still work for the Department?

Bowen: Well that allegation wasn't aired on the program last night it was aired  elsewhere in the media yesterday. Obviously I've asked for a thorough investigation

as to the veracity of that claim. There are many thousands of employees in the  Department of Immigration across a range of areas. Many, many people work in the  Department of Immigration in different areas not involved in this but it's an  allegation which I've asked to be thoroughly investigated.

Kirk: And how long do you think this is going to take to investigate, how quickly do  you think you could revoke people's refugee status if they're found to be in fact  people smugglers, not refugees?

Bowen: Well there does need to be an investigation Alex, I'm not going to put a  time frame on it, we are talking about huge issues which go to people's individual  rights, which go to permanent residency in Australia. But of course it will receive the  appropriate amount of resourcing and the appropriate amount of attention to ensure  it can be done as expeditiously as possible.

But we're not going to cut corners; we're going to do it in a calm, methodical way.  There have been instances where both the Department and me personally have  revoked permanent visas in the past because of new information which comes to  light. But it's not done lightly and it's not done without due consideration of all the  facts.

Kirk: Chris Bowen, thanks very much for joining us on The World Today.

Bowen: Thank you Alex.



