

MEDIA RELEASE

23 August 2012

At last! Greens welcome increase in humanitarian intake and UNHCR funding

The Australian Greens have today welcomed the Government’s announcement to increase  Australia’s humanitarian intake to 20,000 and increase funding to the UNCHR to assist vulnerable  refugees and asylum seekers in our region.

“I am pleased that the Government has now taken on the Greens’ and the Houston Panel’s  recommendations to significantly increase the humanitarian intake and fund the UNHCR to help  refugees in Indonesia and Malaysia,” said Greens’ immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.

“Increasing the number of refugees Australia takes and offering a safe alternative to boarding boats  is the only way to save lives.

“This proposal for safer pathways for refugees is what the Greens and numerous NGOs and experts  put to both the Parliament and the Houston Panel as the best way forward and and we are pleased  to see the recommendations enacted.

“This commitment to increase the humanitarian intake is due to the strong and unwavering  advocacy of key organisations such as the Refugee Council of Australia, Amnesty International, the  Asylum Seeker Recourse Centre plus many others - it is their hard work that has paid off today.

“Giving refugees help to reach safety should be our focus, not dumping them, including children, on  an island prison which will only inflict more harm and damage.

“We call on the government to reconsider its opposition to the Greens’ proposal to establish a time  limit on the length of detention.

“The Greens endorse the Australian Medical Association’s serious concerns about the indefinite  detention of refugees on Nauru and Manus Island and the cruel health and psychiatric impacts that  offshore dumping has on these people.

“The AMA’s call for a vigoriously independent medical panel to oversee the quality of health services  available to all refugees in detention is a welcome announcement, and I call on the Government to  seriously consider the proposal before it indefinitely detains vulnerable refugees.

“As Dr Steve Hambleton stated last night, this proposed panel will add some humanity to an  otherwise inhumane policy.



Media contact: Ali Neyle or Kelly Farrow  0427 604 760

