







CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON, ABC NEWSRADIO

THURSDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Offshore processing, boat arrivals, Sri Lankan returns, increase in  humanitarian intake, ‘no advantage’ principle, Nauru, Manus Island.

MARIUS BENSON: To look at the latest policy direction from the Government, I’m  joined by the Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen. Chris Bowen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you, Marius.

BENSON: Mr Bowen, three months ago you announced an offshore detention policy to  break the people smugglers’ model. Since then, 8000 arrivals and you’re now allowing  new arrivals to stay here. Do you acknowledge you have lost; the people smugglers  have won?

BOWEN: No, and let me completely reject your assertion at the beginning of this  interview and your characterisation of the Government’s policy, Marius. Let me  completely reject that.

We have implemented offshore processing. Now, we have obviously acknowledged the  reality yesterday that with the capacity on Nauru and Manus Island, and the recent rate  of high arrivals, not everybody can be sent there. We are managing that. I’ve made it  very clear, however, that the ‘no advantage’ principle will be applied for those who are  sent to Nauru and Manus Island and those who are processed in Australia.

I do not accept your characterisation one little bit.

BENSON: But when you say that offshore, as declared three months ago to discourage  arrivals, continues; it didn’t discourage arrivals, did it though, it accelerated?

BOWEN: We’ve seen a big increase in arrivals, particularly from Sri Lanka. We’ve seen  some of the other groups reduce, but we’ve seen a big increase in Sri Lankan arrivals.  And very clearly, a range of policies were needed to deal with that: not only offshore  processing, also the decision to immediately return anybody who does not have a  credible asylum claim, which we’ve been doing. Yesterday was our biggest return so far  of 100 people on an aeroplane and they will continue.

BENSON: Your plan was, I think you acknowledged, intended in a sense to be cruel, to  achieve the desired end of stopping the boats arriving, but in fact you have ended up  with the worst of all possible worlds, being both cruel and ineffective.

BOWEN: No, I’ve never used those words and again, I would reject that assertion. Yes,  there are tough decisions to be made. Yes, there are difficult decisions to be made and  we do need to provide a disincentive to people getting on boats to travel to Australia,  hence us increasing the refugee intake to 20,000, the biggest increase in 30 years and  making us the second biggest resettlement country in the world, so that people have  another way of getting to Australia, a fairer, safer, more orderly way.

And yes, implementing the ‘no advantage’ test, which is frankly pretty hard to argue  with. If you argue against the ‘no advantage’ test and say that people should get a  permanent visa when they arrive in Australia, you are saying they should be advantaged  over those asylum seekers who don’t get on a boat, and that’s not something that I  think is fair or reasonable.

BENSON: Mr Bowen, when you announced the offshore plan, you said it was to  discourage boat arrivals; that onshore processing encouraged arrivals. Now you’re  introducing substantially onshore results for people arriving, will that attract more boats?

BOWEN: Well, Marius, as I say, we’re dealing with a challenge here. We have  implemented offshore processing. We have always said that this was a complex problem  which would take time to fix.

BENSON: But in fact, only a fraction, only a small fraction will be processed offshore.

BOWEN: Marius, you asked me a question, let me answer it.

BENSON: Okay.

BOWEN: We are implementing offshore processing. Yes, there’s a challenge in terms of  the arrivals. Now, the alternative would be to, you know, keep extending offshore  processing massively, which is just not sustainable when the population of Nauru is  9,000. So I’m not sure if the Liberal Party would suggest we’re going to have 8,000 or  9,000 people processed on Nauru and double the population of Nauru; that’s never  going to happen.

So of course we have to obviously look at these challenges. But what we’ll do is we’ll  continue to implement these policies. I announced a range of things yesterday, Marius.  You say that we abandoned offshore processing; well, in fact yesterday I announced

that we’d signed a contract for the permanent facility on Nauru. We announced the first  transfer to Manus Island. We announced the biggest transfer back to Sri Lanka thus far,  announced progress on the 20,000. So actually I provided an update on all the  implementation of the recommendations yesterday.

BENSON: But these offshore numbers are in the hundreds; the arrivals are in the  thousands.

BOWEN: Sure. Well, it takes time to get this up and running. Let me point out there are  some people in the political debate who said, ‘Please pick up the phone to the President  of Nauru, that will fix your problems.’ We haven’t said that. There are some people in  the political debate who said there was a detention centre ready to go in Nauru, it  wouldn’t need any work, it could be up and running immediately. We didn’t say that. We  pointed out the challenges and the complexities. There’s a certain irony here, Marius, of  you questioning why Nauru and Manus Island haven’t been immediately effective. There  are other people in the political debate who’ve argued that. That is not something the  Government has previously argued.

BENSON: Save the Children has a responsibility, has accepted a responsibility to  oversee the children being sent to Manus Island, for example. The youngest of those is  10. Is it your intention that the 10-year-old stay there for 15 years, for five years?

BOWEN: Well, Marius, as I say, this is a tough policy. I explained yesterday, as I’ve  done before, the ‘no advantage’ principle and yes, it does mean long periods of time.

BENSON: But a 10-year-old spending five years in isolation on an island.

BOWEN: I did say that five years was a benchmark that could be usefully applied. But I  also have said that it depends on individual circumstances. Where children are involved,  resettlement can happen more quickly in our region and that would be reflected under  the ‘no advantage’ test.

But I’m not going to provide you, Marius, or provide the people smugglers with a ‘how  to’ guide and say, ‘Look, if you bring a child you’ll get in in x month or x years.’ That  would be very counterproductive. But we’ve outlined the policy and we’ve outlined how  it will be implemented.

BENSON: Amnesty International has been expressing great concern about the 400  people who are on Nauru at the moment. They’re saying at least let them get out of the  camp and walk around the island. Is that something you’d allow?

BOWEN: Yeah, that’s envisaged in the MoU between Australia and Nauru. That is  certainly, I think, the intention.

BENSON: They can’t do it at the moment?

BOWEN: Well, we have a temporary facility at the moment and things are getting up  and running. But clearly, the intention is that people would have access to circulate  around Nauru, that’s correct.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you, Marius.

Ends

