Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Expert panel report, Malaysia Arrangement,  Nauru  Monday, 13 August 2012

Interview with Chris Uhlmann, ABC 7.30

Chris Uhlmann: Joining me now in Canberra is Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen.  Welcome.

Chris Bowen: Thank you, Chris.

Uhlmann: Isn't today an admission that you believe that Labor got its policy  spectacularly wrong in 2008?

Bowen: No, look, I don't accept that premise and I think this report makes clear that  circumstances are very volatile and evolving and that policies which have been tried  in the past won't necessarily work now.

The report, frankly, calls on all political parties to compromise. We have. Yes, we've  had to develop our position and compromise, and that's what the Australian people  are looking for. And I think frankly, they're looking for all political parties to do that.

It means that sometimes you have to have a difficult conversation. Sometimes what  you say might not be entirely consistent with everything you've said in your political  career, but the Australian people want this sorted out and I think these eminent  Australians have done us - the nation - a good service by pointing a way that the  political parties can compromise and adopt elements of policies they've supported or  opposed in the past to get a solution.

Uhlmann: You talk about not being entirely consistent; in 2010 you said the Pacific  Solution was a cynical, costly and ultimately unsuccessful exercise introduced on the  eve of a federal election. How would you describe what you've done today?

Bowen: Well, let's look at what this panel recommends. This panel - a theme all  through their report, the panel's report, is that there should be no built-in advantage  for people who arrive by boat. Now, you're right, we've been critical of the Nauru  option in the past because it involved people getting an advantage, coming to  Australia, being transferred to Nauru, being processed, and if they're refugees,  brought to Australia. We've pointed out that is not a deterrent. We've pointed out that  that was costly.

Now the panel takes the view that there should be no advantage, that people who  come by boat should be treated the same way as people who are waiting for  resettlement in camps in cities around the world and I agree with them, and that is

the fundamental principle that we have been looking to implement through the  Malaysia agreement, for example.

They recommend other ways to implement that principle, and I think the Australian  people are looking for political parties to do that.

Uhlmann: But to be clear, from tomorrow you will introduce legislation to Parliament  that will see Nauru and Manus Island reopened. At least that's what you hope.

Bowen: Well the legislation we would introduce will reflect the recommendations of  the panel, which would enable the Minister for Immigration to designate countries  that can be regional processing countries, that could then be disallowed by  Parliament, and yes, we will have discussions with PNG and Nauru as well as  ongoing discussions with Malaysia and countries in our region about what we can do  together; and yes, I would then move to designate those countries.

Uhlmann: Now, the panel says that you need to do more talking with Malaysia, get  more protections in place. So it'll be Nauru and Manus Island until that's sorted. How  long will that take?

Bowen: Well, there's gonna be a range of conversations with a range of countries  here. Now, I wanted to make the point very clearly today that anybody who arrives  by boat from this moment onwards runs the risk of being processed somewhere else  -

Uhlmann: In fact 87 people have arrived by boat this afternoon.

Bowen: Well that was before this announcement. That was at one o'clock.

Uhlmann: So they're not included in that?

Bowen: No, well, it's very - it's important that you say to people, 'If you arrive from  now on, you'll be dealt with under these new arrangements'. Now, that's an important  principle. Now of course, we've got a bit of work to do here.

As a Parliament, first we have to pass this legislation. I would call on obviously the  Parliament to pass it as a matter of some urgency. Then we'll have to have ongoing  discussions with countries like Nauru, PNG and Malaysia. And, yes, we'll be moving  to implement Nauru and PNG as matters of urgency.

Uhlmann: Do you think that your Malaysian counterpart, who you know quite well,  will be able to get more protections by his government?

Bowen: Well, look, let's look at what the report recommended here. And I'm more  than happy to take on board their point of view, which was that the Malaysia  agreement firstly they say was important, that our work with Malaysia has been vital  and that's a very important building block. And obviously I welcome that.

They do suggest that some more protections be codified. And some of that can be  done by us in terms of our pre-transfer agreement and that's something we had

worked with the UNHCR on before the agreement was, if you like, derailed by the  High Court decision last year.

Also, in relation to unaccompanied minors, and we do have some flexibility there  given that we have potentially three offshore sites to process. Obviously we'll  continue to talk to Malaysia. Some of it can be done by us, some of it can be done  with the UNHCR and we'll talk to the UNHCR and to Malaysia about some of the  matters that are raised by the report.

Uhlmann: Will children be sent to Nauru?

Bowen: Well the report makes clear that you should have a system which minimises  the loopholes for people smugglers, but also recommends that for vulnerable people,  unaccompanied minors in particular, there should be what you would call a safety  valve mechanism so that either the Minister or the Department can take the view that  they can be handled onshore, but that's after they've been transferred to Nauru in  the first instance in the vast majority of circumstances, but we would also have pre-transfer guidelines.

Uhlmann: Will asylum seekers sent to Nauru or Papua New Guinea now face  indefinite detention on those - in those [inaudible]?

Bowen: Well technically of course they are not - closed detention centres have not  been in the past, but clearly -

Uhlmann: Is there a time limit?

Bowen: Well, no. What the report recommends is that there be no advantage for  coming to Australia by boat. Therefore, that means that if you're a classified as a  refugee, the government should through various mechanisms determine how long it  would've taken you to be transferred to Australia.

Now that is, as I say, a key difference to models that have been tried in the past. It is  a very different model and will be controversial and of course we'll have a deal of  work to do to make sure it's managed humanely. But when you've got this panel,  which includes somebody like Paris Aristotle, for example - who I would suggest has  done more in the real world to help refugees than many other Australian -  recommending this as being necessary to save lives, then we adopt that  recommendation.

Uhlmann: Chris Bowen, we'll have to leave it there. Thank you.

Bowen: Thank you for that.

