Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Yongah Hill immigration detention centre,  community detention, bridging visas, Coalition's  refusal to support offshore processing, boat  arrivals, Coalition's dangerous tow backs policy,  Nauru  Thursday, 24 May 2012

Interview with Harvey Deegan, 6PR Drive

Harvey Deegan: Welcome to the program, Minister.

Chris Bowen: Thanks, Harvey. G'day, how are you?

Deegan: I'm very well, thanks. I just want to background this story a little bit. We're  going to talk about the Northam detention centre.

On this program, on Monday, we brought to our listeners' attention the fact that it  was just about ready to be open for business and the date of tomorrow was actually  mentioned. This all came out of a transcript from the Senate Estimates looking into  these matters and Senator Michaelia Cash from WA posed the question, 'What  happened at Northam?' John Moorhouse, Deputy Secretary, Department of  Immigration and Citizenship, said, 'What's happened is firstly there appears to be  some good news on the horizon in that we've been advised by our contractor John  Holland that the centre should be delivered to us hopefully this week.' Senator Cash  said, 'It should be delivered to you?' Mr Moorhouse: 'This week, the 25th of this  month.' Cash says, '25 May, really?' Mr Moorhouse says, 'We have our fingers,  eyes and noses crossed.' Interesting way to put it. Then Michaelia Cash says,  'Okay, and when you say delivered, what does that mean?' Now, this is important.  Ken Douglas, from Detention Infrastructure and Services Division, Department of  Immigration and Citizenship - he has a big business card - says, 'In a technical  sense, that would be called practical completion. So we would then commence  commissioning.'

Well, as we've known and as has been reported in other media during the week,  that's just about what is going to happen. It was Tuesday, not Monday, it was  Tuesday we brought that to everyone's attention, just to clear that up. And anyway,  we're just about ready to rock and roll, as they say up at Northam.

So it's taken a while to get to this point, Minister. Why is that?

Bowen: Yeah, look, everything you said is right. We have practical completion on  target. What that means is basically the builder hands it over to the Department of  Immigration and then we put in things like communications cables and start moving  in the furniture, basically getting it ready to be occupied.

It has taken longer than it should have, than we would like. There's been delays  with weather, there's been some issues with bedrock that was found, so it has  taken longer. But we are drawing to the end of the process and once we've got  practical completion, it will take a few weeks for the rest of it to be put it and we  should have an opening date confirmed in the not too distant future.

Deegan: Yeah, well, that was obviously the next question. When will you be over  with, I presume, the Prime Minister and other dignitaries to cut a nice big fancy  ribbon?

Bowen: Well, we'll just get it open and we'll announce an opening date once we've  got one. We don't like to, you know, do that until we're 100 per cent sure because  there's still some things to do, but it is getting there and I'd let the mayor know and  the local community know when it's actually going to be up and running.

Importantly, there's been a lot of jobs created here, 100 local people in Northam will  be employed in the centre by Serco and 27 businesses have worked on the  contracts for things like clearing the vegetation and plumbing and waste removal,  27 local businesses have been working on those contracts. So it's created a bit of  work in the Northam area, which is a good thing as well.

Deegan: No doubt. That is the benefit, no question about that. But also, there have  been questions raised, of course, about security at the facility. Can you assure our  listeners that we won't have any repetition of what happened at Christmas Island,  ie. the riots last year, for example?

Bowen: Well, look, we certainly put measures in place and of course it's been  going much better since those riots. You know, there's always lessons to be learnt  about how you can avoid that. We've got less people in detention across the  network than we did at that point, considerably less. You will always have issues  where you've got people that are frustrated - either frustrated that they're in  detention or frustrated they're being told they're not refugees and they'll need to  return home - and that sometimes results in behavioural issues.

But we have measures in place - both Serco staff and obviously appropriate  security, fences, etcetera - and we have arrangements in place to deal with any  incidents that arise. They do arise from time to time, but we certainly do our best to  make sure they don't impact on anybody in the community.

I always like to ensure that the community gets benefit out of having these things in  place. Now, we do find that there is a local community benefit. For example, we  opened one at Inverbrackie in South Australia last year and we have found that,  you know, there is community benefit there in terms of jobs created, in terms of the  interactions, and it can be something which the local community does come to  welcome.

Deegan: How many detainees do you expect the facility will ultimately cater for?  We've had figures thrown at us from 600 to 1500.

Bowen: No, it's up to 600. Six hundred would be the maximum.

Deegan: Right, and where will they be coming from?

Bowen: Look, it depends on where they've arrived from at any particular time. But  we find most of our asylum seekers who arrive by boat are from countries like  Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and Iran. They tend to be the main people who arrive in  Australia by boat, so they would tend to be the main ones represented at that  centre.

Deegan: Okay. Now, 600, well, that's a reasonable number of people, but you are  still getting hundreds arriving on our shores seeking asylum. Are we going to keep  building detainee centres such as Northam ad infinitum to cater for these people  that you don't seem to be able to stop coming to Australia?

Bowen: Yeah, a couple of points. No, we don't have any plans to build any more  centres. We've got a couple - obviously, like Northam - coming online for full  operation. We're also using other measures to manage the number of people we're  processing, like families and children. By the way, there's no families or children at  this centre; this is just for single adult men. But we do move families and children  into the community and where somebody has been through all their checks and  they've cleared all the necessary checks - health, character, identity - then we do  consider issuing them with a bridging visa, which is a temporary visa, while their  claims are being considered. So at this point we have no further plans to open any  more detention centres.

Of course, in the long run, we want to get offshore processing up, which means  processing people in a different country. We need to get legislation passed in  Parliament to do that, which is tricky in this Parliament and the Opposition have  said they'll oppose that. But we'll nevertheless continue to work towards that  because that is, at the end of the day, proper offshore processing is what will  provide the deterrent for coming to Australia. By proper offshore processing, I don't  just mean processing in another country and then bringing people to Australia, I  mean processing people in another country and resettling them in another country.  Because I think most people would agree, we should have a compassionate system  but it should be fair and orderly, and everybody should get a decent go and it  should be safe. So that's what offshore processing, I think, can deliver.

Deegan: You'd have to agree, though, that it's not much of a deterrent the way  things stand at the moment, because boat after boat after boat continues to arrive  in our territorial waters.

Bowen: Yeah, look, we've had an increase this year. We had a big decrease last  year, particularly when we announced offshore processing through the Malaysia  agreement. Last year, we saw a big decrease. Then the High Court knocked that  over and knocked over all offshore processing in effect. Then when it was  announced that the Liberal Party would oppose our legislation, it was clear it wasn't  going to pass Parliament, we've seen a big increase since then, that is true.

But all you can do is put the case to say, well, we believe in offshore processing  and you're right, offshore processing is the best deterrent; proper offshore  processing with the chance of resettlement in another country, which is not the  country that people are seeking to be resettled in. That is, in effect, the best  deterrent you can have.

Deegan: Well, of course, one of the main points which is made by Tony Abbott and  his immigration spokesman Scott Morrison is that as long as it's safe to do so if they

were in government, they would turn boats back. Are you not prepared to give a  similar commitment?

Bowen: No, because I don't believe it's ever safe to do so. That's certainly the  advice to us from the Navy and from all the experts. The Navy's been very strong in  their advice to the government that this isn't safe to do. We've seen it happen  before that people then go to sink the boat and then make it a rescue at sea so they  can be taken to Australia. That risk their lives; it also risks the lives of our sailors.

In addition, you'd need the cooperation of Indonesia to do it. Indonesia has said on  many occasions now they will not cooperate with this. They cooperate with us on  many things when it comes to people smuggling and activities to try and stop it.  They would see this as a backward step and they wouldn't cooperate with it.

Deegan: Well, just tell them that some of the aid that we provide to Indonesia might  be withheld unless they do start to cooperate, because they're coming from their  shores from the most part in the first place.

Bowen: Well, they do cooperate with us, Harvey, on many things, including  disrupting people smuggling efforts, but you've got to work cooperatively with them.  If a new government came to office and said, 'Listen, Indonesia, this is what we're  doing and we don't care what you think', well, you're going to find that affected. So  Tony Abbott can deal with that. If that's the promise he wants to make, that's fine,  he'll need to show how he can deliver it without the cooperation of Indonesia.

Deegan: If you don't sort this situation out to the satisfaction of the electorate by  September next year, you're going to get absolutely spifflicated at the polls.

Bowen: Spifflicated? I haven't heard that one before, mate. I've heard it described  many ways. Spifflicated's a new one.

Deegan: Yes, well, it kind of means that you're going to go down in flames.

Bowen: I get the meaning.

Deegan: If you don't sort this out. I mean, you can't just roll along with your current  policy because the people of Australia are going to vote you out.

Bowen: Now, look, I understand people want to see offshore processing in place. I  understand that they want to see this dealt with. I agree with them and we will  continue to argue for it. And look, if we can't do it with Liberal Party support, well,  when John Howard needed Labor Party support to introduce his policy on Nauru he  could never have passed it through the Parliament without Kim Beazley's vote.  That's a fact, that's a statement of fact. Kim Beazley said, 'Look, I don't agree with  everything you're doing, but I will give you the power as the government to  implement your policies.' Now, this Liberal Party's taken a different approach. I'm  not blaming them, it's just a statement of fact. That is a statement of fact.

Deegan: Well, mate, go to Nauru. Well, we hear that you were reasonably  amenable to that suggestion but were held down in Cabinet.

Bowen: No, no, I was more than reasonably amenable to it; I offered it to the  Opposition. I've offered it to the Opposition. We wrote them a letter and said we will  open a centre in Nauru if you pass this legislation. They said, 'No, we will not pass

this legislation.' So that just shows you, I mean, they're saying 'no' to their own  policy, as well as to our policy.

Deegan: Okay. Just one final question, if I can go back to Northam just for a  moment if you don't mind, Minister.

Bowen: Sure.

Deegan: Let's say, okay, there are 600 single men there at any one time. Are they  going to be detained behind, I don't want to use the term 'bars', but within the  confines of the detention centre, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, or under  certain circumstances will you let some or all out into the community?

Bowen: No, they're detained. We do have instances where people leave the  detention centre under supervision. But that is, you know, for medical purposes or  as part of an organised thing. They're not allowed to, if you like, if I interpret your  question correctly, you know, wander out and come back at a certain time. Any  leaving of the detention centre is under strict supervision.

Deegan: Okay. Minister, we do thank you for your time this afternoon. I'm sure  people have some comment to make -

Bowen: It's always a controversial area, Harvey. No matter what you say, there will  always be views.

Deegan: It always is, and I have to say, without sort of putting too much emphasis  on this, you have been widely criticised for not making yourself available. I've got  two out of two from you so far, so I feel very privileged.

Bowen: I do tend to do more radio interviews than most people in Australia, but I  can't please everybody by being always available. But I'm always happy to talk to  you if I can, Harvey.

Deegan: We do thank you for your time today, Minister. Thank you.

Bowen: Good on you. Cheers.





