CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

**TRANSCRIPT**



INTERVIEW WITH JIM MIDDLETON - NEWSLINE,  AUSTRALIA NETWORK

WEDNESDAY, 14 MARCH 2012

SUBJECTS: Migration from China, international students, skilled migration,  asylum seekers, Malaysia Arrangement, people smuggling, Serco training  manual.

JIM MIDDLETON: Minister, thanks very much for your time.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure Jim.

MIDDLETON: More migrants from China than Britain; this is a truly remarkable  change in an era of astounding changes for Australia. What does it mean though for  the nation’s future, do you think?

BOWEN: Well it is an historic change. Every year since Australia was first formed,  the majority of our permanent migrants have come from the United Kingdom. This is  the first time more migrants have come from another country.

I think it’s a reflection of the change in Australia’s economic focus, China being our  largest trading partner now, and our migration patterns has followed that. We run a  non-discriminatory migration program in Australia, but a flexible one which responds  to economic realities. And the fact that China now provides more migrants than any  other country - and it’s not just China of course; India provides the third-most  migrants, followed by the Philippines - so it is a significant shift to Asia and I think it  augers well for our economic and community links with Asian nations.

MIDDLETON: I might come back to this in a moment, but another point that you’ve  made is this: educating foreign students has become a big ticket item for the  Australian economy, despite the problems not so long ago associated with students  from India, but you say that international education is also important to Australia’s  long-term strategic interests - not just economic interest but strategic interests.  What do you mean by that?

BOWEN: If you have a future generation of leaders in Asia, whether they be from  China, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines or anywhere, and they’ve received a  substantial part of their education in Australia, particularly at university, I believe  that stands us in good stead in terms of having links with that nation for many years  into the future. That’s why I believe it’s in Australia’s long-term strategic benefit to  do this.

MIDDLETON: Fair enough. Australia’s major source of migrants, apart from China  as you just noted, is also India and the Philippines. Why is this shift happening with  relatively little public comment, compared with Australian reaction to asylum seekers  do you think? Why the difference between the two? Why are people making the  distinction?

BOWEN: Well of course Asian immigration into Australia is not new, it’s been going  on for many generations and is very broadly and warmly accepted in the Australian  community. And it is also very heavily focused on skilled migration, and Australians  understand that with a growing economy like we have, we have skills shortages and  labour shortages and migration is important to that. Now the asylum -

MIDDLETON: - Now that might be the case in places like Western Australia and  Queensland, but in the south-east of the country - New South Wales and Victoria for  example - people are struggling. Unemployment is not as low, labour demand is not  as high as it is in those mining states; and yet even in New South Wales and Victoria  it seems that there’s more greater receptivity - if I can put it that way - to migrants  as opposed to asylum seekers.

BOWEN: Well that’s true in terms of we do have higher unemployment rates in  some states rather than others, but there is still in those states gaps, in particular in  skilled migration and skilled occupations. There are positions that are hard to fill, and  skilled migration - whether it be permanent or temporary - is very important, even  in states like Victoria and New South Wales, which aren’t experiencing the resources  boom that Western Australia and Queensland are experiencing.

MIDDLETON: I was just wondering, on this distinction that Australians appear to  have about migrants and asylum seekers, whether it is the case that the public see  asylum seekers as ‘queue-jumpers’, whereas they don’t apply that criterion to  migrants; and that the presence of asylum seekers offends what is a highly  engrained Australian notion of the ‘fair go’. Is that the problem?

BOWEN: Look, I think it’s important to say that Australia has a very generous  refugee and resettlement program. We resettle more people into Australia, per head,  than any other country in the world, more refugees than any other country in the  world. We go into camps and refugee settlement places around the world - in the  Middle East, in Asia, in Africa - and we resettle people into Australia.

And you’re right: Australians are very warmly supportive of that; but they also feel  that when people try and circumvent that by arriving in Australia by boat - and that  means less people we can take out of refugee camps. That is a very controversial  issue; and you will find, particularly people who have been refugees themselves  often say to me or people who have relatives in refugee camps, ‘Well hang on a  second, Australia should take more people out of the camps and we should have  quite a strong policy on dealing with people who arrive in an unauthorised fashion’.

Now, there’s no such thing as a deserving or undeserving refugee. Every refugee is  deserving. But we do reserve the right as a nation to prioritise our cases, and to take  cases we see as the most urgent and compelling out of very difficult circumstances in  Syria and Jordan and Thailand and throughout the Horn of Africa. They are our  priority and we want to work with the United Nations to resettle as many people as  possible.



I want to resettle more. I’ve said that publicly and I’ve changed our party’s policy to  try and increase the number of refugees we take to 20,000 a year. But to do that,  we need to have a policy which ensures that happens in an orderly way and that  those urgent and compelling cases which are referred by the United Nations get a  fair go.

MIDDLETON: Well, talking about order and asylum seekers, Independent MP Rob  Oakeshott is now trying to have another go at reviving offshore processing of asylum  seekers - your policy - and with it, the ‘Malaysia Solution’ that got put down by the  High Court. Have you had any indication from other Independents in the House of  Representatives, who you would need to support Mr Oakeshott, that they would  indeed have another stab at getting offshore processing through the House?

BOWEN: Well I welcome Mr Oakeshott’s Bill. It’s a very constructive step. It’s not  everything that was in the Bill that I had before the Parliament, but it is a  constructive step forward; and I have indicated that I will be recommending that the  Government support that legislation.

Mr Oakeshott is talking to his crossbench colleagues but bearing in mind that there  was significant actual crossbench support for the Government’s Bill - Mr Windsor, Mr  Katter for example had indicated support. Together with Mr Oakeshott and the  Government’s support that would be something, I think, that would give Mr  Oakeshott some confidence. Of course, the key is getting it through the Senate.

MIDDLETON: Well exactly. That was my next question because the Greens and the  Coalition would still both oppose it, wouldn’t they?

BOWEN: They have a coalition of convenience here - of political convenience. But  they have both indicated they would oppose the legislation in the Senate and it  would fail.

I think my job is to continually point out that without offshore processing we have no  deterrent to arriving in Australia by boat. We need a deterrent because it’s a very  dangerous journey. Far too many people have lost their lives doing it, and therefore  that’s an appropriate thing. A humanitarian approach is to say we’ll resettle more  refugees but we’ll do so in an orderly fashion with a deterrent to arrive by boat.

MIDDLETON: Moving on but in the same area, you set great store by getting the  key nations of South-East Asia - especially Indonesia and Malaysia - to attack people  smuggling, and human trafficking as well, but can you really expect wholehearted  support from Jakarta, for example, as long as the Indonesian crew of asylum seeker  boat, many of them minors, are detained in Australia without trial for so long, for  160 days, half a year?

BOWEN: Well, can I just correct one thing, and it’s a common misconception: minor  crew are returned to Indonesia. If we are satisfied that somebody is a minor -

MIDDLETON: - But it’s a question about satisfaction, isn’t it? That’s a very difficult  issue -

BOWEN: - It is often a difficult issue to determine somebody’s age but where  somebody has satisfied us that they are under-18 they are returned immediately to  Indonesia; and that’s something that’s not commonly understood in the community.  I think that’s a fairly widespread misapprehension. But it is difficult to prove  somebody’s age and obviously it’s in the best interest of the individual to try and  assert that they’re under-18 and they may not be, and that can be a complex  process.

Look, we have a very good relationship with Indonesia and Minister Natalegawa is  here tomorrow, for example, for talks with Minister Carr and Minister Smith.

MIDDLETON: Is it fair to treat the ringleaders of people smuggling boats in the  same category as the simple crew, many of whom are very young and virtually  press-ganged into service? Can you address the Indonesian Government’s concerns  on that, separate out the penalties that pertain to people who are simply crew as  opposed to those who actually run the people smuggling operations?

BOWEN: Well of course we do have separate offences for organising -

MIDDLETON: - Not once they’re on the boats though.

BOWEN: No, no, but where people have lost their lives, etcetera, that is recognised  through the court system. The Indonesians work very closely with us on that. But I  do accept the fundamental point that if somebody’s on the boat, they are not the Mr  Big, not the organisers. Those people tend not to risk their lives, conveniently, and  they conveniently let other people risk their lives on that journey. We are committed  to working with the Indonesian Government to bring those people to justice and they  will be brought to justice.

MIDDLETON: One final subject: a training manual for the contractors of Australia’s  immigration detention centres has surfaced. Is it right that that manual should  recommend that guards use punches and kicks to restrain detainees in certain  circumstances?

BOWEN: Well this is a very serious matter, Jim, and let me just take a couple of  minutes to answer this. This is a manual from 2010. My advice is it’s not the current  manual. We have use of force guidelines for Serco and that makes it very clear that  Serco officers can only use minimal force as required. We have circumstances in  detention from time to time which require use of force, as you would understand,  but it is necessary that it be minimal and Serco officers are not allowed to use  weapons. Now, I have asked to see the current manual and will make sure that it is  compliant with the minimum use of force guidelines. But -

MIDDLETON: - But you’re not sure at this stage whether the provisions that have  surfaced in these 2009, 2010 manuals still apply?

BOWEN: Some of the things in the 2009-10 manual would clearly not be the use of  minimal force and would clearly be inappropriate. I will need to methodically work  through that. I’ve seen the reports today. It’s important I not respond to the media  report, I respond to the substance of the issue, and I’ll take my time to do that  properly.

But let’s be clear about this, Jim, nobody’s alleging that there has been an  inappropriate use of force. Nobody’s alleging that there has been a particular  incident here which is inappropriate. We’re talking about a manual. There’s been no  allegation that these sorts of methods have actually been used. But having said that,  obviously it’s important that the manual be appropriately drafted. We’ll be working  with Serco to make sure and satisfy ourselves that that’s the case.

MIDDLETON: Minister, thank you very much indeed.

BOWEN: Thank you, Jim.

ENDS

