CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH JOHN STANLEY, 2UE BREAKFAST

SATURDAY, 21 JANUARY 2012

E&OE PROOF ONLY

SUBJECTS: Opposition’s turning back boats policy, Temporary Protection  Visas, Malaysia arrangement, Nauru, negotiating with the Opposition.

JOHN STANLEY: Tony Abbott, the Opposition Leader, has given an interview to  Paul Kelly in the Weekend Australian where he has outlined a new and much  tougher approach to turning around boats carrying asylum seekers. Up until now,  the policy has been to reopen Nauru and reintroduce Temporary Protection Visas.  The truth about that, of course, is that it wouldn’t work because once you send  people to Nauru and process them, they would come to Australia. Most of them  came to Australia or New Zealand last time and that is known. And Temporary  Protection Visas, my figures that I last looked at, I think more than 90 per cent of  the people who were under Temporary Protection Visas under the Pacific Solution  ended up getting permanent visas in this country.

Now, to address what are obvious holes in their policies, Tony Abbott is saying this  morning that a Coalition Government will instruct the Navy to turn around asylum  seeker boats on the water and return them to Indonesia. He’s saying that he would  increase the naval presence to the north of Australia. The first thing he’ll do on  becoming Prime Minister would be to go to Indonesia to tell them what he plans.  He’s also talked about people who deliberately sabotage their vessels, that the Navy  would have the capacity to remove people from those vessels, repair the vessels and  then return them to Indonesia. He acknowledges this is a very, very brutal  approach, but he says it’s what’s needed.

He also addresses the issue of Temporary Protection Visas by saying they would  provide a quota, so there’d be a quota and I’m just trying to clarify exactly how this  works. I’d love to speak to either Scott Morrison or Tony Abbott, but they’re saying a  quota of just under 4,000 would apply to both boat arrivals and those to arrive  legally and make a refugee claim. The Temporary Protection Visas would be limited  so that people who thought they could stay here long enough and get a permanent  visa would find themselves effectively in a queue and potentially remain in limbo for  many, many years. So that’s the policy as it’s been outlined in the newspaper.  Clearly, there are more details to come from Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison.

I can imagine what the reaction will be from the Government. The Immigration  Minister, Chris Bowen, joins us on the line now. Mr Bowen, good morning to you.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you, John.

STANLEY: It is a tough approach. Would it not result in the boats stopping?

BOWEN: Well, a couple of things, John. I think you’re 100 per cent right: I think the  Opposition has finally realised, finally publicly admitted at least that there’s holes all  through their policy in relation to Nauru and Temporary Protection Visas.

The trouble is that this policy has even more holes in it and the real trouble is that  this is a highly dangerous policy. Let’s go through a couple of things about this.  Firstly, turning back the boats, Tony Abbott’s said for a long time he’d do that; he’s  had lots of different positions on it, though. He’s had a boat phone where he’d  personally make the decision and then he said it would be up to the people, the  Navy commanders at the scene and now he’s saying every boat would be turned  back.

Well, there’s two big problems with that. Firstly, it’s highly dangerous, it risks the  lives not only of asylum seekers, but our naval personnel because if you’re turning  boats back on the high seas it’s a very dangerous operation and you will get people  sinking their boats and that then becomes a rescue at sea. And then the second  point is he says he’s going to turn them back to Indonesia, indeed, he’s going to put  them on Australian naval ships and take them back to Indonesia. One little problem  with that: Indonesia has said repeatedly, ‘Forget it. We’re not going to take them.’

So this is a policy which is really, I think, on the run. It’s Tony Abbott trying to patch  up the holes in his policy and it’s not only impractical but highly dangerous.

STANLEY: Can I just put a couple of things to you, then? The turning back of the  boats, of course it’s dangerous, but the nature of work of the defence forces is  dangerous and if, as with your Malaysian solution, if it was done a couple of times  and you then saw the impact of these people being sent back to Indonesia, wouldn’t  that then have the effect of stopping the boats, because that’s what you’re hoping  with Malaysia, isn’t it, that once you get a few sent back there they’ll stop coming?

BOWEN: Absolutely. No, that’s right, and I agree it would have a deterrent effect,  of course. That’s why, as you say, our Malaysia agreement is designed to achieve  the same outcome but doing it in a much safer way, not risking the lives of people  on the high seas. It is designed to return people to where they began the boat  journey, which in more than 80 per cent of circumstances is actually Malaysia.

So this underlines, I think, the hypocrisy of Tony Abbott here, John, because Tony  Abbott says, ‘Oh, look, you can’t do Malaysia, there’s no protections in place and  they’re not a signatory to the Refugee Convention and what’s going to happen to  these people?’ And then he says, ‘But we’ll turn them back to Indonesia.’ Well, hello,  Indonesia’s not a signatory; they don’t have any protections negotiated there.



STANLEY: But the boats are leaving from Indonesia, aren’t they?

BOWEN: Well, the majority of people actually fly to Malaysia and then take a boat  from Malaysia -

STANLEY: To Indonesia.



BOWEN: And then another boat from Indonesia to Australia. But, I mean, Tony  Abbott says, ‘Oh, we’re very worried about the human rights in Malaysia.’ He’s not  even going to check who’s on these boats. We could have a boatload of women and  children and he just says, ‘Well, I’ll turn them around on the high seas, I don’t care if  it’s dangerous.’

I mean, this just underlines to me the hypocrisy and shows that when he says, ‘I  don’t like Malaysia’ he’s just stopping it for political reasons. He’s just playing politics.  This is what it says to me.

STANLEY: But with Indonesia, so presumably on the open seas, your Navy can say,  ‘Turn around and go back.’

BOWEN: Yeah, there’s a separate section of the Immigration Act which has been  used, but naval personnel have given evidence before the Senate Estimates process,  former very high-ranking military personnel have been on television shows saying,  ‘Look, this risks people’s lives.’

And I just don’t think Tony Abbott understands what he’s dealing with here. He says,  ‘Look, if they sink the boat, that’s fine, we’ll put them on a naval vessel and take  them to Indonesia.’ Well, a) that’s a rescue at sea, under international law they  come to the closest country which is Australia, and b) why would Indonesia say,  ‘Well, that’s fine, you can drop them off here’? They’ve repeatedly said that they  wouldn’t do that.

STANLEY: Well, let me be devil’s advocate, because if you had a couple of  instances where the boats were returned to Indonesia and it got international  headlines and people were being treated in a very brutal way, wouldn’t that then  deter people from travelling to Malaysia to Indonesia so Indonesia might be stopping  the boats that they’re getting?

BOWEN: Well, I don’t think treating people in a brutal way on the high seas and  risking the lives of them and Australian personnel is the way to go. What I do think  the way to go is to work with countries in our region like Malaysia, like Indonesia,  and say, ‘Well, let’s work together on this cooperatively, let’s try and see if we can  get refugees to Australia the proper way, the right way, and Australia’s happy to  take refugees that way, in a safer way, and take more refugees that way, and let’s  negotiate protections for them’, which is what we’ve done.

Now, again, Tony Abbott said as well the protections in Malaysia aren’t good enough  and then he says, ‘Oh, we’ll send them to Indonesia with no protections.’ I think  what it shows is that he knows that the Malaysia agreement would work; he doesn’t  want it to work because he really doesn’t want boats stopping arriving in Australia  because he’s made a political calculation it’s in his best interest.

STANLEY: So does this suggest, you’ve still got these negotiations in theory  continuing, does this interview today suggest that it’s not worth continuing those  negotiations?

BOWEN: That’s up to Tony Abbott. Look, we’ve said we were in those discussions,  we have been in those negotiations with the Opposition. I haven’t commented on  them on or off the record. I’m not going to start this morning, John. I think that’s  appropriate.

STANLEY: But are you surprised by this? I mean, he’s basically announced it in The  Australian this morning.

BOWEN: That’s a matter for him, John. I have not commented, the Prime Minister  hasn’t commented on these negotiations and we’re not going to until we feel that  that’s appropriate because they’re in good faith, ongoing discussions.

STANLEY: Sure, I understand that. The Temporary Protection Visas bit, I think that  needs fleshing out from them, so I’m just trying to work out how that would work  and it’s not clear to me from the story.

BOWEN: No, he’s said this before and then he’s walked away from it before. He’s  said before that they would have some sort of quota where if you arrive by boat a  certain number would get a permanent visa and then the others a temporary visa.  What he hasn’t said is, well, would those be in detention or would they be in the  community.

I mean, again, I just think what they’re realising is that there are holes in their policy  about Nauru and everything you said about Nauru is 100 per cent right, everything  you said about Temporary Protection Visas is 100 per cent right. They just say, ‘Oh,

look, you know, don’t worry about that, we’ll sort it out.’

STANLEY: But it just strikes me, as brutal as this may be, if we strip away  questions about whether it’s moral, whether it’s brutal, if the objective is simply to  stop the boats and this policy could be implemented with Indonesian cooperation, it  strikes me it would stop them, wouldn’t it?

BOWEN: Well, there’s no question that returning people to where they began their  boat journey is a deterrent, absolutely. And that’s why we negotiated this agreement  with Malaysia, because Nauru doesn’t do that, as you say. Nauru is just a Christmas  Island that’s further away.

STANLEY: That’s right.

BOWEN: It just means people get processed and then they get brought to  Australia, and they know that and they factor that in. They say, ‘We’ll have to spend  a bit of time on Nauru but then we’ll get to Australia.’

STANLEY: But it just strikes me that this policy looks like it would work.

BOWEN: Well, it won’t because it can’t be implemented. It is dangerous, Indonesia  won’t agree to it, and you’re correctly say when you join the Navy you know you’re  going to take risks, but the Navy and I think the Australian people don’t expect their  personnel to be put at risk willingly and wantonly for these sorts of exercises. When  you’re in the Navy you know that you’re going to undertake dangerous activities, of

course you are. But you don’t put yourself willingly and wantonly in harm’s way for  the purpose of an exercise which is impractical and not going to work.

STANLEY: Alright, Mr Bowen, I appreciate your time this morning. Thank you.

BOWEN: Nice talking to you, John.

Ends



