Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Opposition's turning back boats policy,  boat arrivals, poker machine reform Monday, 23 January 2012

Interview with Steve Price, MTR Breakfast

Steve Price: Minister, good morning.

Chris Bowen: Good morning, Steve. Happy New Year.

Price: You too. Had you ever thought using the Navy to intervene  in this operation to order boats to turn around?

Bowen: Well, look, we've obviously considered all sorts of options,  but there's lots of options which don't work and all the advice to us,  all the evidence to us from navy and other government agencies, is  that it's completely impractical to turn boats around. There's a  couple of reasons. Firstly, it's highly dangerous. This has been  tried before and we know how dangerous it is because the boats,  when they see the Navy coming to get them, if they think they're  going to be turned around, then evidence shows they know what to  do, they sabotage themselves so that it then becomes a risk at sea  and under law they are then taken to Australia.

The second problem with it is, Steve, when you turn a boat around,  you've got to send it somewhere, and the only place to send it is  Indonesia. Indonesia has said very clearly and repeatedly that they  will not accept boat turnarounds. They just won't cooperate with it  and so the big problem with Tony Abbott's plan is it just doesn't  work. He's got nowhere to actually turn the boats around to.

Price: It happened during the Howard Government. Did it not  happen successfully in some instances?

Bowen: Well, look it's happened on a handful of occasions and  Indonesia since then has made it very clear they don't regard it as  appropriate and the man who was very much involved in doing it at  that time is now the head of the Australian Navy. He's given  evidence to the Senate that he regards it as very risky and  dangerous.

Look, the principle of returning people to where they began their  boat journey is a sound one. That's a very sound principle and  you've got to find ways to do it safely, and that's what the Malaysia  agreement is all about because most people start their boat  journey actually in Malaysia. And that's why we said, ‘Well, let's  turn people around and send them back to Malaysia, but let's do it  safely.' There's three differences between Tony Abbott's plan to  turn boats back to Indonesia and our plan to take people to  Malaysia: one, Malaysia's agreed to it, Indonesia hasn't; two,  Malaysia's agreed to protections for people, Indonesia hasn't; and  three, you can do it safely. You can't turn boats around in the  middle of the ocean safely.

Price: Your premise on Malaysia was always that if we could get  agreement for this deal to operate, its very existence would act as  a deterrent. Isn't that what Tony Abbott's saying, that he will use  the Navy to turn around a boat or a couple of boats, and then that  deterrent would be sufficient to stop boats sailing?

Bowen: Well, that may well be his premise, but there are some  essential differences. As I say, our premise is people come to  Australia and we say, ‘We're going to take you on a plane to

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 3 Opposition's turning back boats policy, boat arrivals, poker machine reform

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182019.htm

Malaysia.' And their premise is, ‘We're going to have a battle of  wills with you out in the middle of the ocean. If you sink yourself,  we'll pick you up', and Tony Abbott's got some sort of bizarre plan  of repairing the boat and sending that back to Indonesia. I mean, I  just don't think he's thought this through.

As you said, this has been their policy in some guise or another for  quite a while now, but there's been various versions of it. We had  the boat phone during the election where Tony Abbott was going to  be called on his mobile to decide whether to turn each boat back,  and then they said, ‘No, we'll leave it up to the Navy', and it was  the policy to turn boats around where safe. And now their policy is  to turn all boats around. Does that mean even when it's not safe? I  mean, this has got more holes in it than a piece of Swiss cheese,  this policy, it just hasn't been thought through.

Price: Is this more about, Minister, is this more about politics? Is  this about Tony Abbott playing to his audience?

Bowen: Yeah, I think it is, Steve, I think it is. I think Tony Abbott  knows that this is a controversial issue and he's made a calculation  here that this is sounding tough and will be well received. Well, the  trouble is it just doesn't work.

Price: Wagging his finger at Indonesia is not necessarily helpful  either, is it?

Bowen: No, absolutely, Steve, spot on. I mean, we work very  closely with Indonesia on law enforcement matters around people  smuggling. We've got a very good relationship with them, but  basically, as you said, I saw him say, ‘Well, these are Indonesian  boats with Indonesian crew and therefore it's Indonesia's problem.  So to ring them and say this is all your problem, your problem to  fix, I think would endanger the broader cooperation we have with  Indonesia. They're not going to cooperate with turning the boats  around and he runs the risk of damaging the relationship and  damaging the very good cooperation we already have.

Price: Two boats last week; they don't appear to have stopped  because of seasonal factors across this summer. Has that  surprised you?

Bowen: No, because I know that people smugglers don't care,  frankly, about seasonal factors. Asylum seekers do; asylum  seekers will take some recognition of the weather but the actual  people smugglers don't care. They get their money and they send  the boat on their way.

You see the figures go up and down. There was obviously a big  increase after it was announced that the Malaysia legislation  wouldn't pass the Parliament because of Liberal Party opposition.  We've seen a reduction and then we saw an increase. It's come off  a little bit, I think due to a range of factors, including the weather,  but people smugglers just don't care.

Price: Given Andrew Wilkie's experience, can anyone believe the  word of the Prime Minister?

Bowen: Absolutely, look, and let's be clear about this: there are  very serious and meaningful pokie reforms being introduced by this  government and I'm glad that the legislation will pass the  Parliament, all indications are. It is a big and substantial package  with dealing with our problem gambling. Now, the fact of the matter  -

Price: But when is a deal not a deal?

Bowen: Well, the fact of the matter is, this legislation would not  pass the Parliament. The Andrew Wilkie legislation simply wouldn't  have the numbers, so you've got a choice: you can put legislation  up you know is going to fail or you can reach an arrangement  which will pass, which actually is a big step forward, which deals  not only with pokies, but with problem gambling across the board,

Page 2 of 3 Opposition's turning back boats policy, boat arrivals, poker machine reform

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182019.htm

internet and some of the stuff we've seen more recently in sporting  programs on the television, so -

Price: But isn't the Government in danger, Minister, of being seen  to be a government that doesn't follow through with its promises  and is not to be trusted?

Bowen: Well, I think we're a government that gets on with the job,  Steve, and delivers on reform. I mean, this Government's got a lot  of legislation through in difficult circumstances in a hung  Parliament. This pre-commitment legislation will get through. It will  enable every poker machine in the country to have the technology,  a substantial trial of mandatory pre-commitment.

When you're doing reforms like this, you've got to bring the  community with you and the Parliament with you. Otherwise, you're  just talking about some sort of hypothetical idea which is never  going to be implemented. It's much better to actually get some  reform on the law books and get on with dealing with the issue of  problem gambling.

Price: Thanks for your time, as usual.

Bowen: Nice talking to you, Steve.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182019.htm  Last update: Monday, 23 January 2012 at 12:28 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 3 of 3 Opposition's turning back boats policy, boat arrivals, poker machine reform

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182019.htm

