Interview with Neil Mitchell on 3AW Melbourne

17 January 2012 SCT001/2012

TOPICS: Leadership, economic challenges in 2012, costs associated with the return of the anti-whaling  protesters, Andrew Robb’s irresponsible comments about the national economy and Barnaby Joyce  confirming he wants to revive the ‘Regional Rorts’ program.

Neil Mitchell opens with a cross to the Prime Minister’s press conference at the Ford factory in  Broadmeadows.

NEIL MITCHELL: I’m joined by the Minister for Regional Australia Simon Crean. Good morning.

SIMON CREAN: Good morning Neil.

NEIL MITCHELL: Will Julia Gillard still be leader at the end of the year?

SIMON CREAN: Yes.

NEIL MITCHELL: No challenge?

SIMON CREAN: No challenge. There's no challenger with the numbers, nor is there a Caucus with a  desire to do it. I think they’ve learnt the lesson that changing leaders is not the path to improving the polls.  What you’ve got to get down to is tackling the hard issues, which Julia has done.

Over the past 12 months, there have been many hard issues. But we finished the year on a very strong  note. We got carbon pricing up, we got the Minerals Resource Rent Tax up - the tax that will enable the  country to reinvest in its future.

By taking the proceeds from the resources that the nation owns and investing them to diversify the  economic base for the nation.

That's why I’m down in Tasmania this week, looking at the opportunities in that state to diversify its  economic base and to understand the fundamental role of Government in helping, is not to prop up ailing  industries but to encourage and give the lift-off to the new industries.

NEIL MITCHELL: But it strikes me we’re heading into a pretty uncertain year in economic terms and the  Prime Minister has picked up on what’s happening in Europe and the implications for the rest of the world,  and also an uncertain year, with due respect, in terms of the leadership - as you well know, you were  Leader - when your poll results are low there's always going to be niggling around the edges.

So you've got economic fragility and leadership fragility.

SIMON CREAN: I disagree. I think what you’ve got is the niggling from people that haven't got anything  better to do. I think that a lot of the sources of niggling never identify themselves.

There'll always be some unhappy people within the show, but the overwhelming commitment is to get on  with the task. It is true there is a lot of international uncertainty, but Australia is the country best placed to  overcome it.

We're the only developed country in the world to have avoided the recession, we’ve got room to move on  monetary policy that makes a difference on the economic front - and the last interest rate cut is an  example of that.

We've got infrastructure investments in the pipeline - $150 billion - in terms of investment in mining and  resource capacity, but we've got to do is understand that as the globe is being challenged we’re an  economy in transition, and the task for us is to make that transition sensibly.

We've got to look at the patches, because the regions are the patches in this patchwork economy and  look to identify their particular strengths and what's needed to realise them.

NEIL MITCHELL: So what is the issue for this year, what will be the dominating issue? Is it the economy?

SIMON CREAN: Yes, the economy. There's no question about it - because the economy is what  generates the job opportunities and is what can set the nation up for greatness. I believe that this is a  nation poised on the cusp of greatness.

When you look at what the world needs Neil, its food security, energy security, water security and skills  development. Australia can lead in all of those spaces. And it isn't just us extracting the stuff and shipping  it out, it’s how we do it - turning the comparative advantage into a competitive advantage.

Take Tasmania, where I am, they're looking at moving strongly into dairy now. Why? Because their  comparative advantage is water, they’ve got a surplus of it, but they’ve got to turn it to a competitive  advantage. They’ve got to make it work in a way that is valued by the rest of the world.

NEIL MITCHELL: But what does this mean to me if I'm sitting in suburban Melbourne, worried about  paying the electricity bill, worried about the carbon tax, worried about keeping my job, worried about the

A A A

search

Page 1 of 3 Interview with Neil Mitchell on 3AW Melbourne

27/07/2012 http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2012/SCT001_2012.aspx

mortgage - basic survival. You know cost of living is a big issue, what does all the stuff you’re saying  matter to me?

SIMON CREAN: It matters to you because it means we're underpinning the fundamental strengths of the  economy, which in terms of individuals translates to job security.

We created 750,000 jobs in the last four years. That's the largest increase in jobs in the history of the  country and the previous four years, when the Howard Government was in, they created 160,000 less.

And we've gone through a global recession Neil.

We've talked about the carbon pricing and people have talked about the threat to jobs. We've produced  modelling that has shown that by 2020 there will 1.6 million new jobs.

That is more than double again what we've produced in the past four years. So not only have we  delivered in the last four years, the prospects are we’ll deliver even more over the next eight.

NEIL MITCHELL: So why is the Government in strife? The polls have been very bad for a long time, why  are you in strife? Is it Labor values, have you forgotten them?

SIMON CREAN: No I don't think we’ve forgotten Labor values. The Labor values are there in spades, look  at our commitment to expand superannuation, look at our commitment to invest in the health system, look  at our commitment to invest in education, look at our delivery on those fronts, plus the jobs front.

They're Labor values through and through Neil.

NEIL MITCHELL: So why are you in strife?

SIMON CREAN: I think last year we saw an unprecedented period in Australian political history. Not that  we had a minority government, but the fact we had an Opposition that broke down the fundamental  principle of bipartisanship around key issues.

Governments of all persuasions need to have a foundation built around an agreement on key issues by  the big major parties.

Why do you think the asylum seekers debate has gone off the rails, when you’ve got alignment between  Tony Abbott and The Greens. The reason is because the mainstream of the Liberal Party wouldn't stand-up to Abbott, wouldn't tell him we needed a sensible position that had some give and take in it and he  went the other way.

But he led the way to an agreement with The Greens, incredibly, that has stymied our ability to move  forward.

NEIL MITCHELL: Can I put it to you that most people, and this applies to all parties, don't know what you  stand for. It seems you're now backing away from pre-commitment, because you don’t need Andrew  Wilkie anymore. Is that still going to happen?

SIMON CREAN: We’ve announced the commitment to trial it in the ACT. The further discussions  happened over the weekend and are ongoing, and this is important to lay some foundations to get back  into the Parliament so we can move the issue on.

It's not backing away from the commitment, we’ll honour the commitment. All election commitments we  made, we have delivered upon.

Neil Mitchell plays clip of Ms Gillard criticising Opposition spokesman Andrew Robb talking down the  Australian economy and comparing it to the embattled European economies.

NEIL MITCHELL: Does that mean the Opposition shouldn’t be saying what they believe to be the state of  the Australian economy?

SIMON CREAN: Of course they can state what they believe to be the state of the Australian economy,  but it’s got to be based on fact. The fundamental starting point in politics is to start with the facts.

Andrew Robb is fundamentally wrong. And don't take our word for it. Look at what the OECD and World  Bank said at the end of last year - that Australia debt to GDP ratio is the best in the developed world.

Just as our economic growth is the strongest, just as our employment growth is the strongest. So let’s  have a bit of spruiking Australia up, instead of talking it down. The facts say we’re in good shape, not that  we’re in perfect shape, not that we’re not going to face difficulties, let's argue about how we go forward.

But don’t lay the foundations based on a falsehood.

NEIL MITCHELL: So what are the problems we’re going to face in the year ahead?

SIMON CREAN: The problems we face is if we get the downturn in Europe and also in the US. If we can  get that balance where the US is coming back, we can withstand some years, and it looks likely, where  the European looks like it is going to be in a pretty poor state.

So long as you haven't got the two big ballast blocks out together, then you’ve got a real chance.  Particularly because we've positioned ourselves strongly in Asia - and not just China.

Asia is the strong opportunity for us, and I talk about China, and everyone talks about China, but there's  India and the ASEAN nations - we signed the free-trade agreement with the ASEAN nations, collectively  as a group of countries they're our biggest trading bloc and that's opened up new market opportunities.

Not just in terms of agricultural products but food processing, food security and as the middle class grow  in Asia there demand is for infrastructure - that is, our resources, there demand is for cleaner quality,  nutritional food and that's what Australia leads on in spades.

Page 2 of 3 Interview with Neil Mitchell on 3AW Melbourne

27/07/2012 http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2012/SCT001_2012.aspx

NEIL MITCHELL: The whaling protests do you know what that’s going to cost us, getting those three  back?

SIMON CREAN: No I don't, I checked this morning and the costs are still being calculated but it will be in  the hundreds of thousands.

NEIL MITCHELL: We haven't got an option though?

SIMON CREAN: There's no option. We have to do it but is not just the risk they put themselves at but the  cost to the nation. We are doing what we can, we’ve taken it to the international courts, we continue to  pressure the Japanese to stop their scientific whaling but these are additional costs that are unavoidable  but very expensive.

NEIL MITCHELL: The other thing is, what do you have against bikini babes?

SIMON CREAN: Bikini babes? I’ve got nothing against them.

NEIL MITCHELL: Well Barnaby Joyce was going to give them half a million dollars and you're having a  go at Barnaby Joyce for funding them.

SIMON CREAN: That’s because he was using government money to fund them in some damn fund  through the Regional Rorts program and that was just one example of it.

There was Tumbi Creek up in NSW that they paid to dredge and it dredged itself - naturally, there was a  steam train that never got on the tracks, it ran out of steam, which they funded.

The way in which they handled the regional programs was an absolute rort. It was exposed by the Auditor  General, they only gave the money out just before the election, they never gave it to every council going,  they gave it to their favourites - exposed as a rort.

Now Barnaby Joyce - babbling Barnaby says that's what they want to return to. Two questions, one, what  does that say about the rorting, and two, where’s the money coming from?

Because under Andrew Robb, that bloke that got all the figures wrong before that I talked about he’s  overseeing a $70 billion black hole and now they want to find more money when they haven’t got any and  they’re going to spend it on more rorts.

That's an opposition that does not have a clue.

NEIL MITCHELL: So it’s a year of recovery for Labor is it, you’ll go up in the polls, everything will be  good, and the leadership will be stable?

SIMON CREAN: Look the polls will determine themselves Neil but I can tell you this, it is a year of  commitment from Labor.

I think that we've finished last year and now there’s confidence that the Government will complete its term.

The hard decisions taken last year, two years of consolidation the consolidation around job creation,  about investing in those things that are going to grow the economy in a sustainable way and those things  that are going to deliver services to the Australian people, that's what we are committed to and we'll let

the polls look after themselves.

NEIL MITCHELL: Thanks very much for your time.

ENDS

Print

Last Updated: 17 January, 2012

Page 3 of 3 Interview with Neil Mitchell on 3AW Melbourne

27/07/2012 http://www.minister.regional.gov.au/sc/pressconf/2012/SCT001_2012.aspx

