Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Joint Select Committee Report on  Australia's Immigration Detention  Network, community detention,  bridging visas Friday, 30 March 2012

Interview with Emma Alberici, ABC Lateline

Emma Alberici: I'm joined now in our Sydney studio by the  Minister for Immigration, Chris Bowen.

Thank you very much for coming in this evening.

Chris Bowen: Evening, Emma.

Alberici: Now the bottom line, I guess, of this report is that why  should people be in a cell if they're not a criminal? In other words,  it's not a crime to come to Australian shores seeking asylum.

Bowen: Well, look, firstly, can I say, I think the majority report is a  good one. It's substantive and considered. Obviously, I received it  today and I'll work through it methodically, but it's a well-constructed report, which I thank the committee for.

In relation to mandatory detention, we believe that when people  arrive in Australia without documentation usually, they don't have  any evidence as to who they are, we need to establish their  identity, we need to establish character and security checks and  health checks.

That's appropriate and we need to do that in a detention  environment because we simply don't know, as opposed to say, an  asylum seeker who has arrived by plane who has a passport, a  visa and documentation. We simply don't know enough about  those people, but I do accept that we do need to do that quickly  and we need to move people into the community.

Hence, the reforms that we've made: community detention;  bridging visas which are recognised in this report; 3400 people  moved into the community, mainly families and children.

Alberici: It's going too slow though, with respect. That's the  problem, isn't it? And you've still got around 1000 or thereabouts  who have been in detention for 18 months or thereabouts.

Bowen: Well, those figures include people in community detention,  so that's people not in detention in any meaningful sense, but living  in the community. But let me just run through a few things. Firstly  —

Alberici: How many people have you got in detention centres?

Bowen: Around 3800 and we've got —

Alberici: And how many have been there longer than a year?

Bowen: Well, can I just run through: we've got around 3800 people  in detention centres. We've issued 1100 bridging visas. Now, they  have concentrated on people who have been in detention the  longest.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 1 Joint Select Committee Report on Australia's Immigration Detention Network, comm...

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb184703.htm

