AUSTRALIAN GREENS MEDIA RELEASE

Thursday 2 August 2012

Greens and refugees say safer pathways are the genuine alternative to boats

The Greens today called on the government to compromise on their obsession with deterrence  and punishment of refugees and opt instead to save lives by offering safer pathways to  protection.

“The government and opposition are only interested in a political solution, not in doing the right  thing for vulnerable refugees” said Greens’ immigration and citizenship spokesperson  Senator  Sarah Hanson-Young.

“Their obsession with deterring and punishing those who arrive by boat only panders to the  view that asylum seekers have no right to seek refuge here. What we need is the political will to  listen to the experts and adopt safe, humane and legal ways to save refugees before they are  forced by desperation onto dangerous boats.

“It’s time the government and opposition stopped playing politics with the lives of refugees.

“When the Expert Panel reports back next week we hope to see proposals that don’t push away  and punish refugees under the false myth that deterrents work, when we know they don’t.

“Australian experts such as Malcolm Fraser, legal academics, and the human rights, social  services and refugee sectors have given very clear submissions to the Expert Panel showing that  punishing refugees by sending them offshore won’t work.

“It is sad to see the Government, Opposition and Rob Oakeshott still talking about turning  people back to Malaysia and Nauru, which shows that they haven’t heard what the experts are  saying.

“The way to save lives is not through punishing refugees.

“The Greens have proposed eight immediate action points and a New Regional Plan of Action to  provide safer pathways for people seeking asylum in Australia.

“Immediate steps would be to raise our humanitarian intake to 25000, directly resettle 1000  refugees from Indonesia and 4000 from Malaysia, and boost the capacity of asylum application  assessments in Indonesia.  This will give refugees the hope that they don’t need to board a boat.

“Experts have repeatedly told us that a regional proposal will work because it’s what Australia  and other nations did after the war in Vietnam.

The Greens today have released a new video featuring Afghan refugee Najeeba  Wazefadost, who came on the Tampa as a child and was detained on Nauru, which calls for  safer alternatives to boats and shows that deterrence and punishment will not stop desperate  people fleeing danger.



BROADCAST QUALITY link to video here:    https://rcpt.yousendit.com/1635710145/4f3418232716365290b05f14c2c28681

The Greens’ video shows the first-hand perspective of refugees, who flee because no  punishment by the Australian Government can match the horror asylum seekers flee  from.

“Najeeba and her family came to Australia by boat after their lives were threatened by  the Taliban. They felt they had no other option but to risk the dangerous journey” said  Senator Sarah Hanson-Young.

“By increasing the number of refugees Australia accepts and working with the United  Nations and our neighbouring countries, we can prevent refugees from feeling so  desperate they risk boarding a boat”.

Media Contact: Kelly Farrow 0427 604 760

