Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

ABC 24 Weekend Breakfast Subjects: asylum seekers, Julian Assange, Manufacturing Taskforce report, Liberal states  pressure a return to WorkChoices.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

18 August 2012

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: For more on the asylum debate and other issues, we are joined  from Canberra by Federal Trade Minister Craig Emerson. Craig Emerson, welcome.

CRAIG EMERSON: Good morning, Andrew.

GEOGHEGAN: Offshore processing centres are being prepared for reopening: there will be  some 1500 places at Nauru, 600 at Manus Island. Yet as we’ve just heard, around 450  people arrived this week alone. Once capacity has been reached, what then?

EMERSON: What we’re seeing, Andrew, is akin to a closing down sale. That is, the people  smugglers came to appreciate that the Parliament was serious, that there was a real prospect  of this impasse that has existed since the High Court decision was brought down being  broken — and in fact the impasse has been broken with the legislation being passed as you  showed in the preview package. And so obviously there’s a surge of people trying to get in  before that, but they will be going to Nauru or to Manus and we expect that this will provide  the sort of deterrence that Mr Houston and the others on that committee expect that it will too.  That’s what they’ve said in that report, that report has been embraced by the Government and  we’re implementing its recommendations.

GEOGHEGAN: But if those processing centres are filled to capacity, will that still provide a  deterrent?

EMERSON: Well, I think we’re getting very much into hypotheticals there. There has been a  surge because of the knowledge that the Parliament was likely to pass this and of course the  same sort of issues would have arisen. We’ve had the Opposition saying that Nauru worked  before — maybe it did, but it had run its course — and they are saying just pick up the phone  to the President of Nauru. Well I don’t think there is going to be an issue of more asylum  seekers arriving than there is capacity there. The Coalition remains confident that Nauru will  be capable of handling this, we are too. We have to stick to this principle, Andrew, and that is  no advantage in coming by boat. Everyone deserves a crack at being accepted as an asylum  seeker and if they are accepted a crack at being able to come to Australia without preference  to people arriving by boat and that’s the underlying principle here.

GEOGHEGAN: What’s the feeling in caucus about this decision, given it’s been months in the  making.Clearly you ruled it out initially, now we’re back at the beginning in a lot of ways.  What’s the feeling in caucus?

Page 1 of 4 ABC 24 Weekend Breakfast, transcript, 18 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trad...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120818_abc_news_24.html

EMERSON: Oh look, I think the feeling is frankly that so many people have died at sea and  many people have undertaken an emotional journey over this. That is, those people on the  progressive side of politics more generally who have supported onshore processing have  been more compassionate. Many of those have accepted that people dying at sea is hardly  compassionate, and so they have moved their view on this. We’ve always sought an effective  deterrence. We’ve had our doubts about Nauru on its own. We still believe that Malaysia is an  integral part of the regional solution, and that too is validated by the Houston report.  Nevertheless, what we’ve been able to get through Parliament at this stage is Nauru and  Manus and we’ll proceed with those.

GEOGHEGAN: So you are still pushing for the Malaysia people swap deal? Obviously we’ve  had a thousand refugees from Malaysia here already. The other side of the bargain is yet to  play out.

EMERSON: Well what we’re saying is that we’ve embraced in-principle all the  recommendations of the Houston report, and that is one of the key recommendations: that we  must have a regional solution to what is a regional problem. Nevertheless, the report also  suggested that we set up the facilities at Nauru and Manus without delay. Again, your preview  package has shown that that’s happening, and that too will have its effect, Andrew, in sending  a clear message not only to the people smugglers but to asylum seekers is that that is their  destination if they seek to come to Australia by boat, and further that they will be there at no  advantage in relation to other asylum seekers who are in refugee camps. That is, they will  have made the journey for no good reason. They’ve paid money and would be taking very big  risks because we have seen tragically so many people dying at sea.

GEOGHEGAN: Craig Emerson, let’s just move on to the issue of Julian Assange. Can you  confirm that consular assistance has been offered to him but not accepted?

EMERSON: Consular assistance is regularly offered, I can confirm that, to Mr Assange. We  always do that to all Australian citizens. All you can do is offer. I’m not aware of whether he’s  accepted or rejected those offers. The issue now is really a legal issue involving the United  Kingdom, Sweden, and Ecuador. Yes, he’s an Australian citizen, the role that we can play in  that is to offer consular assistance.

GEOGHEGAN: Declassified diplomatic cables revealed by Fairfax newspapers this morning  reveal that the Australian embassy identified a range of criminal charges that the US could  bring against Assange, is that correct?

EMERSON: Well what has happened there is that the embassy is doing its job, and that is  getting prepared for the possibility of an extradition but having no evidence — or certainly I  have seen no evidence — that the United States is actually preparing to do that. But you  would want as an embassy to be in a position that if this were to arise hypothetically in the  future, you wouldn’t be standing flat-footed and unable to provide advice back to the  Government in Canberra. So I wouldn’t read too much into it. People can attach their own  probabilities or possibilities as to what the United States may or may not do in the future, but  the fact is that there’s no evidence, no evidence that the United States is seeking to extradite  Julian Assange. If they were, they would be able to seek an extradition from the United  Kingdom where he now is, rather than waiting for him to go to Sweden. So obviously they  haven’t done that and the embassy is doing its job just to be in a position to advise the  Government if it believed that an extradition effort was imminent. There is no evidence of  such an extradition effort.

GEOGHEGAN: If it were, would the Australian Government object to the extradition?

Page 2 of 4 ABC 24 Weekend Breakfast, transcript, 18 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trad...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120818_abc_news_24.html

EMERSON: We would just use the normal processes that are involved. That is, there is an  extradition treaty involving the United Kingdom with the United States, as I understand it;  there’s an extradition treaty involving Sweden with the United States. We would obviously  continue to do what we do for all Australian citizens and that is to provide consular  assistance. But I think we are getting a little bit into the world of hypotheticals because as I

keep saying Andrew, there is no evidence that the United States is seeking the extradition of  Mr Julian Assange, we aren’t aware of that, all that was happening is that the Post in  Washington was doing some contingency planning in the event that such an eventuality  arose.

GEOGHEGAN: All right, but you’re saying that the Australian Government has no role to play  currently in that stand-off between Ecuador and the UK?

EMERSON: That’s right: between the UK and Ecuador, this is a matter between those two  countries. The UK has said it’s sought to negotiate a result here but remember that this issue  about Mr Assange between the UK and Sweden is not in relation to Wikileaks, it’s in relation  to allegations of something that he may or may not have done in Sweden itself and that’s up  to the legal authorities in those countries. The legal processes have been followed, Andrew,  and given that they have been followed there’s no particular role for Australia beyond  ensuring that Mr Assange has reasonable consular assistance and that’s what we’re offering.

GEOGHEGAN: Craig Emerson, let’s just move on to the Government’s Manufacturing  Taskforce, it released its recommendations this week. Which key recommendations are you  going to enact?

EMERSON: Well we’ve agreed in-principle to most of those recommendations.  Fundamentally, Andrew, we believe that the future of manufacturing lies in production for  exports, in what are called value chains. If we can participate in the enormous growth and  opportunity that’s being presented by the Asian Century then we’re producing not just for a  small domestic market, but for the massive markets of the region. By 2030 there’ll be 3 billion  middle-class customers in Asia: that’s a fantastic market and we need to ensure that our  manufacturing sector is well-positioned to compete in those markets. Sometimes that might  mean producing components of finished products rather than producing all of the finished  products, that’s the idea of the value-chains. And then you get services wrapped around  those, whether they be legal services or research and development, we think that’s a very  important avenue for the expansion of manufacturing which is under a lot of pressure at the  moment.

GEOGHEGAN: Well clearly because… well, one of the reasons is because of the high  Australian dollar. The former Treasury Secretary Ken Henry has told manufacturers that they  should not expect a respite from the dollar and that they should adapt their business models,  including by shifting more production to Asia. Do you agree?

EMERSON: Well that’s what I’m talking about with the value chains, but shifting production  doesn’t necessarily mean shifting jobs. We can still participate in those value-adding  exercises here in Australia with our manufacturing, but where it does involve becoming more  competitive through cost reductions through some parts of the manufacturing chain, well  that’s a smart thing to do. And what Ken Henry is pointing out is that the value of the dollar  that is set in the market is actually a vote of confidence in the Australian economy with a  record pipeline of investment, we’ve got investment at 40-year highs; we’ve got inflation at 13-year lows; we’ve got unemployment coming down; we’ve got a Reserve Bank cash rate at  nearly half that which we inherited. So all of these are very good indications for the future, and  indeed productivity growth has started to pick up and this has been a point that we have been  making for more than a decade. Industry itself has been saying they’d like to see productivity  growth picking up — well, it is. So these are all good developments, but I tell you that a bad

Page 3 of 4 ABC 24 Weekend Breakfast, transcript, 18 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trad...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120818_abc_news_24.html

development would be to go back to the bad old days of industrial relations tension and  confrontation and that’s actually what state premiers and industrial relations ministers are now  advising Tony Abbott, that they if they were to get into power would again revisit the old  WorkChoices — maybe it’s better known as ‘NoChoices’ because that’s what they want to do,  to deny working Australians any choice.

GEOGHEGAN: Craig Emerson, thanks very much.

EMERSON: Okay, thanks Andrew.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 4 of 4 ABC 24 Weekend Breakfast, transcript, 18 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trad...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120818_abc_news_24.html

