

Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister  for Foreign Affairs and Trade  Julie Bishop

Sky News PM Agenda David Speers

18 December 2012

Subjects: Cuts to foreign aid budget, asylum seeker policy, Kevin Rudd Gangnam Style

E&OE…

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop joins me now. Thanks for your time.

Just on this issue, you say that it’s absolute nonsense for the Foreign Minister to say that this isn’t a  cut from the aid budget. Is he right though in saying this is technically within the foreign aid  guidelines?

JULIE BISHOP Good afternoon David.

It doesn’t matter how Bob Carr tries to justify it on technical grounds the fact is that our foreign aid  budget is meant to be for overseas development assistance. This funding will not be spent overseas  and it will not be spent on development assistance. In fact the Gillard Government has now made  itself the third largest recipient of foreign aid. Indonesia is the largest recipient, then Papua New  Guinea and third the Gillard Government.

This decision is bad on so many fronts. Not only have they cut the foreign aid budget, it’s the manner  in which they tried to do it - sneak it out before Christmas so that no one would notice. They were  caught out by Channel 10 and then had to come up with this excuse that they’re going to redirect the  money to their border protection policies. Well that just highlights what an absolute and utter failure  their border protection policies have been, because there’s already been a $6.5 billion blowout and  now they’re going to take $375 million dollars from the overseas development assistance fund to  shore up their failings in border protection.

DAVID SPEERS The Government’s argument is that this money is still going to be spent on needy  people, asylum seekers, food and clothing. Just because they’re in Australia rather than in another  country doesn’t make a difference.

JULIE BISHOP That is a false argument. There are needy people in Australia, there are needy people  in Indigenous communities. What the Government is doing is spending more money on its failed  border protection policies in Australia than it’s spending on source countries in Afghanistan, Pakistan,  Iraq, Sri Lanka.

And this is doing enormous damage to our international reputation. The Government committed to  increasing the foreign aid budget, that is, overseas development assistance, as a key plank of its bid  to win a seat on the UN Security Council and just weeks away from Australia taking up that seat it’s  junked its promise to increase the aid budget.

So not only can the Australian people not trust Julia Gillard, neither can countries overseas.

DAVID SPEERS So if it is so terrible, will the Coalition restore this $375 million to the foreign aid  budget?

JULIE BISHOP David, what this shows is that the budget is in crisis. It shows that the people  smugglers have more control over the budget than the Labor Government. What we will have to do,  should we be honoured by the Australian people to win Government, is have a look at the state of the  books. Clearly the budget is in crisis, clearly this is an act of a desperate Government and we’ll need  to see the state of the national accounts before we can determine what priorities we’ll be able to  embrace.

DAVID SPEERS So, you may not reverse this?

JULIE BISHOP Well David, it’s $375 million dollars, it’s the third largest amount of foreign aid in our  overall budget. It goes to show that the budget is in crisis. Julia Gillard and Wayne Swan have  promised on at least 150 occasions that they will return a budget surplus. They haven’t done so to  date. They’ve driven the budget into record levels of deficit. We’ve now got a record level of gross  debt and now we need to see the books of account before we can determine what we’ll be able to  fund.

But I can tell you this, by taking $375 million out of the foreign aid budget and not redirecting it to  schools, hospitals in Australia, but to their failed border protection policies, that means that the budget  is in utter disarray.

DAVID SPEERS Can I turn to what the Chief of the Defence Force has now had to say about your  policy to turn back boats to Indonesia. General Hurley says that while it is a question for the  Government of the day, it’s quote “in itself not a solution. The people smugglers will change  techniques and come up with a counter”. What’s your response to that?

JULIE BISHOP The Coalition has never claimed that, in itself, turning back the boats where it’s safe  to do so is the solution. We didn’t do that under the Howard Government and that’s not the Coalition’s  policy. It’s part of a range of measures that we will put in place to dismantle the people smuggling  trade. And we’ve been advocating this for five years, ever since the Rudd/Gillard Government  unpicked the measures that were in place that worked.

In fact when we left office in November 2007 there were just four people who had arrived by boat in  our detention network. We’ve now seen 30,000 or more people arrive. So General Hurley is right  when he says of itself it won’t stop the boats, it’s got to be part of a suite of measures and that’s what  we’ll put in place. We’ve done it before, we’ll do it again.

DAVID SPEERS But on his argument, the people smugglers will come up with a counter, again he  says, “they will watch what we do and then respond”. He spoke about them making emergency phone  calls to avoid being turned back. He does clearly have an argument here that it may not work.

JULIE BISHOP David, this is a battle between the people smugglers and the Gillard Government and  currently the people smugglers are winning because the Government doesn’t have the resolve, they  don’t have the will to implement policies that work. The Coalition does, we’ve demonstrated that in the  past and we’ll demonstrate it again. And I note that Angus Houston no less has said that it is  physically possible to turn back boats where it’s safe to do so and General Hurley has confirmed that  he will of course do his job to implement Government policy.

DAVID SPEERS So you’re not arguing that it will actually have an impact in stopping boats.

JULIE BISHOP David we have never said that of itself it will be the entire solution. This will be a  significant battle with the people smugglers but the Coalition has the resolve to win. The Government  does not, as has been evident by its massive policy failings. I would suggest that border protection  has been the greatest policy failure in a generation.

DAVID SPEERS Now, Julie Bishop I want to finish on a somewhat lighter note. It is the silly season of  course. A couple of weeks ago we saw the PM doing a mock video for Triple J about the end of the  world. Now Kevin Rudd has, perhaps in a case of one upmanship or one downmanship whichever

way you look at it, he’s gone all Gangnam Style on breakfast TV. Have a look in case you haven’t  caught it.

Sunrise clip

DAVID SPEERS Now Julie Bishop, I’ve been trying to think of a clever question for you on this one  but I’m lost. What do you think about that?

JULIE BISHOP Kevin shows that he does have a certain sense of rhythm - the arm movements were  somewhat akin to Psy, the South Korean pop culture guru, but the leg movements weren’t quite there.

What you have to say David, is that Kevin Rudd is the master of timing of his media appearances, so  as to upstage the Prime Minister, given this is Julia Gillard’s first day of leave. But the real story here  is about Julia Gillard’s leadership. Kevin Rudd is clearly trying to draw attention to himself so that he  can position himself to challenge Julia Gillard for the leadership.

My word of advice to Kevin is I think he’s going to have to stand in line. You see, Bob Carr’s been  undermining the Prime Minister on that key UN vote, he’s been boasting that he’s got 90 per cent of  the Caucus. So there’s a menagerie of people lining up for the Labor leadership as we go into 2013.

DAVID SPEERS I don’t think Bob Carr’s got the dance moves like Kevin Rudd unfortunately.

JULIE BISHOP Let’s hope we don’t find out.

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop thank you for your commentary on Kevin’s dance moves. We wish you  a happy Christmas as well. Thanks for all of your contributions through the year.

JULIE BISHOP Same to you and your viewers.

- Ends



