Minister for Defence - Interview with David Speers, Sky News

10 July 2012

TRANSCRIPT: INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS, SKY NEWS

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 10 JULY 2012

TOPICS: DLA Piper; turning back the boats.

DAVID SPEERS: Defence Minister Stephen Smith joins me now ahead of tonight’s Community

Cabinet meeting which is happening at a high school in Brisbane. Minister, thanks for joining

us. Can I start by asking how much of this have you read- how much of this report have you

read- and have the contents shocked you?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well I have, as you’d expect, gone very carefully through this first report.

I’d previously released a redacted version of the Executive Summary. We’ve seen recently,

without my objection, the release of the Executive Summary itself, and today I’ve released all

of the first report including some supplementary materials that I received in April, subject to

some redaction, consistent with federal information legislation to protect personal privacy and

the like. I’ve read this very carefully, but more importantly I’ve also received now the final

version or the final report from DLA Piper, and it’s that document which is now being very

carefully considered by me in particular but also I’m getting assistance from the Attorney-General.

I’ve released this material now so that people fully understand the sensitive, the serious

nature of what we’re dealing with, and also the complexity so that people fully appreciate the

challenges that lay ahead so far as the Government is concerned in dealing with these

matters.

DAVID SPEERS: I’m just trying to get to your personal reaction to this though. You said

you’ve gone through this in detail. There’s some pretty shocking stuff there.

STEPHEN SMITH: There is shocking stuff in it, and I said earlier today that people will be

shocked by it. It doesn’t make for good or for pleasant reading, but I do make the point I’ve

made before; at this stage these are allegations, they are regarded or described as some

over 700 plausible allegations, so they have to be treated seriously, but allegations against

people of course need to be tested and people need to be given a proper opportunity of

responding to or rebutting those allegations. So they are allegations, but in the aftermath of

the ADFA Skype scandal- with the tremendous publicity attached to that- and with the

volume and the number of complaints that came to my office, came to the media, came to

Defence itself I established this process, and we’re now working our way carefully to its

conclusion.

DAVID SPEERS: But this is more than just allegations against the individuals involved. This

goes to the leadership of ADFA, or indeed, Defence, because it talks about no action being

taken against alleged rapes, 24 alleged rapes at ADFA. That would be potentially criminal

negligence wouldn’t it?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well I think there are a number of issues. Firstly, we have to be careful

about how we proceed in the face of allegations, and that’s what we’re doing. Secondly, in

addition to over 700 plausible allegations which need to be considered, there are systemic

issues here that have to be also carefully considered. The Pathways to Change document

which the Chief of the Defence Force and the Secretary of the Department put out earlier this

year in response to a range of reviews that I instituted makes a very frank acknowledgement

that in the past there has been, regrettably, a failure to meet modern day community

standards.

But there’s also been, regrettably in the past, something of a failure of the system to not

respond appropriately to allegations or complaints, to turn a blind eye. So we have to

examine not just the individual allegations, but also whether any complaints that came

forward were dealt with properly or appropriately. It’s not just the allegation or the complaint

that is made, it is how the system responds to that. And that was, if you like, very much at

the centre of the so called ADFA Skype issue; it was not just the complaint that was made, it

was how the system responded to that complaint.

DAVID SPEERS: Well it’s, as I say, it’s not just those alleged individuals allegedly involved but

others as well. But in relation to those individuals the report does say that some of them

could now be in middle and senior ranks in the ADF. What’s the urgency on this, on

identifying those who may still be in potentially senior positions in defence?

STEPHEN SMITH: Could is a possibility, and I have, as has the Chief of Defence Force,

acknowledged in recent times that is a possibility. But again, if there are people in the system

against whom allegations have been made, they’re entitled to put a view, they’re entitled to a

fair process. But as the Chief of the Defence Force has made clear when he responded to

these matters earlier this year, if people have done the wrong thing they will be brought to

justice.

Now, that may well be justice through the civil criminal process, it may well be justice

through the military process, or it may well be through a separate or different legal or judicial

mechanism including the potential of a Royal Commission. And if people are in the system

and they are found to have engaged in wrongdoing, whether that wrongdoing was against

another member of the ADF or whether that wrongdoing was the turning of a blind eye, then

they will be dealt with, but they’ll be dealt with through the prism of the Pathways to Change

document which the Secretary of the Department and the Chief of the Defence Force signed

up to- it’s their document- earlier this year. And that essentially says there has to be in the

modern day a zero tolerance to bad behaviour, and a zero tolerance to turning a blind eye

when complaints are made by members of the Australian Defence Force.

DAVID SPEERS: Can I ask you though, this isn’t just about past issues. The DLA Piper review

did find a document on the ADFA website called Lego Lingo; it was full of sexist and racist

lingo. It’s now been taken down, but the fact that this was there when they began their

inquiry, how does that reflect on the leadership at ADFA?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well it doesn’t reflect well. There’s no point beating about the bush in that

respect. But one of the inquiries or reviews that I instituted in the aftermath of the ADFA

scandal was not just this external reference to the independent law firm DLA Piper, it was

also the use of social media, including the use of Facebook; including the use of digital and

modern media. And people are now growing to understand-

DAVID SPEERS: But on the leadership at ADFA, do you have confidence in Commandant

Bruce Kafer who has been reinstated there at the helm?

STEPHEN SMITH: Well I have confidence in the Chief of the Defence Force, and the Vice Chief

of the Defence Force who are in the chain of command to whom Commandant Kafer is

responsible to. Now I’m not going to retread over old ground. I made my view-

DAVID SPEERS: But this isn’t old ground. You have been critical of him in the past, and now

you’re agreeing this finding that there was a document full of sexist and racist lingo doesn’t

reflect well on the leadership at ADFA. Is this a further blow to Commandant Kafer?

STEPHEN SMITH: I don’t characterise or categorise it in that way. The fact that is was there

was unfortunate, and I’m not proposing to do anything other than say that it was regrettable,

it shouldn’t have occurred, it shouldn’t have appeared. I made my view clear about the way

in which ADFA and Commandant Kafer responded to the so-called ADFA Skype issue. And I

have not taken and won’t take a backward step so far as that is concerned. But we’re dealing

here with separate issues, and there is nothing I have seen which would cause me other than

to proceed on the basis that the Chief of the Defence Force, the Vice Chief of the Defence

Force exercising their chain of command and chain of control authority are ensuring that

ADFA is managed well and is attentive to, and attune to these difficulties which aren’t just

addressed to ADFA, they are addressed to all of the ADF.

And the Sex Discrimination Commissioner’s report, Ms Broderick’s report which deals with

ADFA essentially says that there have been substantial improvements made in the

management of ADFA on these cultural issues, but that more work and more progress needs

to be done. Now, we’re yet to see her final report into all of the Australian Defence Force, but

my instinct is that I expect that she will say much the same thing about the Defence Force

generally, that in the past there has been inappropriate or bad treatment of women within

the system. That has improved, but we’re not at the end of that journey.

DAVID SPEERS: Minister, just a final question if I can on a completely separate matter. You

and other Ministers have been ramping up criticism of Tony Abbott over his plan to turn back

the boats. You today suggested he was not fit for office because of this plan. In the past

though, both Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard have commented in favourable terms about what

the Howard Government did in turning back the boats.

STEPHEN SMITH: Well, the Howard Government instructed the Navy to turn back the boats in

a limited number of occasions during a limited period between effectively 2001 and 2003. The

current Chief of Navy, Vice Admiral Griggs was engaged in that process, and he’s given

evidence of Senate Estimates which refers to one successful exercise he was engaged in and

an unsuccessful exercise. It has become crystal clear that from a small number of boats that

were turned back to Indonesia, that the people smugglers no effectively people on board to

disable the boat, and so you immediately go to essentially a rescue situation. It’s that rescue

situation which places not just asylum seekers at risk, but places maybe personnel at risk,

and the qualitative difference in the last few days has been I think, two things: Firstly, Tony

Abbott refusing to have the courage to look the President of Indonesia in the eye when he

met him in Indonesia and tell him face-to-face, person-to-person that this was his policy.

And secondly, his bald-faced admission that this was a dangerous practice, but that Navy and

Navy personnel could effectively cop that. Now to my mind, that is irresponsible. To my mind,

that doesn’t show the necessary judgement required of a person to be the Prime Minister of

this country. He’s running for the Office of Prime Minister, he should have had the courage to

say to President Yudhoyono face-to-face, this is my policy and suffer the consequences so far

as Indonesian diplomacy was concerned. And he shouldn’t simply turn a blind eye to the fact

that the current Chief of Navy, the former Chief of the Defence Force, Admiral Barrie, have all

said that to engage in this practice is to put personnel, to put Australian Defence Force

personnel at risk. He’s doing that knowingly- that is irresponsible. To my mind, that renders

him not a fit and proper person to discharge the high office of Prime Minister.

DAVID SPEERS: Right, Defence Minister Stephen Smith. We’ll let you go and good luck with

that Community Cabinet meeting that’s going to take place in the school hall there behind

you. Thanks for joining us this afternoon.

STEPHEN SMITH: Thanks David. Thanks very much.



