Chris Bowen MP  Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Houston Report, James Shore  Wednesday, 15 August 2012

Interview with Howard Sattler, 6PR

Howard Sattler: Joining me now is Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen. Hello Chris.

Chris Bowen: G'day Howard, how are you?

Sattler: So you'd agree the backflip is almost complete?

Bowen: Well I wouldn't put it that way -

Sattler: I know you want to say compromise, but it is a backflip.

Bowen: Well it's a compromise. Yes, it is a compromise because the government's  changed its position in order to get something done. This report didn't repudiate or  endorse either party's approach in its entirety - it didn't say the government has got  everything right, it's perfect; it didn't say the Opposition is either. They suggested a  new way forward which is partly based on Nauru and PNG, with a slightly -

Sattler: Largely based on them.

Bowen: Well, 22 recommendations Howard, of which one is Nauru and PNG; it's a  big one. Twenty-two recommendations about working more in the region, including,  and the most important underlying theme is an important one that I think I've spoken  to you about in the past, 'no advantage' - 'no advantage' for coming to Australia by  boat.

Under the old Nauru model there was still an advantage: you got processed as a  refugee on Nauru and then brought to Australia. Now what we're doing here is  saying we'll develop a model of how long it would have taken you to get to Australia  if you'd waited in Jakarta or Kuala Lumpur, and if you're a refugee you'd wait that  long in Nauru or PNG before we'll bring you into Australia.

Sattler: Chris, why did it take - why did it take this committee to recommend that to  you to do it? It was staring you in the face all along.

Bowen: Well we needed a breakthrough. The committee also said, for example, that  Malaysia's important and should be progressed -

Sattler: Not yet, it's been put on the backburner -

Bowen: It's said it's vital, it should be progressed; the report has suggested a way to  do that to cater for further protections. As I say, the report, you know, anybody could  come in and pick parts out of the report -

Sattler: I don't understand why you can't eat humble pie on this and say, 'Yeah, we  got it wrong?'

Bowen: Well this is not about being right or wrong, this is about suggesting a way  forward which the government has accepted in its entirety -

Sattler: But you, I know, tried to get this through the Cabinet a year ago, didn't you?

Bowen: I have said for a long time we needed a compromise with the Opposition -

Sattler: And you got rolled.

Bowen: No, we offered the Opposition a compromise last year -

Sattler: But you got rolled in the Cabinet; you did, you, Chris Bowen, got rolled.

Bowen: Well I don't talk about what happens in Cabinet meetings Howard -

Sattler: That's an easy way out, but I know you -

Bowen: That also happens to be the law of the land; I don't talk about what happens  in Cabinet meetings. But the situation is, for a long time publicly and privately I've  said, 'Look, we've got to get this sorted, we've got to get a compromise with  Opposition'. That's why last year we offered opening a detention centre on Nauru:  that still wasn't good enough. So -

Sattler: Cause you still include the Malaysia solution.

Bowen: Yes, and I could come on here and I could crow and point out and say,  'Look, we -

Sattler: Well you -

Bowen: Well hang on -

Sattler: You can hardly crow, what are you going to crow about?

Bowen: If you'd let me finish the sentence Howard, I could point out that the report  does not recommend temporary protection visas because they don't work, I could  point out that it says 'turn back the boats' is unworkable. I could point all those things  out, but it's actually a good day today Howard. We're talking about a good thing, the  Parliament actually passed a law today - well the House of Representatives has and  I hope the Senate does tomorrow - to allow offshore processing, and it's common  sense because both political parties actually agree with it and it should have  happened months ago.

Sattler: Now those clowns you're in some sort of a coalition with, the Greens, don't  agree with it.

Bowen: No they don't, they're wrong. They're wrong, they're naïve, they think that  somehow you don't need offshore processing. I respect that they believe that and  they're wrong about that in my very strong view.

Sattler: Ok, but look, if we'd done this a year ago when you wanted to do it, how  many lives might have been saved?

Bowen: Well I could also point out if we'd implemented the Malaysia agreement a  year ago when we wanted to do it we could have saved lives, Howard. We could all  make our arguments about that. I've argued for a long time that offshore processing  saves lives, you've got to do it right -

Sattler: So politicians of both sides, what you're saying, have blood on their hands,  both of you?

Bowen: What I'm saying - I wish the Parliament sorted this out a long time ago. I'm  glad the government today got the legislation through that I wanted through last year.

Sattler: The Parliament got it through, you can't claim total - I know it's your  legislation, but -

Bowen: No, absolutely, the Parliament passed the government's legislation today,  absolutely, and you know, credit where it's due, the Opposition voted for it today and  we worked together on amendments to make sure that they could vote for it, fair  enough. I just wish it had happened a long time ago.

Sattler: Chris Evans' got a bit to answer for here too, doesn't he, because he four  years ago decided to pull apart the whole Pacific Solution and he barred Nauru?

Bowen: Well look, I could - we could argue about what worked in the past and what  didn't, we can argue about how much push and pull factors are important. I said all  along if you have proper regional processing in place - and it's got to be proper  regional processing, not just Christmas Island further away, but a proper model.  Increasing your intake is important, you've got to show people there's a better way  than coming on a boat, that if you work through the UNHCR and the government you  do stand a chance if you don't get on the boat. You've got to do all those things, just  simply saying, 'Well what worked ten years ago would work again' - the Panel  expressly says that's not right.

Sattler: Ok, right, now, what about Indonesia? They've got to step up to the mark a  bit here too, don't they, because I know and you know there are still local officials  there taking a kick-back to allow these boats to leave.

Bowen: We do a lot of work with -

Sattler: You know that.

Bowen: Well there is corruption in the world, yes, I don't think that's news -

Sattler: But they haven't done much about that.

Bowen: Well no, I've got to disagree with you there. We work very closely with  Indonesia, we work very, very closely with Indonesia. We do disrupt a lot of vessels  out of Indonesia. It's a very large archipelago, there's hundreds of islands that boats  can leave from and its hard work, but we do work with them.

You've got to remember these aren't Indonesians leaving Indonesia's shores, these  are people who come through Indonesia to get to Australia. So Indonesia is actually  just the most visible part of a chain, but all through the chain we've got to work with  countries. That's why we -

Sattler: But their officials see them leave and their officials stand on the beach and  take kick-backs.

Bowen: Well there are a lot of good officials that we work with, that work with us  stopping boats leaving as well - a lot of very good officials and a lot of good work  done.

Sattler: Now what happens now to the facilities in Australia, the most recently  opened was at Northam, that happened only in June. It cost about, I think, $135  million. What happens to that?

Bowen: Well we're not ready to close anything down yet Howard -

Sattler: No, but -

Bowen: We've got a long way to go yet, and if we're starting to close detention  centres in Australia that's a good thing. But we're a long way from that yet.

Sattler: But what happens to the people who work there for a start?

Bowen: Well I'll make further announcements, but I'm not about to announce closing  any detention centre in Australia, there is still a long way yet. You know, people  smugglers are going to be out there as we speak telling lies -

Sattler: You've said that from now on in, anybody who comes via the boats is going  to be sent -

Bowen: No -

Sattler: - within four weeks I think you said -

Bowen: No, no, let's be clear, what I've said is that anybody who arrives in Australia  from the day of the announcement runs the risk of being sent to Nauru or PNG. It's  going to -

Sattler: Are they going to be sent there or not?

Bowen: Well we've got to strike an agreement with Nauru and PNG, but this is not  yet the law of the land, it's got to pass the Senate -

Sattler: No, are we talking weeks or months?

Bowen: Well we're working as hard as we can to get this up and running -

Sattler: No, but in six months you would hope to get it up and running?

Bowen: Well look, absolutely. We're working very hard here Howard to get the  facilities in Nauru and PNG up as quickly as we can.

Sattler: Ok, so what happens in six months to Yongah Hill at Northam?

Bowen: Well I'll make further announcements about detention centres - we've got a  lot of them across the country - and which ones we would be dealing with in terms of  keeping them going or not keeping them going.

Sattler: Ok, on another sort of related matter because it has to do with immigration,  a bloke called James Shore, heard about him?

Bowen: I know the case very well.

Sattler: Good, you should, I'm glad you do, I'm glad it's been brought to your  attention.

Bowen: And I've decided I can tell you there's - I've had a look at the case and -

Sattler: This is the young, British ex-serviceman -

Bowen: That's right.

Sattler: - served two tours in Iraq, one in Afghanistan, comes to Australia with his  mum on a holiday, his mum lives here, she's a permanent resident -

Bowen: Yes.

Sattler: - he wants to stay, Immigration Department says no he can't.

Bowen: Yes, let me explain the process here and then I can give you an update. So  the Department of Immigration looks at all - you know, a million applications a year,  and applies the law. They don't have much discretion -

Sattler: No they don't, they don't have enough.

Bowen: No, well, it's important that, you know, departmental officers apply the law,  they look at the law and apply the law. And sometimes there's very common sense  cases which just don't meet the legal test, but its common sense that they be allowed  to stay. So in this case, Mr Shore is older than we would normally allow somebody to  sponsor a child in because -

Sattler: He's 23.

Bowen: That's right, normally you've got to be under 18. Now there's a process  called Ministerial Intervention which is where there's a common sense case which  doesn't comply with the law, the Minister is actually the only person who can waive  the law and grant a visa. And I actually get about 5000 personal requests a year  which I work through and decide yes or no on compassionate grounds or common  sense grounds.

I have decided to intervene in this case, and I will be granting Mr Shore a visa on the  grounds that he doesn't legally meet all the criteria but is clearly somebody who has  a lot to contribute to this nation and any common sense test he should be coming in,  and the paperwork for that is underway.

Sattler: Can I put his mum on?

Bowen: By all means.

Sattler: Toni Hughes joins us, stay on there Minister. Toni?

Toni Hughes: Hi.

Sattler: You hear that?

Hughes: Yeah I'm here.

Bowen: Sounds like we have a happy mum.

Sattler: Say hello to the Minister. Say what you want to say to her - say to him.

Hughes: Thank you, I just don't know what to say. I'd just like to thank Australia,  thank you for all the people who have got behind it. Howard, I love you, you're  amazing. Thank you to Facebook for putting the page up there and thank you to  everybody who has stood by us and I hope that this just helps other people who are  deserved - family people come over here and live a wonderful life and contribute to  the country like we do. Thank you so much.

Sattler: Minister?

Bowen: Well that's lovely and that's, if you like Howard, being Immigration Minister  is not the easiest job I've ever done, but it does have its good moments and you can  do good things for genuine people, and that's a very good thing.

Sattler: That's fantastic.

Hughes: Thank you so much, thank you.

Sattler: You hear the emotion there, Minister?

Bowen: I hear it a lot. I hear it in her voice and - I got a similar email the other day  from a Ministerial Intervention, it was actually somebody's mother and, you know,  you just - it's the best country in the world and lots of people want to come here and  its good when you can help good people who want to make a contribution -

Sattler: And he would contribute here and not be a liability, I can tell you that.

Bowen: Sorry?

Sattler: He will contribute.

Bowen: Sure, absolutely.

Sattler: Alright, thanks for your time.

Bowen: Good on you Howard.

Sattler: You've done good there.

Bowen: Thanks mate

