UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON NICOLA ROXON MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management



TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP - HOBART  - 15 OCTOBER 2012

TOPICS: NBN helping community legal centres, Slipper / Ashby matter,  Marriage Equality, Queensland Family Court matter, Jill Meagher case

E&OE ONLY

NICOLA ROXON:    Well thank you for that. Julie and I are happy to answer your  questions. We've just had a look around the legal centre and we're very pleased  as I said before that the Tasmanian Legal Centre in partnership with DLA Piper  is going to be providing services using and unleashing the benefit of the National  Broadband Network.

I think this is a great way to get people specialist legal advice, no matter where  they live. And it's part of our policy showing I think to the community that the  National Broadband Network will provide opportunities far beyond what people  have been talking about today - employment opportunities, the advice to get - the  ability to get advice on the line whether it's legal advice, or health advice, and of  course bringing specialists that might be anywhere around the country closer to  people who are living in Sorell or in Hobart, and of course providing some  professional development as well.

When we were doing our tour, that was one of the things that was really  emphasised, and also allows people working at this legal centre to share their  knowledge with others, and vice versa, to be able to get specialist advice and  support from others that might be on the mainland or here in Tasmania.

But Julie and I are happy to answer questions about this and other matters.

JOURNALIST: Okay.

I'm going to start with some comments from George Brandis - he wants all the  legal officers involved in the Ashby litigation present at the hearing tomorrow.  Will you allow all those people to go?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well look the Senate estimates process is an established  one. Everyone who needs to present Senate estimates will. But I think people  need to remember here that Mr Brandis wants to be the Attorney-General. He is  criticising the Government because he can see politics in this.



I'm a little surprised to learn that if Mr Brandis is going to be the Attorney-General  that he doesn't believe he should get legal advice, doesn't believe he should be  involved in the running of cases where the Commonwealth is the respondent, but  at the same time believes that the Commonwealth should release all its legal  advice, throwing out the window standards of legal professional privilege which I  think have been around since the 16th century.

So a little bit surprising - and to be honest, I think, purely political.

JOURNALIST:         So just to clarify will they be allowed to go?

NICOLA ROXON:    Absolutely, all of the officials who always present at Senate  estimates will be there tomorrow. I think that there are going to be constraints on  what people will provide. Legal professional privilege is one amongst a number  which will limit questioning on particular matters, and that is ordinary and par for  the course for any legal matter that the Government's involved with.

JOURNALIST:         Is James Ashby receiving any sort of financial assistance or  payments from the government at the moment do you think?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well we've been very public about the settlement that was  made with Mr Ashby. It was public. All of the details are on the record. That's  available for everyone to see. Obviously Mr Ashby like a number of other people

were employed by Mr Slipper when he was a Speaker, and like all people who  are employed by parliamentarians, if someone loses that office then the  employment of people who are working for someone in their office also  terminates.

My understanding is Mr Ashby, and any other staff employed by the Speaker will  terminate on 23 October, I think, is the advice we've received. So the normal I  think two week period that's provided.

JOURNALIST:         Given there's been some protests and self-harm incidents  on Nauru, should vulnerable asylum seekers be moved back to the mainland?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well I think any specific questions you would have to direct  to the Minister for Immigration. Obviously the Government is always very  concerned to make sure that people have the proper support that is needed. We  always assess carefully the circumstances that people are held in detention.

We do need to make sure that people understand that they do have available to  them medical services and others. And I know that Minister Bowen was very  conscious of making sure that they'd be available on Nauru as well.

But if there are particular matters they will have to be addressed to the Minister  who's responsible.

JOURNALIST:         But are you confident your Government's on solid legal  ground with the Nauru situation?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well, both Minister Bowen, myself, the Prime Minister have  been very open about the agreements that have been struck. We have  negotiated detailed arrangements with the Government of Nauru and also the  Government in Papua New Guinea. I think that any more detailed questions that  you want to ask about the particular circumstances will have to go to Minister  Bowen.

JOURNALIST:         The Tasmanian Upper House [indistinct] committee to look  at the constitutionality in same sex marriage legislation, state based. What would  be your advice to them?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well I'm not in the habit of giving advice to my state  colleagues, obviously state parliaments are in charge of their own work and are  able to inquire into any matters that they wish to.

So I really don't think it's for me to provide a running commentary on whether or  not any state house of parliament, upper or lower house, wants to make an  inquiry - that's clearly a matter for them.

JOURNALIST:         But would you as a Federal Government have to challenge  such a station in the High Court if it was successful?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well look, I think we've had a lot of hypotheticals, and as all  of you in the Tasmanian media would be well aware, this was a matter for the  Tasmanian Parliament, it wasn’t passed by the Tasmanian Parliament.  Throughout all that discussion we were asked whether we would intervene in a  High Court challenge on a piece of legislation that hadn't yet passed, nor had it  been challenged.

Again we will deal with those issues if and when they arise, there isn't currently a  piece of legislation that's been passed, there isn't a challenge on it, and the  Commonwealth doesn't make decisions about what would or wouldn't intervene  before there is even a case there, and those sort of hypothetical questions.

We've made quite clear from the Commonwealth's perspective what action we  believe should be taken.

We allowed there to be a conscience vote in the Parliament. Unlike our  Opposition. The Prime Minister and the party made a decision that people of  good conscience could have different views. In fact the Prime Minister and I

voted differently on this matter - and we've been quite open about the fact that  we should respect each other, and people who might hold different views on  these matters, and I hope that the debate if it continues in… at a state level or at  a Commonwealth level will continue to be conducted in an appropriate and  respectful way.

JOURNALIST:         But Opposition to the same sex marriage legislation, a lot of  it was based around the possibility of a High Court challenge.

Wouldn't it be better to be upfront and say well we will challenge or we wouldn't  worry about challenging…

NICOLA ROXON:    Well look, that might make a good story. But the truth is we  don't make decisions about what we will challenge, or not challenge, when there  hasn't even been legislation that's passed. There are a lot of contested  constitutional questions. And you know, the history of federation is littered with  states, and Commonwealth governments, having different views on constitutional

issues.

I don't think it really assists the debate for us to try to deal with some hypothetical  situation, the Commonwealth of course is in control of its own conduct here. We  did allow there to be a vote on same sex marriage, we in the Labor Party gave  people a free vote; those in the Opposition did not.

And of course history records that that was not passed by the Parliament.

JOURNALIST::        Were you monitoring the progress of that legislation  closely?

NICOLA ROXON:    Look, we keep an eye on legislation that is being debated  across the country. I don't think it will be accurate to say that we monitor every  minute of the debate on every piece of legislation that goes before different state  and territory parliaments, but of course we have an interest in this.

And we obviously would follow developments.

JOURNALIST:         So if it was to pass then, when would you make a decision  on taking it to the High Court?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well the - look, if the legislation hasn't passed it's been  projected by the Tasmanian Parliament. Obviously it's a matter for Tasmania if  they're going to inquire further into this. I feel very sure that there will be further  inquiries in [audio cuts out]…

…and that we could have a proper debate on an issue that is one where people  of good conscience have different opinions and then be able to see what the  result might be.

Until we have that opportunity, I don't think we're going to see a significant  change at the Commonwealth level. And obviously the Tasmanian Parliament  like any other parliament is the master of their own destiny.

JOURNALIST:         There's a family law conference on in Hobart today and the  experts are keen to see action against the Brisbane newspaper that printed  photos of the children involved in the Italian custody case. Will you take action?

NICOLA ROXON:    Yes, I spoke this morning at that conference and was asked  that question as well. We - I don't yet have any full advice from my department  about whether we are able to take that action.

I do have to tell you I take very seriously though any breaches by the media of  court orders. We are in a situation where there are certain constraints on what  could be reported about our courts, and particularly how we protect children.

And I want to compliment the media because I must say by and large those rules  are very strictly adhered to. They are not adhered to in all circumstances, and in  this particular instance, the Chief Justice of the Family Court has asked us to  consider whether or not action should be taken, and we absolutely will consider  that seriously. I don't yet have that detailed advice though, so I'm not able to  really make any projections about what action might be taken until I have that.

JOURNALIST:         There's been some recent attention on social media and  how that may prejudice a trial. Is that something that Government's ready to  move quickly on?

NICOLA ROXON:    Well I'm pleased that you asked about that. We just a week  had a meeting of state and Commonwealth Attorneys-General that dealt exactly  with this matter, the Victorian Attorneys particularly being concerned about it in  the wake of the very tragic alleged murder of Jill Meagher that's been covered

extensively in the media.

I do think there are some challenges for us with how quickly information is  available, and obviously comments that might be able to prejudice trials is  distributed, not just through the mainstream media, but through social media.

It is primarily a question of whether or not a trial might be jeopardized, whether it  might prejudice someone who is being charged with these particular crimes, and  because of that the states are very keen to take a lead.

Robert Clark, the Attorney in Victoria is going to convene that group which is  going to meet with both attorneys, [indistinct] the political level, the courts, but  also the industry players to see if there is some sort of protocol that can more  quickly be put in place.

A lot of the social media is very responsive to court orders. The question really is  if there's any action that could be taken more quickly before a court order might  be in place. And I'm certainly keen to lend the Commonwealth's weight to  exploring any sensible option which will help protect the integrity of the courts.

Anyone who's appalled by this sort of alleged murder, I'm sure wants to make  sure that anyone charged with that alleged murder is able to be brought to  justice.

And so comments that people might think are just expressing their views or  venting some passionate opinion can actually prejudice cases, and we do want  people to understand that they need to be careful and responsible. But it's part of  what we're dealing with, with the new media and I think we do need to look at  whether any changes are needed.

Thanks very much.

Ends.

For all media enquiries, please contact the Attorney-General’s Office on 02 6277  7300 or 0409 945 476



