Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

People smuggling, offshore processing,  Enterprise Migration Agreements  Tuesday, 5 June 2012

Interview with Lyndal Curtis, ABC News 24

Lyndal Curtis: Chris Bowen, welcome to ABC News 24.

Chris Bowen: Good morning, Lyndal.

Curtis: Four Corners last night alleged at least seven people smugglers have come  into Australia on two boats and been granted in a relatively short period of time  protection visas and Australian residency. A ringleader, Captain Emad, is said to  have come in on 13 January 2010 under the name Ali al Abassi with his daughter-in-law and her child. What are you doing about these allegations?

Bowen: Well, firstly, Lyndal, when we have somebody who's been granted refugee  status, if it can be established that that was based on wrong information, that they  provided wrong information, then that refugee status can be revoked. And there  have been instances in the past where that occurred.

Now, these were allegations aired last night. Obviously, I've asked my department  to examine those allegations and to assess whether there is a case to answer for  refugee status to be revoked in any particular instance.

Curtis: How long would that process take?

Bowen: Well, Lyndal, as I say, we've seen allegations; it's appropriate they be dealt  with appropriately and carefully. We are talking about serious allegations that must  be carefully assessed. But I don't have any tolerance at all for people gaining  refugee status based on false information. There have been instances in the past  where refugee status has been revoked - either the department doing it or me using  my personal powers - when information has come to light which wasn't at hand  when refugee status was granted. And of course, there are instances where that is  appropriate and there needs to be a proper examination of whether that's the case  in this instance.

Curtis: If Four Corners is right, Captain Emad, even if he's not a people smuggler,  is a businessman, he has business in Malaysia. His family also came out on asylum  seeker boats in 2009. If that's proved, they are not refugees, are they?

Bowen: Well, again, that's an allegation, Lyndal, an allegation made on a television  program which we take seriously. But of course, the Department of Immigration and  various review mechanisms look at a whole lot of information. Now, again, all the  information will be examined to see whether the information provided to the  department and assessed at the time was correct information and valid, and then

appropriate decisions can be made about whether there's a case to answer for  refugee status to be revoked in any instance.

Curtis: Four Corners says that the alleged people smugglers were granted refugee  visas in a short period of time: two to three months for those on the boat that came  in on 13 January 2010. Will you also be looking at whether that process was too  quick, whether the Federal Police should investigate and whether ASIO should look  at its own processes?

Bowen: Well, let's take this one step at a time, and I'll deal with each of those three  questions, Lyndal. Firstly, I must say, normally when I'm on the ABC I'm criticised  for the process taking too long or being too rigorous. We do have a rigorous  approach, which does mean that people are rejected for refugee status. The latest  figures are that around half of people are rejected at primary assessment for  refugee status.

In relation to ASIO, we do have ASIO doing assessments of people and we do have  people who are denied a permanent visa because of their links to people smuggling  and their people smuggling activity. Again, often on the ABC, I'm criticised for that  process being too rigorous. But I make no apologies for that.

Of course, in relation to those allegations made - and I'm not able to comment on  whether the AFP have had an interest in this individual in the past, that's entirely an  operational matter for the AFP which ministers can't comment upon - but what I can  say, the AFP have arrested 14 people smuggling organisers, which has resulted in  a number of seven-year sentences. So the AFP is very active here and of course if  there's evidence that the AFP can look at, then they will be looking at it.

Curtis: Because Four Corners has alleged that these alleged people smugglers are  operating not only in Australia, but in Canberra, relatively close to Parliament  House, your own department and the AFP. Have they slipped through the net?

Bowen: Well, I'm not able to comment, Lyndal, as I say, whether the AFP was  already investigating this individual. I just can't comment on whether that's the case  or not. But clearly, the AFP and my department and ASIO examine a whole range  of information that they have about individuals, and they'll examine information  which has come to hand as a result of the program last night because I have zero  tolerance for people providing wrong information to any government agency. From  time to time, information is brought to our attention and from time to time, refugee  status can be and has been revoked.

Curtis: What does it say about the refugee system if your government has allowed  people smugglers to come into Australia, granted them refugee visas, even given  them public housing and allowed them to continue their business?

Bowen: Well, again, Lyndal, we have an allegation aired on a television program  last night. It was a serious allegation around a small number of people, but a  serious allegation. Now, I thought last night's program was actually a pretty  powerful argument for offshore processing; it talked about the dangers of travel at  sea. One of the things I've put the case for consistently - it talked about the  difficulties of assessing refugee claims - I've consistently put the case that it would  be much better to have people processed offshore and referred to Australia by the  UNHCR where all these matters can be assessed, not onshore. And I think, as I  say, that last night was a powerful argument for offshore processing.

As I say, Lyndal, I'm often criticised, particularly on the ABC, for having too rigorous  a process in place, for having too many checks, and for the process taking too long.  I thought, again, last night's episode was an exposition as to why we have these  rigorous checks in place. If somebody has gotten through that net, then that is  something that can be rectified and will be rectified.

Curtis: The reporter who did the story, Sarah Ferguson, also said yesterday, while  it was not included in the program, that the wife of one of the alleged people  smugglers in Sydney works in your department. Will you be investigating that?

Bowen: Yes, I saw that suggestion. Again, it wasn't on the program. That was a  suggestion that was made in the media yesterday for the first time and of course its  veracity will be checked.

Curtis: Labor was scathing when the Howard Government alleged terrorists could  be brought into Australia on asylum seeker boats. If Four Corners is true, doesn't  that mean criminals are coming in?

Bowen: Well, an allegation's been made that a people smuggler has come in as an  asylum seeker. Again, Lyndal, I stress we have people who are rejected for refugee  status, many people, and of course their claims don't stack up. And sometimes  we're criticised for them seeking to return those people to the country from whence  they've come. But that's an important part of our refugee status assessment.

And again, we have people in detention because they're regarded as risks to  national security, either through people smuggling activities or through other  activities. Again, we're sometimes criticised for that, but I think it shows some of the  complexities that we're dealing with here and some of the challenges of dealing  with onshore arrivals. And it again shows why offshore processing is a preferred  way forward.

Curtis: The immigration system is only as strong and accepted by the population if  people have confidence in it. Doesn't this instance potentially taint that confidence?

Bowen: Well, I think people are right to be concerned about the integrity of our  immigration system, of course they are. I am as well, concerned to make sure our  immigration system is as robust as possible. I think there's a number of elements  that go to public confidence in immigration. Yes, I think that offshore processing and  a more orderly process is important in terms of improving public confidence in  immigration. I also think that some of the irresponsible claims we've seen made by  some politicians about the numbers involved and about some of the risks involved  are sometimes unfortunate and do go to public confidence. I think that there's a  range of elements involved.

One of my roles is to obviously talk about the benefits of a strong migration policy,  whether it be skilled or humanitarian or family reunion, that's something I do ad  nauseum. And they're always complex issues involved. And yes, when there's  allegations made, they need to be dealt with seriously, just as we're dealing  seriously with the allegations made last night on Four Corners.

Curtis: We'll come to skilled migration in a moment. But when Labor came to  power, you effectively dismantled the offshore processing system. You've been  retrofitting it ever since then. You haven't been able to get the new system you want  operating. At what point do you say that if you really want to stop the people

smuggling trade, stop people dying while they make that journey to Australia, that  you have to accept that whatever you think of the Howard Government's solution, at  least it stopped the boats coming?

Bowen: Well, we've already said that we would open a detention centre at Nauru,  not an easy decision for the government to make. But we said that as a matter of  good faith and we wrote to the Leader of the Opposition and said, 'Let's get  together, you agree with offshore processing, we agree with offshore processing,  and as a part of that regime, we will open a detention centre at Nauru, but we need  the legislation passed.' That's been rejected out of hand by the Opposition.

Curtis: But, so at what point do you say you are not going to get the Malaysia  solution and Nauru and Manus Island, which is the package you want, through the  Parliament, so you accept that you can have processing on Nauru and Manus  Island and then maybe look at reintroducing what the Opposition wants, which is  temporary protection visas? If that stops the boats, then it means there won't be  that many people on temporary protection visas because they won't be coming to  Australia.

Bowen: Well, again, Lyndal, we need to be able to justify policy decisions we  make. I could not justify saying we'll open a detention centre at Nauru, for which  people will then be settled in Australia after they've been found to be refugees,  which was the case under the Howard Government. We offered an independent  inquiry into temporary protection visas. We pointed out the number of people  arriving by boat went up after the introduction of temporary protection visas, but that  we were happy to have an independent inquiry with the personnel jointly chosen  between the government and the Opposition and the terms of reference jointly  chosen between the government and the Opposition.

Curtis: But you have not been able to make that happen, have you?

Bowen: Well, you're right to say that the Opposition has rejected working with the  government to implement offshore processing, and that is correct. That means as  we move to implement offshore processing, we do so with zero assistance from the  Opposition, unlike John Howard, who needed the assistance of Kim Beazley. I  mean, it's all very well for Mr Abbott to say, 'We're not the government.' When John  Howard went to Kim Beazley and said, 'I can't introduce offshore processing without  your support in the Senate', Kim Beazley provided that support, even though he  didn't agree with every element of the government's policies. What that shows is  that Kim Beazley was more prepared to act in the national interest and to do the  right thing than Tony Abbott is.

Curtis: If we could go now to the approval of an Enterprise Migration Agreement at  Gina Rinehart's Roy Hill mine, you said you told the Prime Minister's office, gave  them a full briefing - the agreement was about to be signed - on the Tuesday before  it was signed. What consultations were held with the government before that?

Bowen: Lyndal, we've been through these issues ad nauseum. I've answered  questions in the Parliament about this. What is clear is that we have an agreement  which can see 8000 jobs be created, 6700 jobs for Australians which would not  proceed without this agreement. So I understand this is difficult politics, but this is  important politics and important policy. And we've put public policy first here by  saying we recognise that one of the biggest challenges for big mining projects going

ahead is getting the skilled labour necessary and we want Australians to have the  first chance for those jobs, and they do and will have the first chance for those jobs.

But if they are unable to be filled by domestic Australian workers, then we've  underwritten a program going forward to allow up to 1700 457 visas on that 8000  person project. And if we didn't make these sorts of arrangements, as was  recommended by the National Resources Sector Employment Taskforce in 2010  and announced in the 2011 Budget, then we would see a real risk of some of these  projects creating jobs for Australians not proceeding.

Curtis: Was the Prime Minister at the Productivity Committee of Cabinet meetings  you said you kept informed?

Bowen: Lyndal, I'm not going to traverse this old ground. I've answered questions  in the Parliament about this. Clearly, this has been something that was announced  in the 2011 Budget and is now being appropriately implemented by the government.

Curtis: How did an agreement which guarantees the jobs for more than 6000  Australians in the mining industry become a problem to the point where Gary Gray,  one of the ministers involved in the process, his preselection is being threatened by  unions?

Bowen: Well, Gary Gray is a first class minister. He always acts in the best  interests of Australian workers at heart and I think that people need to reflect on  some of the things that this government and Gary Gray have delivered in terms of  workplace reform. Gary Gray recommended this after close consultation with a  range of stakeholders, and I think we all need to prosecute the case for this  important reform and to point out, for example, that although it's controversial,  although it's difficult, we do need to make difficult decisions in the national interest  from time to time, and every minister sometimes needs to explain controversial  decisions and I'm no stranger to doing that.

Curtis: One final question: do you take any of the blame for the way this was  handled?

Bowen: Well, Lyndal, I take responsibility for the policy; it's a good one. It's a policy  which creates 6700 jobs. I also take responsibility for explaining difficult issues in  the Australian political discourse. It's something that I do as Immigration Minister.  Welcome to being Immigration Minister; sometimes you've got to explain difficult  and complex things. It's part and parcel of the job.

Curtis: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time.

Bowen: Thanks, Lyndal.



