Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

2CC Breakfast Subjects: Olympics, electricity prices, Abbott's negativity, carbon floor price.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

10 August 2012

MARK PARTON: The Federal Trade Minister Dr Craig Emerson often goes above and  beyond the call of duty, ladies and gentlemen. Of course he's a regular guest with us on  Wednesday, but he was busy doing other stuff then. But blow me down if he hasn't agreed to  come on this morning and we thank him for it. Craig Emerson, good morning.

CRAIG EMERSON: Hello to you, Parto.

PARTON: Now I'm happy for us to make the headlines right here and right now. We just  heard that Perkins' medal-winning moment for Australia, which wasn't gold, and I'm thinking  of a song that you and I could sing here, Craig. What about 'silver is not a dirty word'?

EMERSON: I've got another one, although that is right up the Skyhooks alley.

PARTON: Yeah.

EMERSON: For Brittany Broben: 'Sail on silver girl, sail on by; your time has come to shine'.

PARTON: Yeah. I mean, if you want to break into song with those, Emmo …

EMERSON: I think Simon and Garfunkel do a better rendition of 'Bridge Over Troubled  Waters'.

PARTON: Perhaps, perhaps. Let's move on to more serious things. Tony Abbott - the  wrecking ball, the attack dog - continues to strike so many chords with the voting public — look at these polls. But he's obviously one of the biggest pains in the backside for you. He's  carrying on about electricity prices, but it's been pointed out that he is at odds with several of  his frontbenchers over the causes of higher electricity prices.

EMERSON: He is, and the frontbenchers are right; he's wrong. The frontbenchers are Ian  Macfarlane and Malcolm Turnbull, and they're pointing out that state electricity prices have  gone through the roof. Sure, the carbon price is a component, but a relatively minor  component for which there is compensation. And if Tony Abbott were truly concerned about  rising electricity prices and its impact on the cost of living, he would be concerned about the  big increases in the last few years in state electricity prices.

PARTON: The interesting thing here appears to be from the perspective of the electorate:

Page 1 of 4 2CC Breakfast, transcript, 10 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Compet...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120810.html

that it doesn't really matter whether Tony Abbott's wrong or right.

EMERSON: What matters is the truth, and the truth is that these have been going up. I had a  Twitter exchange actually with Barry O'Farrell last night, who said that all he's doing is taking  the same $1.5 billion in dividends out of the New South Wales system that the previous State  Government did. I don't think that really justifies it — to say 'I'm no worse than them' — and  they've got some sort of rebate scheme. The point is that there are good arguments that  there's been overinvestment. One way I might try to explain it, Parto, if I could, is we know the  road from Canberra down to Batemans Bay. Every Easter, no doubt, it clogs up — and on  long weekends. Do we want an eight-lane or a 10-lane tollway so there is no clogging on that  road at any time but that motorists pay regardless of whether there is any congestion? And I  think we need some common sense here, and that's not necessarily been what's been  applied over the last few years. And the problem is it may not be applied in the future; that's  why we're looking for reform.

PARTON: We mentioned your Parliamentary colleague Tony Abbott and the wrecking ball  approach that he's had. It's been mentioned on a number of occasions by listeners to my  segment with you that whenever anything is mentioned regarding any policy, your first move  is to actually mention Tony Abbott.

EMERSON: I think that's quite true in many cases, and the reason is that for legislation, for  reform, we need the whole parliament — or at least the majority of the parliament. And on the  big issues, Mr Abbott has said 'no, no, no, no, and no'. And what we're trying to do is explain  this to the public. And you never know your luck in the big city: one day Mr Abbott might  change his mind on something and support a policy in the national interest. That's why I do  tend to talk about Mr Abbott. If we could get our legislative program, we'd be sailing on  through to getting it into place in the national interest. But often we're thwarted in doing that  by Mr Abbott's destructive negativity.

PARTON: Isn't that just the burden you carry, though, if you're able to cobble together, by the  barest of possible margins, a sort of working government? That whoever was in the position  to do it — whether it was you guys or them; in this instance it was you — you'd always have  to sort of look over to the other side and say 'well, you should have let us do that, and you  should have let us do that'.

EMERSON: True, Parto, and it's a fair point. But on some of the big calls in Opposition — when we were in Opposition — such as on national security legislation, indeed on asylum-seekers, we said that the national interest was more important than our political interest and  we actually voted for strengthened national security legislation, anxious that it would have an  impact on civil rights. And, similarly, even on asylum seekers: the setting up of offshore  processing couldn't have been done without the votes of Labor in Opposition. And this is the  point I'm making: sure, opposition is there; if they don't agree with policies they should oppose  them. But what Mr Abbott seems to be doing is opposing for the sake of opposing, and that's  the problem. It's this destructive negativity that is having an impact on the nation's future — and that's why I'm a critic of his.

PARTON: I think it's because he can smell blood and all of a sudden that's all he can see.

EMERSON: Yeah, well, that's fine but he should be putting, at least on occasions, the  national interest ahead of his political interests.

PARTON: If it's okay with you, I've got Jenny standing by with a brief question so I'll just do  that and that. So Jenny, you're with us on the line now?

Page 2 of 4 2CC Breakfast, transcript, 10 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Compet...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120810.html

CALLER: Yes, I am. I'd like to ask Mr Emerson: why is it that he blames Tony Abbott even if  we lose a gold medal? I mean, what I'm saying is he's blaming Tony Abbott for everything — why doesn't he blame The Greens? The Greens are stopping everything that they want, not  Tony Abbott. If Tony Abbott said that the boat people couldn't come in — sorry, could come in  here — who would stop him then? The Greens! Why does he keep blaming Tony Abbott?  And another thing: as far as electricity, pensioners are getting $250 a year to help with their  electricity bills, but their bills will go up by $1,000 a year. What is he going to do about that?

PARTON: All right, Jenny. I'll let the Minister answer that.

EMERSON: All right. First point: I hope the first comment was made tongue-in-cheek,  because I haven't criticised Tony Abbott over any gold medals won or not won. Secondly, we  just had the discussion about Mr Abbott and the national interest. In relation to asylum-seekers, the High Court actually changed the situation. It effectively banned offshore  processing. Now, The Greens have always been against offshore processing. This is the  system they want; it's not the system we want. It's actually not the system Tony Abbott wants,  and if he became Prime Minister he, too, would need legislative change and he would be  calling on Labor to support that legislative change. What we're saying is 'let's save lives at  sea'. It's not about Mr Abbott's ego or my ego; it's about saving lives at sea. And finally, in  relation to the electricity prices, this is the very point that we're making: and that is that most  of the electricity price increases are unrelated to the carbon price — there's no compensation.  And Mr Abbott has said yesterday, contradicting his own ministers, that this whole issue of  rising electricity prices is a furphy. Now, even the state governments recognise there's a  problem here. Mr Abbott says it's a furphy and he will oppose reforms to give relief to  electricity consumers.

PARTON: Craig Emerson is with me. Help me, please, Craig. The Federal Government, I'm  told, is considering scrapping the $15 minimum price on carbon after 2015 and restricting  access to much cheaper international carbon credits. Explain that to me in simple terms.

EMERSON: Sure. The mechanism that's been put in place is that the price is fixed for three  years and after that the market determines the price. It's a floating price or an emissions  trading scheme. We have implemented a floor price of $15 to provide incentives if the world  price did go below the previous fixed price …

PARTON: Which it is now, isn't it?

EMERSON: Yeah, it is now … to provide incentives still for a switch in the energy mix.  Because if the price is too low you won't get what we're trying to do out of this, Parto, which is  actually get more renewable energies and other clean energy sources. So there are  discussions going on about this. No final decisions have been made. We'll have to have a  good look at it, but that …

PARTON: It looks like a sensible direction to move. As you well know, I'm not a big fan of the  carbon price, and I …

EMERSON: I'm aware of that.

PARTON: But I think that there's a bit of sense attached to scrapping this $15 floor price after  2015.

EMERSON: Well, that's the nature of the discussions. But as I was saying, no final decisions  have been made. We do, nevertheless, want to ensure that what we're doing does have a  positive effect on decisions; to move to what's called a clean energy future by picking up more  of those renewable and other low-emissions technologies.

Page 3 of 4 2CC Breakfast, transcript, 10 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Compet...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120810.html

PARTON: Well I know it'll be a discussion that we'll continue to have. And can I say genuinely  that I really applaud the fact that you do come on to face the music and have a yack about it  here. It's a worthwhile thing certainly for us, and I hope it is for you.

EMERSON: I'm always keen and I enjoy it a lot.

PARTON: Good on you, mate.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 4 of 4 2CC Breakfast, transcript, 10 August 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Compet...

26/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120810.html

