Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

Sky AM Agenda Subjects: Asylum seekers, Hazelwood power station, industry assistance, Gina Rinehart.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

26 June 2012

KIERAN GILBERT: With me to start the program this morning, the Minister for Trade Craig  Emerson. Mr Emerson, thanks for your time. Scott Morrison says it's not about policy; that the  Government's the problem. Given the track record over the last few years, he's got a valid  basis to make that point, doesn't he? Thousands of asylum seekers since 2007.

CRAIG EMERSON: In order to get any legislation through the Parliament you have to have a  majority in the House of Representatives and the Senate. Previous governments have had to  grapple with that reality. It's a reality that the Australian people wish upon the Parliament. We  fully respect that. Mr Howard would not have been able to get the Nauru processing centre  through Parliament without the support of Labor in opposition. So this argument that the role  of oppositions is simply to say 'no' and to oppose is not borne out by history. All of the  national security legislation after the World Trade Centre bombings in the end, as a result of  the negotiations, passed through the Parliament because Labor in opposition accepted that it  had a responsibility to behave in the national interest. Now Mr Abbott is saying 'the role of  Opposition is to oppose; you can go and get knotted'.

GILBERT: They're also saying that you've lost credibility on this issue. And if you look at the  numbers: since 2007, more than 19,000 asylum seekers, over 330 boats; in the period from  2002 to 2007 there were less than 300 asylum seekers. Doesn't the record show the  Government's change of policy has caused … has created this mess?

EMERSON: Look, we can go over that. I'm happy to do it, about push factors and all of that. I  think rather than do that, let's use our time to do what the Australian people legitimately  expect us to do — and that is to seek to find a response that is effective. Now, the argument  about who said what to whom and who did what to whom is about the past. We are at a  position where people are dying at sea …

GILBERT: Yeah, that's right. It's beyond an argument now, isn't it? That's a reality. It was a  mistake …

EMERSON: It's a serious obligation on the…

GILBERT:… a policy mistake, really, to change, which has led to the influx of boats and now  you've got to come up with a solution.

Page 1 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 26 June 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Competi...

28/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120626.html

EMERSON: All right, if you want to go back into the past: the advice about Nauru was that it,  while it may have been effective for a time, the reality had dawned upon the people  smugglers that the majority of people who went to Nauru ended up in Australia anyway, or  New Zealand, and therefore it was no longer a deterrent. There are often things that may be  seen to be effective at some point in Australia's history, but it doesn't mean that they will  remain so. And that was the advice …

GILBERT: But you also scrapped the temporary visas …

EMERSON: Sure, but let me just add to this — and I didn't mean to interrupt you — but that  was the advice of the man who helped design, conceive and design Nauru: Andrew Metcalfe  the head of the Immigration Department.

GILBERT: But it was part of the whole change. And I don't want to rehash everything, but the  reality is that's the starting point, isn't it? The reality is today, 19,000 plus asylum seekers  since the election of the Labor Government, as opposed to 300 or less than for the last half of  the Howard Government.

EMERSON: Well sure that's a nice little bit of selective quoting then. If we want to do the  terms of the two governments, then we compare like with like.

GILBERT: But the relevance of that is … because that was after Howard changed the policy  …

EMERSON: All right. We are going to spend, regrettably, a lot of time going over the past. But  you're asking the questions; I'll answer them.

GILBERT: The reason I'm asking you is because the Coalition says …

EMERSON: Because you want to dwell on the past.

GILBERT: No, because the Opposition says you've lost credibility on this issue — so it  comes to an issue of credibility. That's what Morrison says: that it's whether or not you have  got the credibility to implement a decent policy.

EMERSON: Okay, well I'll respond to the past then. We'll keep spending our time on the past.

GILBERT: Well, no, it's about your Government's credibility on this issue.

EMERSON: You asked me; you said there are these two sets of figures. There was a war in  Afghanistan, right; Hazaras left Afghanistan in large numbers. There was a war in Sri Lanka;  that happened after the Howard Government ceased to exist. These are new developments  that led to a new round of asylum-seeker behaviour. Now, I say let's move on; let's seek a  compromise. Let's not go down the Scott Morrison path that it is morally fine not to  compromise because he considers that the Government hasn't got credibility. The Prime  Minister has said that she is willing to compromise. The Opposition Leader tragically has said  he isn't.

GILBERT: Okay, let's move on now. I will be discussing this issue with Greg Hunt in a  moment, the Liberal front bencher. On to Hazelwood, the coal-fired electricity generator: it's  sought a bail-out, or relied upon a bail-out from its international parent company. Is this the …  well, it's the latest one; there was another coal-fired generator that did the same thing the day  before. Is this the carbon tax working as it should be: closing down or at least making these  facilities unviable?

Page 2 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 26 June 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Competi...

28/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120626.html

EMERSON: The carbon price is designed to change the energy mix. That is, to move  gradually from high emissions technologies to lower emissions technologies, including  renewable energy. And therefore, we are seeking to achieve a clean energy future. That can  only be done with changes. We can't get into a political world where a political party says  'we're going to introduce a price on carbon but nothing will change'. There will be changes.  And the idea that high emitting power stations emit less or change their technologies, or the  whole generation mix changes towards low emissions technology, is what is behind the  carbon pricing mechanism.

GILBERT: So the Hazelwood development … that this is a sign that the carbon tax …even  already sending the right signals to the …

EMERSON: It's meant to send signals. And in this case, the generator appears to have  sought and obtained finance privately. There is also a government fund to assist in that  transition. That has not been accessed; the company have made a decision to go private.

GILBERT: Gary Banks from the Productivity Commission has criticised the Government's  $42 million bailout of Alcoa, suggesting it's simply going to shift costs to other parts of the  economy and won't save jobs anyway.

EMERSON: I've seen that analysis — and I do respect Gary Banks a lot — but I think we  need to put the whole thing in perspective. In relation to Alcoa, they are saying it's not related  to the carbon price — first point. Secondly, I've done a graph, Kieran, of effective rates of  protection of industry over the last 40 or 50 years. It is lower now than it has been at any time  in half a century. So we do get criticism of people saying 'you're providing too much support

for Australian industry'. There's actually less support now than any time in history. And I think  from that, if you like, market-based philosophy, there should be some acknowledgment of  that.

GILBERT: It's not really protection, this issue, to wrap up our discussion with. It might be a  sort of protection, but the discussion from the Government relating to Gina Rinehart and her  assuming control, or at least board positions, at this stage in Fairfax. She suggested last night  on Four Corners that she might just pull her entire share. Given the contracting nature of the  media at the moment in this country, what's your view on the wealthiest person in the country  saying 'okay, I'd like to invest in media'? Is it not a good thing in part, because there's a lot of  money leaving the industry?

EMERSON: Ms Rinehart is entitled to invest in media, to abide by the laws of the country — I'm sure she would. So I don't have a problem with that.

GILBERT: Have you got a problem with some of your colleagues who are already saying that  we should be careful of it? That it's a threat to democracy and that sort of thing?

EMERSON: I think you asked whether someone should be able to invest in media. My  answer is 'yes, they should'. In relation to editorial independence, which I think is what  colleagues are talking about, my own view is that if Ms Rinehart were to get in a position  where she was seeking to influence the editorial content, then she would run up against this:  if Ms Rinehart said 'I want editorial content, news stories, that portray climate change as not  existing, as 'absolute crap' — to use Tony Abbott's words — then I think she'd lose a lot of  readers. So in that sense, the market would adjust. If those newspapers became — and I'm  not saying this would happen; I'm not — but if they became very hard right wing then the  readership of The Age and Sydney Morning Herald would leave.

GILBERT: Thanks for your time this morning.

Page 3 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 26 June 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Competi...

28/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120626.html

EMERSON: A pleasure.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 4 of 4 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 26 June 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Competi...

28/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120626.html

