Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Discussions with the Opposition,  offshore processing Tuesday, 24 January 2012

Interview with Marius Benson, ABC NewsRadio

Marius Benson: Chris Bowen, there's a report in The Australian  this morning that says talks between the Government and the  Opposition on asylum seekers have broken down. Those talks  have been going on for a month. Is that the case; have they broken  down?

Chris Bowen: Well, what's very clear is that the Government  initiated these discussions with the Opposition in good faith. We  wanted to see if there was a way that the two political parties that  support offshore processing could actually vote for it. There have  been a series of discussions and a series of exchanges between  us but the bottom line is if the Liberal Party is not prepared to move  away from its position of not supporting the legislation, then there

is no further point in those discussions. So whether there are  further discussions is a matter for the Liberal Party, but they would  need to show some indication of a willingness to support the  Government's legislation or at least to discuss ways they could.

Benson: So that certainly sounds like talks that have broken  down.

Bowen: Well, look, the Government, as I say, initiated these  discussions. We acted in good faith. We listened to what the  Opposition said was their concern. We've seen the Opposition in  recent days reaffirm the strength in their policy of turning boats  around, in breach of Australia's international obligations, in breach  of our duty of care to the safety of our naval personnel, in a move  which has been condemned by Indonesia, the UNHCR and which  former very senior military personnel have pointed out would be  highly dangerous.

At the same time, the Opposition says the conditions in Malaysia,  which is a non-signatory country, aren't good enough. This just  underlines the unbelievable hypocrisy that we're seeing. It's okay  to send boats to Indonesia, which is not a signatory country, with  no protections negotiated, but somehow any protections in  Malaysia aren't good enough, just underlines that this an  Opposition playing politics and they don't want to see boat arrivals  to Australia stop because they've made a decision that that's in  their political best interest.

Benson: So, if the talks are over, where to now? You have an  Opposition and a Government who are agreed that offshore  processing is the way to go and no way to go there. What happens  now?

Bowen: Well, we'll obviously pursue our policies. We'll obviously,  in the light of what appears to be the refusal of the Opposition to  support offshore processing, we'll obviously pursue the options  available to us and that means acting in a way which we can  without the support of the Opposition. What the Parliament does is  then a matter for it in terms of the legislation that we put forward.  But, look, what's clear about this -

Benson: Can I just stop you there? Are you saying you'll be  putting forward legislation?

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 2 Discussions with the Opposition, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182059.htm

Bowen: Well, what I'm saying is that our position has been very  clear in relation to the legislation we feel is necessary and of  course we will be pursuing that both in the Parliament and outside  the Parliament. But what's very clear about this -

Benson: But, again to interrupt, that legislation on your own  assessment is doomed.

Bowen: Well, if the Liberal Party, which says it supports offshore  processing, votes against it, then the Greens which have always,  in fairness, opposed offshore processing, vote against it, then the  situation in the Senate is very clear. That is very clear and that's  always been the case. The Liberal Party knows that.

And this is often the case; governments don't have majorities in the  Senate. Mr Howard, when he didn't have a majority in the Senate,  needed the Labor Party's support to pass its offshore processing  legislation.

Benson: Sure, but your only option for dealing with boat arrivals  now is to put legislation to Parliament which you know will be  rejected.

Bowen: Well, of course, if the Liberal Party opposes the legislation  it would be rejected in the Senate. That's always been the case  and will continue to be the case. The Liberal Party has the chance  to reflect between now and that point. Even though they're not  willing to enter into further discussions with the Government, they  have an opportunity to reflect. They have an opportunity to reflect  on all the advice and the evidence that's come forward. They have  an opportunity to reflect on the ongoing dangers for people  undertaking that boat journey to Australia.

Benson: It seems, effectively, I mean, obviously you're inviting  them to reflect but you're not even in a position to talk with the  Liberals about this issue. It seems you've run out of options. Boats  will simply continue to come; the processing will be onshore.

Bowen: Well, I've always said Marius, consistently, that, unless  the legislation was passed, the practical and legal result was  onshore processing. Of course it is. Any offshore processing, in the  absence of the legislation, given the High Court's interpretation of  the existing law, means that offshore processing is not a viable  option. That's always been the case and will remain the case.

Benson: Chris Bowen, thank you very much.

Bowen: Nice talking to you, Marius.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182059.htm  Last update: Tuesday, 24 January 2012 at 11:29 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 2 of 2 Discussions with the Opposition, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182059.htm

