



Transcript of interview with Samantha  Hawley - ABC AM  30 May 2012

Topics: New Government legislation regarding forced marriage, slavery and organ  trafficking; ASIO High Court case

NICOLA ROXON: Unfortunately these laws that are being introduced today do cover a  spectrum of human misery. This is young women being forced into marriages against their  consent, the trafficking of people, particularly for sexual servitude or for domestic servitude,  and the trafficking of people with the intention of using their organs.

All of these are terrible situations and we're changing the laws to make clear that there is no  place for this sort of activity in Australia.

SAMANTHA HAWLEY: On the matter of organ trafficking, I mean, does that actually  happen in Australia?

NICOLA ROXON: Well, we have had an instance of a person being identified. Luckily it  was identified before any action was taken. But what it highlighted was our laws don't allow  us to prosecute people who traffic people into Australia with the intention of removing their  organs.

I think in all these circumstances they are relatively rare in Australia but you don't have to  look too far around the world to see unfortunately that it does happen.

SAMANTHA HAWLEY: Can I just also ask you, now I have you, on another matter - the  High Court challenge into the indefinite detention of refugees. The High Court has indicated  this week that it will move quickly on this. Has the Government got any plans to address this  matter before the court does?

NICOLA ROXON: Well this is a situation where the court has said that they will move very  quickly, that this will be heard in a matter of weeks.

SAMANTHA HAWLEY: Are you surprised by that?

NICOLA ROXON: Well, I'm surprised to the extent that the court doesn't often do that. But  I understand that when it's a matter of someone's detention they feel that it is pressing.

I think we need to make sure that all parties are able to quickly get their case together. I think  in the hearing earlier in the week even the plaintiff said that they were not sure that they  would be able to meet the timeframe that was put on it by the court.

SAMANTHA HAWLEY: Okay well, of course the same legal team successfully contested  your Malaysian solution and won. That wasn't a great look for the Government. Wouldn't it  be better to be seen to be on the front foot? Is there any plans for the Government to make  any changes before this matter is addressed by the court?

NICOLA ROXON: Well the Government always, you know, looks at policies to make sure  that we have both the interests of people who need protection and our national security  interests properly accommodated.

SAMANTHA HAWLEY: No consideration of changing legislation, of re-looking at the  ASIO Act to enable people to have a mechanism of review...

NICOLA ROXON: Well we've been public about the fact that we are prepared always to  look at whether there are changes that might be needed into the future. We are doing that  difficult and complex work.

But realistically if this case is going to be heard within two weeks, I don't think it's likely that  we will have made any of those changes and certainly not any legislative ones before the  court deals with the matter.

TONY EASTLEY: The Federal-Attorney General Nicola Roxon speaking to Samantha  Hawley.



