Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Minister's visit to Sri Lanka, asylum seekers,  people smuggling, refugee resettlement  Wednesday, 02 May 2012

Interview with Richard Lindell, ABC 24

Scott Bevan: Human Rights Watch is calling on Immigration Minister, Chris  Bowen, to question Sri Lanka on its treatment of political activists and returned  asylum seekers.

The minister is on his way to Colombo after a two-day visit to India. Speaking here  to ABC correspondent Richard Lindell, Chris Bowen defended Australia's handling  of asylum seekers it's returned to Sri Lanka.

Chris Bowen: In relation to the return of asylum seekers, it's important to know that  anybody Australia returns has been found not to be a refugee. They're therefore not  in danger of persecution in Sri Lanka.

If you can't return people to countries who've been found not to be genuine  refugees, then you might as well not have a refugee assessment process, you  might as well say, 'Well, if you come to Australia and say you're a refugee we'll take  your word for it, we won't return you to Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Iraq, or anywhere  else.'

That's just not a sustainable way forward. Every western government around the  world returns failed asylum seekers and Australia's no different.

Richard Lindell: Just because you haven't been proved to be a refugee doesn't  mean that they are safe on returning. In fact, there are many reports of returned  asylum seekers being detained and tortured on return. Does the Australian  Government track and keep in touch with those returned from Australia to ensure  that they are treated properly?

Bowen: If you've been returned to Sri Lanka it does mean that you've been found,  after all that very exhaustive appeal process, not to be in danger of persecution  when you return to Sri Lanka.

Now, does Australia have the capacity to then monitor every single person who's  returned over an indefinite period of time? Well, of course not, but there is a very  exhaustive process which goes into determining who can be returned and who can't  be.

And I do make the point and I think this is often lost in the debate - people saying,  'Well, we shouldn't be returning refugees to Sri Lanka or anywhere else' - well, we  don't. We don't. We return people who have not been able to establish, against

what is a very fair system, that they are in danger if they return to countries and that  applies to Sri Lanka, it applies to Iraq and Afghanistan and across the board.

Lindell: The point is, if you're not monitoring them on their return, how do you know  that they're safe? In fact, the ABC was there recently and we spoke to asylum  seekers who were admitting themselves that they were economic refugees and yet  they were still detained and tortured on their return.

Bowen: We do have arrangements in place with the Sri Lanka for assurances to  ensure the safety of people returned.

Now, if people have acknowledged that they're an economic refugee or an  economic migrant or a refugee, as some people would term it, that would be a clear  indication that they do not have a case.

Lindell: But they were still detained and tortured when they returned.

Bowen: Well, I mean, I'm sure that people will make that case but I can also assure  you that we make the case that there is a very thorough analysis of the risk that  people face when they're returned and they are not returned if the Australian  Government has fears that those risks are real.

Lindell: Human Rights Watch says that by cooperating with the Sri Lanka  Government, Australia is putting the prevention of people smuggling ahead of the  legitimate rights of those trying to leave Sri Lanka and seek asylum. Have domestic  political pressures outweighed human rights in this case?

Bowen: I reject that completely and absolutely and it's, frankly, an outrageous  suggestion. Australia, as a signatory to the refugee convention, takes its obligations  very seriously and we resettle people and we accept refugees, obviously, who've  arrived in Australia by irregular means. For the premise of that question to be right  that would not be the case so the premise of the question is wrong. We accept  people from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan and other countries.

Now, we do say that people smuggling is an evil trade because it is, because it is.  Because we've seen people die on the shores of Christmas Island. We've seen  people die off Indonesia. We've seen 200 people lose their lives two weeks before  Christmas and so I make no apologies for saying we do believe in deterring  irregular boat travel to Australia because it's dangerous.

But I'm also very proud of our refugee program which resettles more people in  Australia per head than any other country in the world. I'd like to see it increase  further. I'd like to see us increase it to 20 000. That would see us not only be the  biggest resettlement country per head in the world but the second biggest in  absolute terms.

Bevan: That was Immigration Minister, Chris Bowen.



