



THE HON GREG COMBET AM MP  Minister for Climate Change and Energy Efficiency  Minister for Industry and Innovation

TRANSCRIPT

GC 162/12

28 June 2012

TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH TONY JONES - ABC LATELINE

SUBJECT: Carbon pricing; Asylum seekers

E & O E - Proof only

JONES: Just a short time ago I spoke with Climate Change Minister Greg Combet who was in  our Parliament House studio in Canberra.

Greg Combet, thanks for being there.

COMBET: How are you, Tony?

JONES: Very well. Let's start with the ground that's been very well traversed over a long period  of time. Just remind us exactly why you're bringing in this new tax. What exactly is it meant to  achieve?

COMBET: Well it's meant to achieve reductions in greenhouse gas emissions in our economy  over time, because it's important for Australia to play its part in international efforts to tackle  climate change. We're part of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  An advanced economy like ours has to play its fair part. We are one of the top 20 greenhouse  gas emitters internationally and we are the highest per capita emitter amongst the developed  economies. So, we have to play our role and the intention here is to put a price tag on pollution  so that there's an incentive to cut greenhouse gas emissions.

JONES: OK, but how effective will the carbon tax be in actually doing that? Because even with  the carbon price in place, according to Treasury forecasts, Australian emissions will keep going  up for the next 15 years - not down, up.

COMBET: Well you've got to bear in mind that what we're implementing of course is an  emissions trading scheme. I know we've discussed this previously, but when it does migrate to  a flexible price in 2015, the government of the day will be setting caps so we can achieve a  targeted emissions reduction.



Essentially what that means is the number of permits to emit greenhouse gas will be limited,  and cut each year, so that we can achieve a specific emissions reduction target by 2020. So it

will be effective, but of course we're part of the international community. Other countries are  doing similar things and a tonne of greenhouse gas emissions cut overseas or in Australia is - it  doesn't matter whether it's here or overseas, as long as there's greenhouse gas emissions cut  and that's why linking carbon markets is important.

JONES: That's a fundamental thing, isn't it, because even the carbon tax, the carbon price, is  not going to reduce emissions here? And in fact, in order to make the 5 per cent cut, the fairly  modest cut by 2020, you're actually going to have to buy credits, carbon credits from overseas  in order to do that.

COMBET: Well, as I say, a tonne of greenhouse gas emissions reduced here or overseas is not  material to the overall effort to tackling climate change. The important thing is that the tonne  of greenhouse gas emissions is being cut. And the reason that we enable Australian businesses  to be able to purchase a tonne of reduced greenhouse gas emissions overseas as well, is to

reduce the cost. To make sure that we achieve our obligations at the least cost. If you only  design a scheme that reduces emissions in the domestic economy and has no linkage  internationally, then you're going to be doing it at much greater cost. And the Treasury has  indicated that it would be at least twice the cost we've put forward and that's not in our  economic interest at all.

JONES: Let's go to the economic costs. And we'll take one industry, the housing industry, the  home building industry. How much extra will it cost by your estimates to build a new house of  an average size in Australia?

COMBET: Well it depends what the house is made of, but the important thing is that in  industries like glass, which are common to every house, and of course steel manufacturing,  pretty much common in some form of building material in housing, many of the inputs into  housing which are produced in emissions intensive industries like glass or steel will attract a  free allocation of around 95 per cent of their carbon permits, so that their effective carbon  price is reduced to an average of only $1.30 a tonne. And that's very important when you're  thinking about housing or car manufacturing, for example, that very significant inputs to those  industries are in fact very significantly offset in the cost that's incurred.

JONES: And yet, there are different estimates out there. Allen's Consulting Group says the extra  cost of an average two storey 200 square metre house will cost - will be $3,800. The Housing  Industry Association puts it at $6,000. Who's got that right?

COMBET: Well it's definitely on the lower side than the HIA estimates because as I remember  it, when they first announced that they hadn't taken into account the free allocation of permits  to glass manufacturers and steel makers and others that I indicated. So it'll depend on the  construction of the house. But it's going to be a modest cost, all of which, I might add, has been  factored into the modelling that Treasury has done. That's led to the outcome that the cost  impact across the economy is only 0.7 per cent increase in the consumer price index and in  respect of which of course we are providing tax cuts, pension increases, increases in family tax  benefits and other payments to assist people with cost of living and to offset the cost impact of  introducing the carbon price, which as I say, is a modest impact. There's been a lot of grossly  exaggerated claims and I think on July the 1st, on Sunday, we're going to move from fiction to

fact and all of these things will become much more evident.

JONES: OK. You say the lower price is more like it. So $3,800, the Allen Consulting Group  figures, that's about right, is it? That'd be the extra cost roughly you might expect for a average  new house?

COMBET: Well it depends on the construction of a particular house. But when you consider  that something as core as glass is offset in its carbon impact to the extent of nearly 95 per cent,  it's going to be a very small price impact. But a whole lot of things influence housing costs.

JONES: OK, on 7.30 tonight we heard the case of an Italian sausage manufacturer who’s only  now discovered that his refrigerant gas costs are about to triple. And he's now hearing his  transport company and other suppliers are also about to put up their costs. How you can be  sure there won't be a whole range of hidden costs across manufacturing, especially small  manufacturing, which will be passed on to consumers?

COMBET: Well the first thing is any businesses in this situation where their suppliers are saying  these sorts of things, they should cross-examine them pretty closely and if in doubt refer it to  the ACCC to have a good look at it. Because if your transport supplier for example is saying that

they're going to jack up prices because of the carbon price, they'd better look out. Because  there is no effective carbon price applied to light commercial vehicles, household vehicles or  indeed heavy-on-road vehicles at least until 2014. So what's the cost driver? You know, and  with many other elements I've heard many small business people express these concerns.  Cross-examine your suppliers, talk to the ACCC, because it's not lawful for companies to be  suggesting that they're going to be jacking up their prices where in fact they don't have a  material carbon price impact.

JONES: What about these refrigerant costs, because we heard this in Parliament today? I don't  think I actually heard a straight answer from the Prime Minister on this, but it was raised. This  manufacturer says refrigerant costs are going to triple.

COMBET: Well there is an effective carbon price being applied to synthetic greenhouse gases  and this is because we're building on a scheme that was implemented by the Howard  Government to apply an effective carbon price to them. So there will be a price rise there, but  you've got to bear in mind that refrigerant gases are replaced only very rarely and the price for  a new fridge, for example, to be re-gassed would be about $4 to the fridge. Similarly, the re-gassing of an air-conditioning unit only happens on rare occasions and the price impact is fairly  modest. The major retail outlets would replace the refrigerant gases in their fridges I think  pretty rarely and that's the only time the cost will be incurred.

JONES: OK.

COMBET: There's also the opportunity to use alternative gases that have less greenhouse gas,  global warming impact.

JONES: Alright. All around the country electricity prices have been going through the roof now  for a couple of years. The carbon tax is going to put them up as we know another 10 per cent,  or roughly 10 per cent. Aren't you afraid that people are going to blame you for the entire  rising costs of electricity?

COMBET: Well of course that's what Tony Abbott will argue, and we will argue the facts. We've

been arguing the facts for a long time and we'll keep doing it. You're quite right, electricity  prices are going up by an average of 10 per cent around the country as a consequence of the  implementation of the carbon price. That equates to about $3.30 a week on average for a  household and of course we're providing an average of $10.10 a week in cash to assist  households.

That's the important thing to bear in mind, the assistance is being provided. For an average  small business - we've done work with the Small Business Association - it's about a $5 or $6 a  week increase in their electricity costs with the carbon price coming in. It's important though  that we argue out what the drivers are behind electricity price increases because in NSW, for  example, they've gone up by 55 per cent in the last three years and it's nothing to do with  carbon pricing. It's mainly to do with the poles and wires investment that's been taking place.  And we'll explain that to people and continue to put our case. We'll be talking to electricity  retailers about inserting a fact sheet in electricity bills so that people can hear what the case  really is.

JONES: As you pointed out yourself, Labor ran a very big scare campaign over the GST. You can  hardly blame Tony Abbott for picking up Labor's template, can you?

COMBET: Oh well Tony Abbott's running a - you know, quite a fraudulent scare campaign in  relation to carbon pricing. He's a good scare campaigner there's no doubt about that. But we  are about to move from fiction to fact and his claims are going to have to be tested against  people's lived experience.

He's said the price impacts will be unimaginable. They will not be. It'll be an average of 0.7 per  cent increase in the CPI and people will get an average of $10.10 a week in cash.

He's claimed that whole industries like the coal industry will be destroyed. There's $100 billion  going into the coal industry right now and jobs are growing. He's claimed regions will  disappear, Whyalla will collapse. The population in Whyalla's increasing and there's a lot of  investment there. I just think a lot of the claims that have been made from Sunday will be able  to be tested against reality and I think people will think, "Well, you know, can we really believe  what Tony Abbott's on about?"

JONES: A final question Greg Combet, did you have to struggle, as many others did particularly  those from the left of Labor politics, with your conscience over this idea of reopening Nauru  and offshore processing even the Malaysian Solution?

COMBET: Look I do find, as many of my colleagues have also indicated, the whole issue very  difficult, very complex. I've learned a lot about it actually since coming into Parliament and I've  genuinely come to the position that I support the Government's policy because I don't believe  there's anything humane at all about a policy position that leaves an incentive for people to get  on those boats and that leads to deaths at sea. I just think that's a tragedy.



I've had to question my own prejudices about the policy position that I had in my own mind  when I came into Parliament, but I think the compromise solution that got through the House  of Representatives and that's unfortunately been defeated in the Senate is the right way to go  and we'll continue to argue our case for it.

I'm really pleased though Tony, that Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston has been appointed to  head up this expert panel to advise the Parliament and the Government about a way forward  from here because I have had the privilege of working with him. He knows these issues very,  very well from his years of experience as chief of the Defence Force, and I think that's what we  need. We've got to find a compromise. We've got to find a workable position on the basis of  the facts, of good policy making and try and get the politics out of it. That's in the interests of  the country. It's in the interests of people seeking asylum.

JONES: Greg Combet, we'll have to leave you there. We're out of time. Thank you very much  for coming in to join us tonight.

COMBET: Thanks for having me on, Tony.

ENDS

