Search this site

Go

Home

Biographical details

Media Centre

Contact details

Department

Minister for Multicultural  Affairs

Links





Community detention, asylum seekers,  offshore processing Friday, 17 February 2012

Interview with David Oldfield, 2UE

David Oldfield: Mr Bowen, Chris, how are you?

Chris Bowen: I'm good David, how are you mate?

Oldfield: Good thanks. Look, the first thing I want to ask from you  of course is that I'm cognisant often these things are not absolutely  accurate. There are three pages of this in the paper this morning,  including a full list of the household start-up package and what-have-you. Now I've been aware in the past there was a whitegoods  package. How much of this story is correct or is any of it wrong?

Bowen: Well look, I think the important point here David — and I  can understand certainly people's concern — but the important  thing is that this is not some sort of gift or something that people  get given and they take away. Yes, we have people  accommodated in houses and yes, those houses are provided with  very basic furniture and a television and a cot if there's a baby.  And then when they leave that house, if they're granted a visa or  their claim is processed in some other way, that then stays behind.

So we work with Red Cross because we do think it's better not to  have children in detention because it is not a good environment,  and regardless of what you think or I think or people think about  this issue, I think people can all agree it is not the kids fault so we  deal with kids quite differently.

Oldfield: No, no. But I would have thought the detention was much  better alternative to the war-torn, life-threatening, dangerous  places we're told these people come from?

Bowen: Well sure, but when you're dealing with two-, three-year-old kids or, you know, older kids, we have some appropriate  facilities, but generally they are better off being able to go to school  and being in the community. Now I don't think this is a situation  where they are given luxuries or given anything which is  inappropriate.

They are given an allowance which is less than the unemployment  benefit, much less than the Age Pension. They are given in the  house, the house is provided with some basic furnishings and  material, but it is not some sort of gift pack which they then take  away or they have and when they get a visa then they are allowed  to work and they're expected to make their own arrangements.  These are people who are not allowed to work under our rules  because they are still being processed for a visa and the Red  Cross, on our behalf, does provide some material to them.

Oldfield: According to the government's own figures though, once  they are allowed to work, and they're processed and been  accepted as refugees, 93 per cent of them are still on welfare five  years later.

Bowen: Well look, some of them are, no doubt.

Oldfield: Ninety-three per cent.

Chris Bowen MP Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Page 1 of 6 Community detention, asylum seekers, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182667.htm

Bowen: And people, you know, I must say David, you know, I think  that people who come to Australia, under any program — whether  it is skilled migration, family reunion or humanitarian — have the  capacity to contribute to Australia and to work and there are some  people who've been refugees who've gone on to make a wonderful  contribution. There are others who have required more assistance.

Oldfield: Ninety-three per cent.

Bowen: Well there are different, I've released other reports which  show different figures as well, David. The figure is high, I accept  that.

Oldfield: This was a government report.

Bowen: There's several reports out there which show it depends  over what period of time, etcetera. The point I'm making -Oldfield: Are you telling me the government reports are in conflict  with each other?

Bowen: Well David, what I'm saying is that there are various  reports about the contribution of people who've come to Australia  as refugees and how long it takes them to find work.

There are examples — for example, I'll give you one example  David. Recently we put some people on bridging visas, which is  quite different to this community detention, which means that  people are living in the community and we're not supplying houses.  Some of those asylum seekers took themselves — they do have  work rights — took themselves up to Queensland and got a job in  the meat works; not the [inaudible], a reopening meat works which  had been closed, and said, 'We're here for work if you'll have us', a  meat works which finds it difficult to get employees. So there are  various stories around and various -Oldfield: That fit into the category of the seven per cent who are  working five years after they've -Bowen: Well I'm just making the point, David, that there are  different circumstances for different people.

Oldfield: Hmmm, look, a lot of these, I'll just run through some of  the things on the list here: washing machines, refrigerators,  minimum four seat lounges, tables and chairs, radio alarms — I  find that sort of interesting, I'm not sure what they're getting up for  — 21 inch televisions, DVDs. And Minister, here's an allegation  that was made here on the program a minute ago, can I just have  you listen for a second to Vanessa's call?

Bowen: Sure.

[Recording from caller]

Oldfield: Ah, now, they learn the system, don't they, doing it on  eBay. I suppose the question is this, when you say all this stuff  stays there, is there some inventory that these people are

responsible for that it in fact still is in the home when they leave,  and how much of it might be going out on eBay and disappearing?

Bowen: Oh yes, absolutely. They are required to tell us. You  know, we ensure that the material is still there. Now -Oldfield: But what do you do if it isn't?

Bowen: Well obviously, we'd make appropriate arrangements.

Oldfield: What would that mean?

Bowen: Well, that would include references to the police if  something has been stolen. That would include -Oldfield: Well if it's not, what happens then?

Page 2 of 6 Community detention, asylum seekers, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182667.htm

Bowen: Well then the police would investigate and lay charges.

Oldfield: And do they?

Bowen: Well I'm not, look, with Vanessa's call we'd need to -Oldfield: Because no, sorry Chris, of course you must understand  that none of us really believe any of this BS. I mean, we really don't  believe that there is an inventory and the police come in and say,  'Well it's not here so it is theft because it's not there and we're  going to charge you.' No one believes this happens. You don't  even sort of do anything about them when they set fire to buildings.

Bowen: Well David, you've invited me on the show today to talk  about this issue and I've accepted your invitation.

Oldfield: I have, and we're not trying to make it, I understand that -Bowen: I'm happy to talk about the issues, but if you're going to go  through and say this is BS, well then that's not really able to

progress the discussion. Now I'm telling you -Oldfield: But it sounds like BS Chris.

Bowen: Well David, I'm telling you that these are goods that are  not the property of the asylum seekers, they are the property of the  Red Cross on our behalf. Now if somebody has sold one of those  then that would be a criminal matter. Now Vanessa says she  bought if off a refugee: we don't know if that refugee was in  community detention who had already been processed by his  claims; she's made that allegation, I'm more than happy for her to  contact my department, give us all the details and we'll make the  appropriate investigations.

Oldfield: Look, we've probably got Vanessa's number, I'm not sure  if we've got it in the system, I'm not sure if we can -Bowen: Well, if you've got it you can give it to my office off-air and  we'll make contact with her, even better.

Oldfield: Will Vanessa face the possibility of having purchased  stolen goods?

Bowen: Oh look, if Vanessa's -Oldfield: You'll let her off on that?

Bowen: If Vanessa's alleging a crime, I'm sure it will be  investigated appropriately.

Oldfield: Can we reasonably expect she'll get immunity from  prosecution as going 'state's witness' on these things?

Bowen: Well, I'm not the Director of Public Prosecutions but I don't  think anybody's going to complain about Vanessa making a call.

Oldfield: Okay, well we'll see. As I say, I'm not sure whether we  have her number, depending on how it came on the system but  we'll definitely if we have, we'll contact Vanessa and we'll see.

Bowen: Sure, and if she's listening and you don't have her  number, then she should ring my office.

Oldfield: Minister, just a couple of more quick things: all of this is  taking place, the question is in a lot of people's minds the  justification compared to what Australians who really are in need  do, in fact, get themselves.

A call came through to one of our other programs the other day —  on Tim Shaw's program overnight — a lady pointing out the  difficulties that take place in public housing. If you could just bear  with us with this for a second.

Page 3 of 6 Community detention, asylum seekers, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182667.htm

Bowen: Yes. I heard it. I'm more than happy for you to play it, but I  did hear it live.

Oldfield: Here it is.

[Recording from caller]

Oldfield: 'Not use your washing machine or have a shower in the  same day'. These are the sorts of problems — and look I  understand Chris and of course, you worked in state government,  so we both appreciate that the Housing Commission is not  realistically something that your department takes care of — but  these are the sorts of things that Australians who are in difficult  circumstances are facing everyday.

Bowen: Absolutely, and I -Oldfield: They're facing situations where sewage is coming up  through their drains; where they're told not to take a shower and  use their washing machine, because of these problems, in the  same day. And they hear these stories and read this stuff about  these white good packages, DVD players, televisions, new beds,  every conceivable aspect of requirement for a kitchen, laundry  baskets, nice new shower curtains, smoke detectors, fire  extinguishers — they'll need those — should send some of those  out to Villawood.

It's just amazing what they're seeing. Can you understand how  Australians are sort of saying, 'Hang on a second, I was born here,  I came here under absolutely legal circumstances, became a  citizen, I've made a contribution to the nation, and this is how I'm  treated compared to these people who come here uninvited'?

Bowen: Well, David, let me say a few things. Firstly, I did hear that  interview and I hear similar stories all the time in my Fairfield West  office, when I'm talking to my constituents, etcetera. As you say,  public housing has been underfunded for a long time and has been  a big issue. And I should say we don't use any public housing for  community detention.

Oldfield: Well why would you with sewage coming up through the  drains?

Bowen: Why would we when that would add to the waiting lists?  So we just don't use it. The Red Cross sources its accommodation  through other people.

Oldfield: Clearly it doesn't meet the standard that's good enough  for asylum seekers, because Chris there's one more thing here.

Bowen: [inaudible]

Oldfield: Sorry, and I appreciate your time. There's one more thing  here and that is the suggestion — the allegation, indeed — the  very serious one that asylum seekers just get off scot-free on all

manner of things and when you hear this it might give more  credence to what I was suggesting to you before about we think it's  BS the idea that the police would investigate and find something  had been stolen and actually charge one of these people. This is a  Serco worker who was attacked while working.

[Recording from caller]

Oldfield: Now this bloke was a Serco worker who had boiling  water thrown on him by a person in one of the detention centres.  There were three other witnesses. There was nothing done to this  person at all. In fact, the person who was injured, the Serco  worker, working, in a de-facto sense, for us taxpayers, the  government, even had to wait second, third-hand for medical  attention because the first priority is the person who is the  assailant in this case.

Page 4 of 6 Community detention, asylum seekers, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182667.htm

Look, I feel for you Chris because it is a difficult position to be in  and I'm sorry you have to be here to answer these questions which  I know are not invited -Bowen: Well, that's my job, David.

Oldfield: But do you understand how this is unfolding for  Australians?

Bowen: Well David, let me say -Oldfield: It's a good thing you're not on the welcoming committee  for these boats because there's another one here today and you  wouldn't be able to do this interview.

Bowen: David, let me run through a couple of those things  because there are some very important points to make here.  Firstly, I'm aware of that case. Obviously I'm restricted about what I  can say about individual cases but I'm aware of that case and it  has been before the courts. I understand that the caller wasn't  happy with the result but nevertheless there's a process in place.

Secondly, there is absolutely no policy, of course there's not, and it  would completely outrageous to have a policy of providing medical  treatment to detainees before staff. That is simply not the case.

The final point I want to make is a general one, David. With all  these issues — regardless of whether it's community detention or  what's happening in detention centres etcetera — there's an  underlying issue here, which you correctly pointed out: it's boat  arrivals.

Do we want to stop boat arrivals? Of course we do. We have  legislation before the Parliament for offshore processing which we  want to see passed which would see people processed in different  countries.

Now, Tony Abbott says he wants to stop the boats but he won't  vote for the legislation that would do so. So if he's fair dinkum  about this, then say 'we'll give the Government of the day the  power to implement offshore processing, even if they're not doing it  the way we agree with'. And if he was serious about it, he'd say in  good faith, 'This government has said, okay, we'll open a detention  centre at Nauru' and he said no to that. He has said no to his own  policy.

So I'm not going to accept crocodile tears from Tony Abbott about  boat arrivals when there is a solution before the Parliament that he  refuses to vote for.

Oldfield: Minister, I appreciate you saying that and we all  understand the timing of that. Could I remind you of the timing of  the election of Kevin Rudd in 2007, who turned back the clock,  changed all of the laws and brought all of this upon us. Now you  must know that this mistake that has now brought in the last four or  five years, thousands and thousands of people to this nation is as  a consequence of the decisions made by the new Prime Minister in  changing the laws.

Bowen: You and I have been through this.

Oldfield: No, we haven't actually been through this.

Bowen: We have been through it David, I can recall -Oldfield: I'm just wondering whether you would acknowledge that  Labor made a mistake in changing the Howard Government's  policies when they first came to power?

Bowen: No, what I acknowledge is we need offshore processing.  We've got legislation before the Parliament to do it and I'd like to  see it passed and I wish Tony Abbott would vote for it.

Page 5 of 6 Community detention, asylum seekers, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182667.htm

Oldfield: Chris, I appreciate your time, as always.

Bowen: Good to talk to you, cheers.

See: Index of Speeches

URL:  http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182667.htm  Last update: Friday, 17 February 2012 at 14:04 AEST

Home Copyright & Disclaimer Privacy Department of Immigration and Citizenship

Page 6 of 6 Community detention, asylum seekers, offshore processing

5/06/2012 http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/cb/2012/cb182667.htm

