Current | Archives | Search

Q&A, ABC1 and ABC News 24 - Julian Assange; Australian  Olympic team; Julia Gillard; border protection; Australia’s  relationship with Indonesia; Fifty Shades of Grey book;  education funding; tobacco products

Posted on August 20, 2012 23:10

TONY JONES: Good evening. Welcome to Q&A. I'm Tony Jones. Answering your  questions tonight, The Australian's political columnist Janet Albrechtsen, outspoken  Labor Senator Doug Cameron, author and comedian Mandy Nolan, South Australian  Liberal Senator Simon Birmingham and Labor insider turned commentator Graham  Richardson.

...

TONY JONES: The first question tonight comes from Jack Milroy.

JACK MILROY: Julian Assange is wanted for questioning in Sweden over an alleged  sexual assault. In order to avoid being extradited to face these questions, he’s  blockaded himself in the Ecuadorian embassy. What does it say about Assange's  values that he would claim an alleged sexual assault on a woman is merely a  smokescreen for a US arrest? Do you think people would as easily dismiss such a  sexual assault allegation against a woman if it were made against a prominent  sportsperson?

...

TONY JONES: Doug Cameron.

DOUG CAMERON: I support Julian Assange and I have to say this, that if ...

TONY JONES: Unlike your own government?

DOUG CAMERON: Well, that's right. If you were fearful of your life, or fearful for  your freedom for the rest of your life, I think you would do anything and go  anywhere and that's why we’ve got refugees coming here and that's why Julian  Assange is looking for any way out of this. I actually had two officers from the  American embassy visit me last week, which is highly unusual for some... to visit the  Left of the Labor Party.

TONY JONES: And what was the purpose of that visit?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: And you didn't get arrested, Doug?

DOUG CAMERON: It was just apparently for a nice conversation but I raised the  issue of Julian Assange with them.

...

MANDY NOLAN: ... I actually think he was set up - how about that? - and I’m a  feminist, you know.

TONY JONES: Let’s hear what the other woman on the panel thinks. Janet  Albrechtsen?

JANET ALBRECHTSEN: Well, I don’t think he was set up. I think Julian Assange  and his supporters are looking for conspiracy theories everywhere. I think Julian  Assange chose to go to Sweden because he happened to like the whistle-blowing  laws in Sweden and he doesn’t like the sexual assault laws. You know, these are  actually serious charges and he knows that and let’s not lose sight of the fact that  there is a legal obligation on Britain to extradite Julian Assange to a country which is  a very fine western liberal democracy - much finer, may I say, as a liberal democracy  than Ecuador - and for Mr Assange to choose to seek asylum in a country like  Ecuador I think just screams of hypocrisy. For a man who talks so much about  freedom of expression to seek asylum in a country where freedom of expression is  nothing like you find in Sweden or Britain or the United States or Australia... and yet  here he is, you know, accusing all of us for not treating him right.

...

TONY JONES: ... we’ve got a lady down there with her hand up but I’ll just hear  from Simon Birmingham first while we get the microphone over to that lady.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Tony, there’s an absolute clear muddying of the issues  here and Jack, I think, really pinpointed it in his question and that is: there is a sexual  assault allegation in Sweden and then there’s the whole WikiLeaks saga and whether

Print page

20

Interview Transcripts

Page 1 of 6 Q&A, ABC1 and ABC News 24 - Julian Assange; Australian Olympic team; Julia Gil...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Default.aspx?tabid=63&articleType=ArticleVi...

or not there are any allegations to be answered in the United States and Julian  Assange could go to Sweden, face up to the sexual assault allegation and then, if the  United States want to charge him with anything, they can seek extradition from  Sweden and I have complete faith that the Swedish justice system - a good liberal  democracy, as Janet said - will, of course, actually address those cases just as fairly  as the British justice system or the Australian justice system and far more fairly,  probably, than the Ecuadorian justice system.

TONY JONES: Now, your... I’ll just bring you up here for a second. Your Deputy  Leader, Julie Bishop, seems to be arguing that the Government has not done enough  to support Julian Assange. She seems to have a slightly different view of things than  you.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, the Government didn't exactly help the situation in  those early days when Robert McClelland, when he was Attorney-General, Julia  Gillard as Prime Minister, all sought to basically say he was guilty of crimes, that  nobody has actually charged him of, in the United States, so the Government created  and actually added to this real problem that exists where people think Julian Assange  is being persecuted. He’s not being persecuted by anybody for anything aside from

perhaps Julia Gillard.

TONY JONES: Would... just let me just ask you this, then: would you be perfectly  happy to see him go and stand trial, perhaps before a military court, in the United  States, potentially with the death sentence?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: I haven't seen anybody suggest that's what's going to  happen. I would have concerns, if it were before a military tribunal, to see an  Australian civilian citizen go down that path, though, but this is a different matter...

TONY JONES: And if he were charged with espionage before a normal court and he  potentially faced the death penalty, what then?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: I’d have concerns if he faced the death penalty anywhere  in the world, Tony, as I do for any Australian facing the death penalty.

...

TONY JONES: Earlier today, the Australian Olympic team had a welcome home  parade in Sydney but back in Britain it seems the post-Games celebrations might go  on for some time yet. Here’s a video question we received just a short time ago from  Stephen Fernandes in London.

STEPHEN FERNANDES: My name’s Stephen Fernandes. I returned home to  the greatest nation in the world, the UK, to support our fantastic Team GB.  Tony, I want to ask you why are Australians so crap at sport? The Brits have  smashed Australians in every major sport including the Beijing Olympics, our  Olympics medal tally, the Ashes, the one-day series, the Tour de France et  cetera, et cetera. Need I go on? And also, Tony, I want to ask you why do the  Australian media slag off the Brits every time we kick your arses?

...

TONY JONES: Simon, what do you think?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: I’m not...

TONY JONES: What we see here is not the whinging pom of the past but the  winning pom, which is worse.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: The winning pom is a very ugly pom to see. If Doug wants  to go back and celebrate with him, though, he’s welcome to do so.

DOUG CAMERON: Don't associate me with poms!

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: The sooner we’re back at the top of the dais... that's where  Australia belongs; that’s where we should be fighting to be.

...

TONY JONES: Alright, let's get onto some serious matters now. We’ve got a  question from Fay Muhieddine.

FAY MUHIEDDINE: Julia Gillard's old law firm, Slater & Gordon, has declared that a  secret internal 1995 probe, into work the Prime Minister did for her then boyfriend,  found nothing which contradicted information provided by Ms Gillard. Tony Abbott  has been demanding that the Prime Minister make a full explanation to Parliament  about the incident and the Liberal Party seems adamant in pursuing personal attacks  against the Prime Minister. Doesn't the Party have more pertinent issues to be  dealing with?

TONY JONES: Graham Richardson.

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: I don't think I’ll speak for the Liberal Party. I might leave  that to Simon but, as far as I'm concerned, there are questions to answer over this  for her. I accept, I think, that she’s done nothing illegal. I don’t believe that, for  instance, if she said to them in this inquiry, as we were told on Saturday, that she  may have benefited from this slush fund, I don't worry about that too much because  then she produces receipts, she goes back home, finds the receipts, is able to satisfy  Slater & Gordon that all is okay, that she can show that she spent all the money that  needed to be spent so, as far as I'm concerned, she’s covered on that. The big

Page 2 of 6 Q&A, ABC1 and ABC News 24 - Julian Assange; Australian Olympic team; Julia Gil...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Default.aspx?tabid=63&articleType=ArticleVi...

question remains, though: why wouldn't she answer the question as to whether or  not there was a file created? It seems to me if you’re in a law firm and you do work  for a client - any client - you create a file. If it’s indeed true, as was suggested on  the weekend by another lawyer who used to be at the firm, Nick Styant-Browne,  whom I’ll come to in a second, that she didn't create a file, that's a serious matter  and you’ve got to say ‘why?’ because it’s pretty ordinary, isn’t it? I mean, it’s the first  thing you do as a lawyer, so I think she’s got to answer that question and if the  answer is ‘I did create a file,’ it’s all over. If the answer is she didn't, then she’s just  got to say why and Nick Styant-Browne, by the way... there are those at Slater &  Gordon who say that he’s a disgruntled ex who got asked to leave as well, so there’s  a few in that category. You have to be careful about what you accept and you have  to try and make sure that you’re sure of the information. The difficulty is it’s a long  time ago, some of the people involved are dead and some of them are going to be  soon, so, as far as I'm concerned, what I’d be doing if I were her is just answering  that last question. If she gets over that, this will go away. I don't understand why she  won't.

TONY JONES: Graham Richardson, the Paul Kelly confrontation on television  yesterday... just give us your political take on that.

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: Well, I mean, I’ve been bagging Julia Gillard for some  time. I think she’s got appalling judgement and that was a classic example of bad  judgment. If there is a senior journalist, you know, apart from Laurie Oakes, in this  country who is recognised, it’d be Paul Kelly. He is one of the most senior journos in  the country. To even suggest that he’d be getting told what to ask was absurd. It  was just dumb and she shouldn't have done it.

TONY JONES: She may have been told that by someone else, according to the...

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: Well, she, according to this... apparently, though... it’s  exactly what, you know, if you’re in positions like her or, if I’m interviewing someone,  I’ll often say ‘well, listen, I have to ask a question about this.’ It doesn't mean  someone told me to. I mean, I said to Joe Hockey the other day as we were chatting,  just before he came on my show, ‘Joe, I’ve got to ask you about boats, I know it’s  not your portfolio but I have to’ but no one instructed me to. It was just the way that  it was put and some of her junior staff - and I’ve... how many times have I talked  about her staff now - stuffed it up. It’s pretty common but, in the end, just to finish  it, Tony, you can't just blame the staff because you have to accept it. You make the  judgement at the end. If she’s dumb enough to accept that bad advice, it’s her  problem.

TONY JONES: Simon Birmingham, well, I mean I could argue that Graham  Richardson’s doing your job for you but, interestingly, this issue was not raised in the  Question Time today. Is the Opposition backing away from it because of all the shady  and interesting characters who are involved in this story?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: The Opposition has not really pursued this issue, Tony. It’s  been pursued...

TONY JONES: Well, except for Tony Abbott, as the questioner said.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Tony Abbott's words on the weekend were that we would  facilitate the Prime Minister making a statement to the Parliament. That’s all he had  to say on the matter, so Tony Abbott has...

TONY JONES: She should make a statement to the Parliament, I think he said.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Tony Abbott has not prosecuted this case. It has been  prosecuted well and truly, I suspect, far more so in the trade union movement than it  has by the Liberal Party, by Julia Gillard's enemies in the Labor Party far more so than  it has by the Liberal Party and there are, as Graham says, some questions that she  should answer. Where she chooses to answer them is her choice but if she addresses  those simple issues, which have been around for a long, long, long time and the  Prime Minister has stuck with the same words, the same formula, for an equally long,  long, long time... if she just answered a couple of simple questions, she may well be  able to make the whole thing go away.

TONY JONES: Okay, so just so that I’m clear on this, the Opposition tends to stay  above the fray on this issue, do they, and let all the work be done by journalists and  so on?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: I think the issue was first raised, this year, in the  Parliament by Robert McClelland, a Labor MP. We will leave it to the Labor Party,  their factions, the unions, the journalists and others.

TONY JONES: Alright, we’ve got a question from the floor there, or comment.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: Surely, as we see in America the media and both the  Democratic Party have been calling Mitt Romney to submit his tax returns and his  receipts. Surely, if Ms Gillard really does give in to the beck and call of the media and  everyone that calls on her to divulge every single things she does in her life, wouldn’t  that just open the door for everything, for her to bite everything the media says?

...

TONY JONES: A final quick comment from Simon.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: And, Tony, just to the original questioner, people of high  public profile, people in public office, our leaders, are rightly subjected to higher

Page 3 of 6 Q&A, ABC1 and ABC News 24 - Julian Assange; Australian Olympic team; Julia Gil...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Default.aspx?tabid=63&articleType=ArticleVi...

standards of scrutiny. That's the way it's always been. That’s the way it will always  be. It doesn't matter whether you’re Julian Assange or whether you’re Julia Gillard or  whether you’re Doug Cameron or Simon Birmingham, you’ll be subjected to  graduating higher levels of scrutiny and accountability and that will just keep being  applied and you’ve just got to deal with those issues to allow you to get on with the  job at hand.

...

TONY JONES: Our next question comes from Bryan Lewis.

BRYAN LEWIS: Thank you, Tony. I’ve believed in the core values of Labor all my  life but this reprehensible ‘to and fro’ of blame on the asylum seekers has to stop.  Liberal, Labor - both sides of Parliament disgust me. Human beings are dying. All  ‘solutions’ so far have been at the wrong end of the scale. Surely Indonesian and our  intelligence, police and armed forces have some idea of who the actual smugglers  are. Why can’t we get them? Go after the smugglers, not these poor bastards coming  by ship.

...

TONY JONES: Simon.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Bryan, was it?

BRYAN LEWIS: Yeah.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Yeah, Bryan, you’ve struck on something that is not talked  about often enough in this debate. We’ve talked about, for a long period of time now,  offshore processing and it being part of the solution. Occasionally we talk about  temporary protection visas or the type of visa mechanism you give and it being part  of the solution but Australia's relationship with Indonesia is absolutely critical to this  solution, Bryan, and you are spot on there and, of course, the relationship, and I'm  sorry to make the political point, Tony, on this but the relationship has gone  backwards in the last few years and the stark example there is the live cattle trade  decision where the Government just woke up one day after a Four Corners program  aired just before this program and said ‘we’re going to ban live cattle exports to  Indonesia’ - a third world country - ‘we’re going to take the food off the table. We’re  going to take the food off the table for you’ and that, of course, really harmed our  reputation.

TONY JONES: Okay, I’m going to say that you’ve veered, possibly for political  reasons, onto another subject and I’m going to go back to our questioner.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: It’s quite related, Tony. In fairness, the relationship with  Indonesia was seriously harmed by that.

TONY JONES: The relationship between cattle and people is not as clear to me as it  is to you.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: The relationship, Tony... in fairness, the relationship  between the Government of Australia and the Government of Indonesia was seriously  harmed by that decision.

...

TONY JONES: Our next question comes from Elena Eckhardt.

ELENA ECKHARDT: Thank you, Tony. My question’s for Janet Albrechtsen. I was  just wondering how Fifty Shades of Grey can be in any way empowering for women  when the female protagonist is controlled and owned by a rich and old man,  completely conforming to all sexist and stereotypical gender roles. Do you think the  novel would be nearly so successful if the female was cast in a role as the dominant?

...

TONY JONES: Mandy Nolan?

MANDY NOLAN: Well, you know, should I say more? I'm not into bondage myself .  I like the whistle in the bedroom, you know, a sort of a sporting thing. You’ve got to  know...

DOUG CAMERON: Is that not half time?

MANDY NOLAN: Exactly, half time, or when you can call offside but I don't know...  I personally find it ... I identify very clearly as a feminist, I have done since I was 17  years old - which is only 10 years ago - but I’m more disappointed in how badly  written it is. I’m more disappointed in our literacy levels. You can’t read a woman  that... you see, she’s not just hammering in the bedroom, she’s hammering the  adjectives, she’s hammering this... I mean... and the stereotypical characters upset  me. I’m going ‘can’t he be a bit Heathcliff or Rochester? Can’t he be like’... you know,  the BrontÃÂ« sisters wrote the best S&M you could ever have because it happened in  your head and there was longing, there was a guy with a gimpy leg coming at you...  to me, that’s so much hornier. I’m so disappointed that women have become so  ‘white bread’ with their S&M. Pick it up, girls! It’s really embarrassing and that’s my  feminist perspective.

TONY JONES: Graham Richardson.

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: You will not get me into this one! No way, I have no

Page 4 of 6 Q&A, ABC1 and ABC News 24 - Julian Assange; Australian Olympic team; Julia Gil...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Default.aspx?tabid=63&articleType=ArticleVi...

comment, period!

TONY JONES: You’ve heard of the book, right?

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: I’ve heard of it. People...

TONY JONES: Have you read the book?

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: No! No, nor have I looked at the pictures. No, I haven't  read the book and I won’t be reading the book...

TONY JONES: They’re mental pictures, Graham. It’s a book.

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: I know that, I know that. It was a joke. You’ve just got to  pick them up, mate. No, I’ve heard people talk about it but it’s not something I’m  going to read. I don’t think it was meant for me.

JANET ALBRECHTSEN: We know you’ve read it. We know you’ve read it. There’s a  whole group of people out there who’ve read it.

GRAHAM RICHARDSON: I’m not the target audience. Simon, perhaps - you can  talk to him.

TONY JONES: Simon, have you picked up the book? Have you skimmed through it?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: I have to confess, I’ve not picked up the book, Tony, but  go your hardest! Honestly, if people want to...

TONY JONES: So is that your...

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, indeed, the old populate or perish approach, perhaps.  If people want to enjoy this type of literature, that's fine. If people are reading,  frankly, happy days that they’re reading - that’s a good start.

TONY JONES: Is that ‘go your hardest’ with or without a whistle?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Entirely your choice - I’m a good liberal on these things.

MANDY NOLAN: Yeah, and bondage is going to be okay under a Liberal  Government.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: I hope it’s okay already!

TONY JONES: Do tell!

...

TONY JONES: Our next question comes via ABC Open in Horsham and it’s from Jo  Wheaton in Kaniva in Victoria.

JO WHEATON: Our family live in a rural farming community halfway between  Melbourne and Adelaide. We’ve chosen for our children to complete their  secondary education at the local public P-12 school. My question is for Simon  Birmingham. Given your own background, having been educated in the public  system, do you support the changes to education funding as recommended by  the Gonski Review [of Funding for Schooling Final Report]? Is it true that if the  current Labor Government implement the Gonski recommendation... that the  Coalition plan to repeal them if they come into power?

TONY JONES: Simon Birmingham.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Tony, look, I am very happily a proud product of the public  education system and I think there are a lot of teachers who do a wonderful job out  there and I wish we had a bottomless pit of money that we could plough into all  forms of education and empower parents to have maximum choice along the way.  There isn't a bottomless pit of money. Now, Gonski might be a wonderful step  forward if we had that bottomless pit. There are still some issues there about, of  course, creating losers along the way but we have to see what the Government’s  actually going to bring forward at present and all we’re seeing at present...

TONY JONES: Well, let's say it does accept the Gonski recommendations of $5  billion a year plus extra funding to reduce inequality in our schools. Would you  support that?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Well, if they can find $5 billion a year, plus extra funding to  reduce inequality, ensure that nobody else is worse off as they’re currently saying,  then it sounds fabulous. I’ve got no idea where the money’s coming from...

TONY JONES: Okay but let's say they identify where the money’s going to come  from and put it into their budget and you come up to an election. Do you then cancel  the program and take the money back?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Oh, if they can tick all the boxes, which is an amazing array  of boxes to tick, Tony... but if they can find the $5 billion, find extra funding for  disadvantage, ensure nobody’s worse off and that there is actually ongoing growth in  funding for all those receiving funding at present, address areas of inequality, provide  choice for parents in the system as well and fair choice that ensures people don't see  their students getting an ever-diminishing share of taxpayer dollars, then I think  we’ve got a good outcome but they’re an awful lot of boxes to tick and I struggle to  see at present how the Government's promises - and that's all they are, there’s no

Page 5 of 6 Q&A, ABC1 and ABC News 24 - Julian Assange; Australian Olympic team; Julia Gil...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Default.aspx?tabid=63&articleType=ArticleVi...

policy on the table - how those promises are going to stack up.

...

TONY JONES: Okay, we’re running out of time. We’ve got time for one last question  from Ben Miller.

BENJAMIN MILLER: Thanks. Last month, Cameron Nolan wrote an ‘op ed’ for The  Sydney Morning Herald in which he suggested the Government could mandate that  cigarettes be sold only to people over the age of 18 who were born after the year  2000, phasing out cigarettes in Australia by forever prohibiting their sale to the next  generation. Could this be the next step in reducing cigarette sales in Australia or will  it simply encourage criminal activity and a black market circa 1920s Prohibition in the  United States?

TONY JONES: Mandy Nolan.

MANDY NOLAN: I think it’s ridiculous, really. It’s a nice idea in principle but, look,  what I like the most... it’s going to make being old cool because you’re going to be  able to...

TONY JONES: What, it’s cool to smoke and die from cancer?

MANDY NOLAN: Well, that's not cool but you know how the edgy subculture works.  It’s oppositional. People are oppositional by nature. Of course prohibition creates a  black market. You’re becoming really prescriptive about what people can and can't  do. I mean, I don’t know, I’m all for sort of reducing smoking but I don't think, you  know... the plain packaging is a big win but put everything that's at risk in plain  packaging, like me...

TONY JONES: Hang on, just think about the logic that’s being said, though. It would  have to be a black market for quite a number of years as taken up by 12-year-olds  but that's not really going to happen, is it, so, I mean, there is an argument, and it’s  made quite widely, that if tobacco was introduced today, or it was proposed to be  introduced today, it would be rejected so why not actually reject it for your children  and for their future?

MANDY NOLAN: Well, you can reject it for the future. I don't want them to have it  but I don't know how you wipe it out. I don't believe that... I think it will go up in  smoke, honestly. I don't think it’ll happen.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: There’s already a very strong black market here, Tony. It’s  already out there in terms of bikie gangs and others making ‘chop chop,’ as they call  it, so there’s already the market base to produce more...

TONY JONES: You’re talking about... I’ll go back to what I just said. You’re actually  talking about setting illegal cigarettes on the black market to 12-year-olds for a  number of years?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: But the black market is already there avoiding taxes and  selling cigarettes through ways that provide cheaper cigarettes to the rest of the  population, so it’s already there. It will expand...

TONY JONES: But what do you make of the logic that I just put forward which is  that if you brought cigarettes in today, the health system, the Government, would  say ‘no, don't do it’ ...‘why?’ ... ‘because it causes cancer’ and if you then had the  opportunity to stop children from doing it, why wouldn't you do that?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: You might do that, Tony. You might equally say it’s actually  too hard to enforce that level of prohibition on a product that is not that hard to  make and that’s, of course, part of the problem you have and why that black  market’s there. Frankly, I think everybody who goes through our education system  nowadays, everybody who has an ounce of capacity to think, knows that smoking is  bad for you. They know it yet plenty choose to do it. At some stage, we have to say  ‘we’ve given people all the warnings in the world, now take a little bit of individual  responsibility.’

...

DOUG CAMERON: I don't think prohibition will work. I think it’s about good  government regulation. I think it’s about education - health education. I think that's  working and we should just take on these big tobacco companies that are still giving  money to the Liberal Party because that sounded as if where Simon was coming  from.

SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Yet you’ve taken the same policy position!

...

TONY JONES: ... I’m told that's all we have time for. We, in fact, have run out of  time. Please thank our panel - Janet Albrechtsen, Doug Cameron, Mandy Nolan,  Simon Birmingham and Graham Richardson ...

[ends]

Posted in: Interview Transcripts

Page 6 of 6 Q&A, ABC1 and ABC News 24 - Julian Assange; Australian Olympic team; Julia Gil...

7/02/2013 http://www.senatorbirmingham.com.au/Default.aspx?tabid=63&articleType=ArticleVi...

