CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP  *TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH ADAM SPENCER, ABC SYDNEY BREAKFAST

THURSDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2012



E&OE PROOF ONLY

SUBJECTS: Detention contracts, Opposition’s refusal to negotiate on  offshore processing, asylum seekers’ documentation.

ADAM SPENCER: The latest bill that’s been handed to the Federal Government  for the running of its detention centres is a fourfold increase from an original  contract of $279 million to just over $1 billion.

Chris Bowen is the Immigration Minister. Does the size of the bill surprise you,  Minister?

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning, Adam. I’ve always said that detention is  expensive and however you process asylum seekers - whether it be in detention  or in the community - is expensive. This is a contract which is, if you like,  backward looking. These figures were already factored into the Budget, so it’s  not an announcement of any new government expenditure today, but last  December we put the contract up on the website and it’s public to go through.

SPENCER: And so this is what the last four years has cost us or what it’s going  to cost us from now for the next four years?

BOWEN: Well, it’s a combination, it’s a contract. What we’ve done in the past,  Adam, is when we’ve needed to extend or build new detention centres, the  contract has just been added onto, and that’s happened over a period of years.  It’s better to have it all in one place in one contract and that’s what’s all been put  together.

SPENCER: How many new detention centres have we had to build and why  have we had to build so many new detention centres, Minister?

BOWEN: Well, we’ve had an increase in the number of people arriving in  Australia by boat over the last few years. That’s no surprise; I think that’s been  through the wringer a few times in the public domain. We’ve had to build, for

example, the new contract includes 10 new facilities spread around the country,  some of them being detention centres, some of them being other types of  accommodation. Some of those have closed in the time I’ve been minister, for  example - we’ve closed a few, we’ve opened some. We have had to open new

detention centres and this new budget, this new contract does reflect those and  reflects the sort of ad hoc additions to the contract that have happened in the  past.

SPENCER: Can I get you to respond to a couple of opinions put in this article in  today’s Daily Telegraph? Scott Morrison says when Labor came to office there  were just four people in detention who arrived illegally by boat; there’s now  5,600 due to the failings of your Government in this area.

BOWEN: Well, a couple of points. Firstly, if Scott Morrison really cared, really  cared about this, then he could have in a bipartisan fashion reached an  agreement with the Government. We offered several things that the Opposition  said they wanted in terms of offshore processing and the Opposition came back  with absolutely nothing.

And I think they’ve made the decision that it’s in their political best interest  because Scott Morrison can get cheap quotes up like that. It’s in their political  best interest to try and get more people arriving in Australia by boat despite the  dangers and despite their rhetoric.

The other point I’d make is that at the moment we do have a substantial number  of people living in the community under our community release program,  children and families being the focus of that. And in detention itself, on the  mainland and at Christmas Island, we have around 4,000 people.

SPENCER: Do you believe if the Opposition had walked along that path with  you, as you wanted, you could have broken the people smugglers’ model and  substantively reduced the number of people arriving by boat?

BOWEN: Absolutely no question about it, Adam. I think properly constructed  offshore processing would do that and that’s what we’re trying to do. What I  want to do, Adam, is spend this money in a better way. I would rather spend the  money we’re spending on detention and processing boat arrivals - whether it be

in detention centres or in the community - on actually lifting more people out of  misery, increasing our refugee intake, taking more people out of camps in Burma  and the Middle East and Africa who would never have the money or the  inclination to get on a boat or pay a people smuggler.

I reckon there’s a much better way to do this, but to pass the legislation through  the Parliament we would need a bipartisan effort and that’s why in good faith we  wrote to the Opposition and said, ‘ Why don’t we sit down and sort this through?’

The Opposition resisted, eventually agreed to a meeting, but then simply didn’t  want to play ball.

SPENCER: Can I ask you a quick question about the people who arrived by  boat? It was revealed in Senate Estimates that in the period July 2010 to 17  October last year, of the 3,237 asylum seekers who admitted flying to Indonesia  on a passport, 3,200 of them did not have any travel documents when they  arrived in Australia. So is it clear that part of this people smuggling model is  people who have passports and can prove who they are destroy that  documentation having flown to Indonesia before they get on boats to Australia?  And if so, what does that say about the people smugglers’ model and our ability  to accurately assess people’s claims?

BOWEN: Yeah, well, this is one of the challenges, Adam, you’re quite right. And  one of the things about this debate that annoys me is that there’s a lot of  generalisation and a lot of simplification. Every case is different. But yes, you do  get many people destroying their documents.

SPENCER: We’ve got effectively everyone destroying their documents now.

BOWEN: And often people say to me, ‘Why don’t you just process people more  quickly?’ Well, if somebody turns up in Australia with no documentation at all -  not just no passport, no visa, no identification, nothing - and they say, ‘Well, this

is who I am’ and we are meant to work out whether they really are who they say  they are, where they say they’re from. That takes time to investigate. But it does  make the process a lot longer and more complicated.

SPENCER: In making that assessment, if it’s known that that person had a  passport and a visa until a couple of weeks ago when they flew to Indonesia and  now they don’t have one, does that count against, is the only reasonable  assumption you can make in someone choosing to destroy their documentation  that they think it would assist their case?

BOWEN: Well, in some cases, documentation is lost, that is fair. In some cases,  in many cases, it is destroyed. And the decision maker can take into account the  destroying of documents in determining credibility of the claim. But at the end of  the day, somebody is a refugee or they’re not. I know the Opposition says, ‘Well,  if they didn’t have documents we’d presume they’re not a refugee.’ Well, you  can’t do that under the Refugees Convention. They’re a refugee or they’re not  and an independent decision maker has to make that decision. Are they at risk of  persecution if you sent them back to the country they came from? And whether  they’ve got documents or not, that can go to their credibility, but it can’t be used  to determine whether somebody’s a genuine refugee or somebody is simply  claiming to be a refugee and they’re not.

SPENCER: But critics say the system and the way it’s working at the moment  say that the people smugglers are laughing at us and people who arrive in this  country laugh at us. They take the documents, they destroy them and then we  give them the benefit of the doubt.

BOWEN: Well, it’s not the benefit of the doubt. Independent decision makers  weigh up all the evidence and, you know, we do have a rigorous process and a  lot of people are regarded as not refugees under the process by independent  decision makers, and then there’s a different outcome where somebody’s  regarded as a refugee.

But, you know, again, this underlines the reason why I want to have a different  model. I want the processing to be done by the UNHCR, by the United Nations,  all these things taken into account, in countries where people have gone to,  whether it be Pakistan, whether it be Malaysia, whether it be Syria or Jordan,  and I want that processing done and then I want us to be taking refugees out of  those camps directly to Australia, with none of these obstacles that we get  thrown up. And that’s why offshore processing is so important. That’s why a  bipartisan solution is there to be reached, could be reached; we’ve attempted in  good faith to reach it.

And then I’d like Australia, which already takes the highest number of refugees  per capita in the world for our resettlement program, to actually do more and  spend that money more wisely in lifting more people out of misery and  persecution.

SPENCER: Thank you so much for your time this morning, Chris Bowen.

Ends



