CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

MEDIA RELEASE  31 May 2012

ABBOTT RECORDS ‘NO’ VOTE AGAINST OFFSHORE  PROCESSING

The Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, Chris Bowen MP, today welcomed the House  of Representatives voting offshore processing legislation through to the next stage of  consideration, and called on Tony Abbott to reverse his ‘no’ vote and work in the national  interest when the legislation returns to the Parliament.

Mr Bowen said Rob Oakeshott had put forward his legislation in the spirit of compromise and  in an attempt to break the political impasse over offshore processing.

“We acknowledge the spirit in which the Member for Lyne has brought this legislation  forward, which today saw the House of Representatives vote for the private member’s bill to  be debated in detail,” Mr Bowen said.

“It would have been nice if Tony Abbott had put away his destructive negativity and brought  the same constructive attitude as Mr Oakeshott to the offshore processing debate.

“For weeks, the Coalition has been calling for this legislation to be brought on, only to vote  against it today - as we knew they would.”

Mr Bowen said while the bill was not the preferred mechanism to re-establish the legal basis  for offshore processing, it was a major step forward, which is why the Government voted in  support.

“The Coalition has had so many opportunities now to support offshore processing. We gave  Mr Abbott and Scott Morrison every opportunity to say ‘yes’ in the national interest,” he said.

“Whatever the Coalition may say about this bill and about offshore processing - today,  tomorrow or the next day - it will not erase the fact that their actions over the last 12  months mean that offshore processing remains impossible.

“Until they are prepared to allow offshore processing to occur, the Australian people will  have no choice but to conclude that the Coalition prefers to see more boats arrive because  Tony Abbott believes it is in his political interest.”

Mr Bowen said the Government had repeatedly offered to compromise and put forward a  written proposal in good faith, which was rejected out of hand.

“We offered them their own policy of Nauru. We offered an inquiry into Temporary  Protection Visas. But they still said ‘no’. They said ‘no’ to the Government’s offshore  processing legislation, just as they said ‘no’ today to Rob Oakeshott’s bill.”



Media Contact: Bill Kyriakopoulos 0400 510 802 / Laura Stevens 0432 833 769

