







Transcript - Sky News Interview

9 December, 2012

Topics: Syria post Assad regime, recognition of the Syrian National Coalition



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Gemma Veness: Former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is at the International Institute of Strategic  Studies conference in Manama, Bahrain where questions are being raised about the security  situation in the Syrian region. Mr Rudd has just spoken at a session on Middle East security and he  joins us now on the phone. Mr Rudd thank you for your time, what is the end game for Syria likely to  be and from all intelligence so far how far off is it?

Kevin Rudd: Well the battle for Damascus has already begun and I think there is general consensus  among analysts that we are now into the endgame period. No one is prepared to predict the day and  the hour but the end of the regime is in sight. Therefore there are a couple of critical challenges  which lie ahead which the international community is now focusing on and must now focus on.

One is preventing the Bashar al-Assad regime from using chemical weapons. Two is in the event of  regime change to make sure that those chemical weapons are put into secure control immediately,  three is the international community must also prepare for the rest of the major task of stabilizing  the country day one after the Assad regime falls.

Gemma Veness: Picking up on that very frightening prospect there you mention about the chemical  weapons, of course we are hearing that chemical weapons are being prepared for use by President  Assad, what will this mean?

Kevin Rudd: Well chemical weapons are not called weapons of mass destruction for no idle reason.  They are weapons of mass destruction capable of killing tens of thousands of people. Therefore both  Russia and China have made it explicit to Bashar al-Assad and his regime that this is an action which  is completely unacceptable and unsupportable by them. Of course it would be a crime against  humanity for the regime to deploy such weapons against its own people.

But the parallel challenge is, if these weapons are not used, that once the regime has gone, to put  those weapons under secure international control immediately. That’s where the UN must step in,  that’s where the International Atomic Energy Agency must step in and it is where other competent  national governments acting under UN authorization, such as the Americans and others must have a  role to play as well.

Gemma Veness: And Mr Rudd, what does the unification of the rebel command mean?   Kevin Rudd: Well these developments have unfolded rapidly. Only two weekends ago at Doha in  Qatar here in the Gulf a final agreement was put together to bring together opposition forces within  what’s called the Syrian National Coalition. This was a major diplomatic breakthrough brokered by in  part the Qataris and to some extent the Turks as well as others in the Gulf Cooperation Council.

Over the last several days both the Turks and the Qataris have also been at work with various  representatives of the Syrian National Coalition to integrate their activities with the strategic  command structure of what’s called the Free Syrian Army. This is a difficult and complex task given  that opposition forces are being targeted on a daily basis with substantial weaponry still in the  possession of the regime.

Gemma Veness: With this end now in sight, now you are right there amongst everything in terms of  what the international community is saying, what are they saying?

Kevin Rudd: Well the core challenge now is not just how and when the regime concludes its period  in office, and whether or not Bashar al-Assad and those around him will seek refuge in other states  which in terms of minimizing bloodshed would be the smart thing to do right now. But the other  equal emphasis is what happens on day one once the regime collapses. There we have had a  discussion about a number of things, the first is the absolute importance of the United Nations  Security Council having ready a comprehensive resolution which deals with the day one tasks of  peace enforcement, peacekeeping, stabilisation, truth and reconciliation so you don’t have a  breakout of retribution killings across the country.

As well as the urgent humanitarian task which confronts a country where half the hospitals have  already been destroyed and the economic task of beginning to rebuild economic infrastructure.

The other task for the international community through the UN is this: to make sure that not just a  comprehensive resolution is ready, but there is an operational plan and forces ready to deploy on  day one as well. We cannot afford a strategic vacuum to occur in Syria. This would be a disaster.  Therefore we as incoming members of the Security Council have a role to play here as well and I am  confident Foreign Minister Carr is doing that.

Gemma Veness: And finally, what lessons should be learned from Libya?

Kevin Rudd: I believe that one of the important lessons is to ensure that we have appropriate  international recognition of opposition forces going into the endgame in terms of the still developing  civil war within the country. For example there is a meeting of Friends of Syria which occurs at  Marrakesh in Morocco in the coming week.

I think the time has come for Australia to move towards full formal recognition of the Syrian National  Coalition as a number of Europeans have done and I believe the Americans will do in due course.  This is important to provide legitimacy for that coalition to help form an interim administration in  Damascus once the regime goes but also for that to be underpinned through the international legal  legitimacy of appropriate UN Security Council resolutions as well. That is core, that is critical and the

big challenges will be day one after the regime collapses. We have no interest in Syria itself  imploding as a state. Apart from anything else, the further devastation of the Syrian people and the  outflow of Syrian refugees will be enormous.

ENDS

Mr Rudd’s Office: 0457 791 556

