Minister for Trade and Competitiveness  Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Asian Century Policy  Minister for Tertiary Education, Skills, Science and Research

The Hon Dr Craig Emerson MP

Sky AM Agenda Subjects: Newspoll, carbon pricing, asylum seekers.

Transcript, E&OE (Errors and Ommissions Excepted)

10 July 2012

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda, good to have your company this morning. With me  now from Brisbane is the Trade Minister Craig Emerson. Dr Emerson, thanks for your time.  The Treasurer Wayne Swan said that the carbon tax was going to be a 'game changer'. Not  much has changed in the poll today.

CRAIG EMERSON: Well what has happened is that the carbon price came in on the first of  July, last Sunday a week ago, and Mr Abbott's credibility has fallen to the ground but the sky  hasn't. It is Mr Abbott who was saying that price rises would be unimaginable; that seven  communities would be wiped off the face of the earth; and his sidekick Barnaby Joyce saying  that a leg of lamb would cost $100. So Mr Abbott's been exposed for this scare campaign.  People are getting on with their lives, Kieran. That's the point, and there hasn't been this sort  of catharsis that Mr Abbott said that there would be and he needs now to explain why he set  out deliberately to terrify communities and to misrepresent the facts about the carbon price.  It's his credibility that's lying in pieces on the ground now.

GILBERT: These numbers have been entrenched for months and months and months. Are  you worried that people have just stopped listening to Prime Minister Gillard?

EMERSON: Well what I would say about all of this is that Mr Abbott has engaged in the  mother of all scare campaigns. People are getting on with their lives. I know even to up to last  week, Kieran, we had people saying 'gee, where do I pay this carbon tax? I'm a printer or  whatever, where do I put it on the invoice?'. What has actually happened since the first of July  is that people have come to realise that all of this mysticism about carbon pricing has not  really been a concern. They will get on with their lives; the chooks will get up in the morning  and lay their eggs; and we'll get on with the job of governing, Kieran. We don't get out of bed  every Tuesday morning and check Newspoll, or every second Tuesday morning. What we do  is make the right decisions in the long-term interests of this country and I think it's fair that we  make decisions, for example about carbon pricing, knowing that they're tough decisions,  knowing that they're not particularly popular decisions, instead of putting that off to future  generations, booking up these problems to future generations and expecting them to pick up  the tab on this. What we're doing is make the right decisions for the country's future.

GILBERT: On the asylum seeker policy there, in the Daily Telegraph today Simon Benson  reports this letter from Tony Abbott to Julia Gillard saying that he won't be involved in the  multiparty committee suggesting that it's the same alliance that enabled the passage of the  carbon tax, it's been set up to achieve a predetermined political outcome. What I'm baffled  about is how the Government even thought Tony Abbott was ever going to agree to it. He was

Page 1 of 3 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 10 July 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Competit...

27/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120710.html

never going to get around the same table as the Greens, Tony Windsor and the Government  and work on a deal here. He believes the Coalition's got the right policy and you should adopt  it.

EMERSON: Well any Opposition Leader deserves the courtesy of being invited onto a  multiparty committee. I am not shocked that Mr Abbott has decided that he's not doing that.  He does not believe that it's the role of an opposition to behave in the national interest;  notwithstanding that John Howard when he was Prime Minister repeatedly argued that it was  the role of the Labor Opposition on matters of national interest to support the Coalition. We  did that on many pieces of national security legislation and we also did it….

GILBERT: But he believes the national interest is that the Coalition policy be reinstated  because it worked.

EMERSON: Let me make the parallel: we did not believe in all aspects of John Howard's  policy on asylum seekers. Nevertheless, we recognised that John Howard had formed the  government of the day and as a consequence the Labor opposition actually joined with the  Liberal National Party government and allowed particular aspects of asylum seeker policy to

be implemented - not because we thought it was exactly the right policy but we thought we  had a responsibility to behave in the national interest in opposition, as John Howard called  upon us to do. Mr Abbott believes he has no responsibility to do that. One consequence of  that and a terribly tragic one is that people are dying at sea. And Mr Abbott, 'Captain  Courageous', he's got this policy of towing back boats into Indonesia and he says 'look we  really need to nurture the relationship with Indonesia.' You would think that he would have  raised this with the President of Indonesia. It's been confirmed today he did not. 'Captain  Courageous' lacked the guts to raise the tow back policy with the President of Indonesia.

GILBERT: Well he would say that he'd wait until he's in government. Why do it from  opposition?

EMERSON: Because he's supposed to be developing alternative policies. He says he's got a  whole kit bag full of alternative policies, fully-costed election policies. And he's saying that this  is the right policy for Australia and that relations with Indonesia are vitally important. During

the live cattle trade issue we had the Coalition saying 'you need to be very careful about  damaging the relationship with Indonesia.' That pales into complete insignificance compared  with a policy of using Navy ships, risking Navy lives to tow back boats into Indonesian waters.  This is completely unacceptable behaviour. The Indonesians know it; Mr Abbott knows it; and  that's why he's so gutless as to not have the courage to raise it with the President when he  had the opportunity.

GILBERT: And finally, Minister, on the Greens and the stoush with the Greens: if they're so  extremist, loopy, populist - they're some of the descriptions your colleagues have used about  the minor party - why is the Government in alliance with them?

EMERSON: Well we work with the Parliament as it is. And it's only been, I think, between… in  the late '70s one time, and then between 2004 and 2007, that the government of the day has  had a majority in both Houses of Parliament. Labor has worked with the Democrats; we've  worked with Independents; we've worked with Greens. And while I have my criticisms of the  Greens too, I think it's a bit rich for George to say they are an 'anti-democratic movement'. I  mean, the people of Australia did actually vote them into the Senate, George. What are you  saying? That we should ban the Green Party? Yes, we have our criticisms of the Greens,  including the fact that the Greens sided with the Coalition in preventing any resolution of  asylum seeker policy after the High Court's decision, and that resolution is necessary after the

High Court's decision. And the Greens and the Coalition on this matter have formed an

Page 2 of 3 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 10 July 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Competit...

27/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120710.html

unholy alliance trying to stop any change in policy whatsoever. So again, I call on the Greens,  I call on the Coalition to consider the national interest and help achieve the outcome of trying  to stop people dying at sea. That's fundamentally important. It's the moral thing to do.

GILBERT: Trade Minister Craig Emerson, thanks for your time this morning. I appreciate it.

EMERSON: Thanks a lot, Kieran. Thanks very much.

Media enquiries

Minister Emerson's Office: (02) 6277 7420

DFAT (Department of Foreign Affiars and Trade) Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

Page 3 of 3 Sky AM Agenda, transcript, 10 July 2012, Australian Minister for Trade and Competit...

27/06/2013 http://www.trademinister.gov.au/transcripts/2012/ce_tr_120710.html

