UNCLASSIFIED





CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH MELISSA CLARKE, ABC NEWS 24

TUESDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Changes to the Migration Act, Nauru, Malaysia Arrangement.

MELISSA CLARKE: Chris Bowen, thanks for joining us.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, Melissa.

CLARKE: Will you bring in legislation or amendments this week to excise the mainland  from Australia’s migration zone?

BOWEN: Well, what I’ll be doing is bringing in legislation tomorrow which makes it clear  that if you reach the mainland by boat you don’t receive an advantage over those  people who only make it to Christmas Island or Ashmore Reef. And it would be a  particularly perverse incentive to say to people, ‘Look, we’re trying to save lives here. If  you make it to Christmas Island or Ashmore or another excised island you’ll be  transferred overseas, but if you stay on the boat another couple of days and you make  the mainland then you’ll be okay, you won’t be processed in a different country’ - that’s  a particularly perverse incentive. So we’ve adopted the recommendation of the Houston  Panel to change that law.

CLARKE: If the ultimate aim of this is to try and save lives, to prevent people from  going that extra part of the journey, couldn’t you go the other way and allow people  who arrive on islands to have the same rights to judicial review and to be processed  locally? Wouldn’t that ultimately have a safer outcome in terms of preventing people  from, say, trying to go to New Zealand like we saw a boat try to do, the Chinese boat  that came?

BOWEN: Absolutely not, because then you would be encouraging boat arrivals to  Australia full stop. These are difficult decisions for everybody, but we do need to have in  place a properly integrated system which says to people there’s a safer way of getting to  Australia; we’ve increased the refugee intake to 20,000, I’ve announced where those  places will be allocated to, we’ve already started processing people and people who  have come to Australia under that increase.

But if you get on a boat, if you come to Australia, regardless of where you land you’ll be  subject to being processed under the arrangements which could see you taken to a  different country.

CLARKE: What’s your legal advice on this, because the Greens are maintaining that this  would breach Australia’s obligations under international conventions?

BOWEN: They’re wrong. They’re wrong. Our legal advice is very clear: that this is in  keeping with our obligations, particularly under the Refugee Convention.

CLARKE: Even though it discriminates between the difference between people arriving  by plane as opposed to by boat?

BOWEN: Well, clearly, we already have a system of differential processing; people who  arrive by boat without a visa as opposed to those who arrive by plane and claim asylum,  who almost always have a visa. We do have different arrangements in place because  people arriving by boat are risking their lives. And yes, we have obviously got legal  advice from the relevant legal advisers and it’s very clear that we are entirely in keeping  with our obligations under the Refugee Convention.

CLARKE: Are all your colleagues comfortable with this move - because the Labor Party  campaigned against this very heavily when John Howard moved to excise the islands  from the migration zone, and we know that some Labor MPs were very reluctant in  accepting Houston’s recommendations - are they all backing you on this?

BOWEN: Well, look, obviously, there are always strong views all across Parliament  about these sorts of things. I’ve come to learn over the last two years that immigration  decisions, particularly around asylum, can be controversial. But the Government and the  caucus are fully supportive of the efforts to save people’s lives, to get a fairer, orderly  process.

CLARKE: But I understand issues were raised in caucus?

BOWEN: Of course there’s a caucus discussion. I’ve got to say I’ve been involved in  some pretty robust caucus discussions over the years and this wouldn’t count as one of  those.

CLARKE: Now, we have asylum seekers being processed in Nauru; that’s up and  running. The Nauru Government says they’re going to charge $1,000 per month, per  asylum seeker, potentially for years, given that there’s a ‘no advantage’ test here. Have  you written the Nauru Government a blank cheque?



BOWEN: No, not at all. In fact, ‘blank cheque’ was the term used by Peter Reith when  he was in charge of negotiating with Nauru and he was the one who said, ‘Oh, John  Howard gave me a blank cheque, it didn’t matter what it cost, just get it done’. That’s  where the blank cheque comes in. I’ve not written a blank cheque.

We’ve always said that we would make sure that Nauru wasn’t out of pocket. Of course  we’re having an impact on Nauru and Nauru is a small country, small population. We’re  a very significant increase in that population and of course it’s had an impact. We’ve  always said we’d pay for those expenses. Now, how it’s done is a matter that we’ve  been discussing with Nauru and what is actually paid for out of those visa charges is  something we’ve been discussing with them, and they’re ongoing discussions. But the  only blank cheque ever taken to Nauru was taken by Peter Reith.

CLARKE: So if there’s $1,000 per month, per asylum seeker, a couple of years - if you  negotiate to have that raised paying for some things that Nauru would need to do, does  that mean that eliminates other charges that Nauru might otherwise impose on the  Australian Government?

BOWEN: Well we have factored into our costings for Nauru all these, making sure that  Nauru is not out-of-pocket and is appropriately paid for the services that are being  rendered, and the impact on the small island of Nauru. So that’s - all these things have  been - are being worked through with Nauru as part of the very regular interaction I’m

having with my colleagues, the Nauruan ministers and officials, and the departments are  having, in order to make sure this is as smooth a process as possible.

CLARKE: Now all these steps are being done in response to the Houston Panel - the  Government’s adopting all the recommendations - but central to those  recommendations was the Houston Panel saying that Australia must continue to develop  its cooperation with Malaysia on asylum seekers and that that Malaysia agreement must  be built on further, rather than being discarded or neglected. So what negotiations are  currently taking place with Malaysia?

BOWEN: Well you’re right, and thanks for putting that out, because this is the key  difference here. We’ve always said that, look, Nauru and Manus Island and things like  that can be part of a solution, but unless you can actually send a very clear message  that if you come to Australia by boat, you run the risk of being sent to Malaysia, for  example, and not resettled in Australia, that is what will have the maximum impact.

CLARKE: So what meetings are going on?

BOWEN: So, we’ve been interacting with the Malaysian Government, but I’d make this  point: unless and until we can be confident of getting the Malaysia agreement approved  by the Parliament, that would mean the Liberal Party or the Greens party indicating  support for a Malaysia agreement that was brought back to the Parliament, then it is a  hypothetical moot point. We could do all the discussions -

CLARKE: So it’s on-hold until -



BOWEN: - We could do all the discussions with Malaysia that we wanted, and the  Malaysians have been steadfast friends of Australia in this, they haven’t blinked in the  light of the trashing of their reputation by the Liberal Party in a quite irresponsible way -

CLARKE: But what you’re saying now -

BOWEN: - But I would want to see, I want to see some indication - I mean, Tony  Abbott has said in the past he would never support the Malaysia agreement under any  circumstances. Let’s see some indication that they’re actually fair dinkum about stopping  the boats by actually saying, ‘Well the Government’s done the right thing here, the  Government’s been very flexible, they’ve adopted policies like Nauru and Manus Island -

CLARKE: But by saying that you’re not going to move until the Coalition moves first -

BOWEN: Well no -

CLARKE: - Aren’t you doing precisely what Houston says which is it’s discarding and  neglecting that idea because it’s all too hard?

BOWEN: Nobody believes in the Malaysia agreement more than me or the Government,  and with respect, you’re not quite accurately reflecting what I just said.

What I am saying is that all discussions with Malaysia, all the things that we could do to  comply with the suggestions of the Houston Panel, which said it’s a very good  agreement and deserves to be built on and is a vital breakthrough, et cetera, all of that  is hypothetical when you’ve got a Leader of the Opposition who says he will never, ever  support an agreement with Malaysia. So negative about it because, as I’ve said before, I  think he knows deep-down that is one thing that will very clearly work to break the  people smugglers business model and it doesn’t suit his political best interests for that to  occur.

CLARKE: Chris Bowen, thanks very much for joining us.

BOWEN: Thank you, Mel.

Ends

UNCLASSIFIED



