Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Asylum seeker legislation, compromise with the  Coalition, expert panel  Friday, 29 June 2012

Interview with David Lipson, Sky News

David Lipson: Chris Bowen, thanks for your time.

Chris Bowen: Pleasure, David.

Lipson: Parliament sat until four o'clock this morning, beyond four o'clock this  morning. Andrew Wilkie moved a motion to try to continue debate but now  politicians have already started leaving Canberra. We're going to go to six week  break without any firm commitment on asylum seeker policy. What does that mean,  and is that an indictment on this place?

Bowen: Well it's very disappointing, very disappointing. The House of  Representatives passed a Bill to enable offshore processing. The Senate, for  political reasons, voted it down: the Greens and the Liberals combining to vote  against offshore processing.

I was hoping this morning David, to be spending this morning on the phone to  Malaysia and Nauru and putting in place a very comprehensive offshore processing  regime. That's what I was hoping to be doing this morning. I could've been doing  that today; we could have had these two arrangements up and operating in coming  months and we could have been starting that operation today.

Instead, we've seen the Parliament in gridlock because the Greens and the Liberals  have combined - and only the Greens and Liberals. Every other crossbencher  voted with the government in both Houses, Senate and House of Representatives,  to say we've got to give the government the chance to stop these deaths.

Lipson: But you knew the Greens and the Liberals would vote against this. They  made this very clear from the very start, so you're accusing them of playing politics  in the Senate but wasn't this doomed from the very moment it went through the  House of Representatives?

Bowen: It doesn't have to be that way David, it doesn't have to be that way. You  know, we -

Lipson: But you could've accepted, for example, Scott Morrison's amendment from  the start; that would have actually gone through the Senate.

Bowen: Which was designed to cripple the government's Bill. The government has  moved here, comprehensively: moved to offer Nauru; moved on TPVs in  discussions with the Liberal Party; begun the consultations with the Liberal Party

and discussions with the Liberal Party last year. In return, the Liberal Party has  moved not one centimetre. It didn't have to be that way; we could have had  discussions all this week with the Liberal Party, the door was open - and with the  Greens.

So, this is what we've done: time to stop talking at each other - the Parliament has  been doing that this week - time to step back. The government's has had the  benefit of expert advice for months, as we've said publicly ad nauseam, saying that  what you need is an agreement like Malaysia to break this.

Now, what we want to do is a formal process to have that expert advice shared  through the Parliament. We've made it available to the Opposition and the  crossbenchers in the past; we've made our experts available. But clearly that hasn't  cut through, so let's get three eminently respected experts in this field, let's get  them working with every single Member of Parliament and let's try and get a  breakthrough this way.

Now, it's not the ideal, it's not our preferred option. We would have preferred to see  legislation pass the Parliament yesterday and me, being here today in Canberra,  managing the transition to a new offshore processing regime. That's what I had  hoped would be in my diary today; it's not.

Lipson: This committee though - it's just outsourcing the problem isn't it?

Bowen: No, it's not. You've got Angus Houston, Paris Aristotle, Michael L'Estrange.  Three eminently respected experts in their fields - in this field. We want to make  them available to the Parliament; we want to make all the intelligence agencies, the  Department of Immigration available to those three people and then have them  working with the cross-party reference committee and the entire Parliament, making  those expert views available. Now we'll take their views very seriously. I hope other  parties do too. I include in that -

Lipson: - You haven't committed to following their recommendations, have you?

Bowen: Every political party, we would respect, has its own processes. So, the  Liberal Party would have its own processes of consultation internally that they have  to go through - we respect that, so would the Greens, and so do we. But obviously,  when you've got those three people making clear recommendations, certainly -  from our point of view - we would deal very very seriously with that indeed.

I would hope that even the Greens, who've been implacably opposed to offshore  processing in the past, would look very closely at this work and say, 'If this could  save lives, this is worth really doing', and I would hope the Liberal Party too would  put its pride aside and work with this group and work to accept their  recommendations.

Lipson: Do you concede though, while this group is looking into this, that there  could be more drownings at sea?

Bowen: Obviously David, until this is resolved and until offshore processing is in  place, the risks are high. That's why we introduced the legislation. That's why we  argued it so strongly in the Parliament. We got it through the House of  Representatives - against the odds, I might say. We convinced Independents who  had previously been very strong in their opposition, who've come around to our

point of view, to do so. Every single crossbench MP, except for the Greens, in the  end supporting the government's position because of, I think, the strength of our  arguments and the passion of our arguments to them. And all credit to them - to Mr  Wilkie, who previously had been very critical of offshore processing, saying  something's got to give here, people are dying at sea.

That's the sort of attitude we want to see in the Parliament. The Labor Party and the  government, I'll be quite clear, has had to move here. We've had to change our  position to try and get something through - not something that's always easy for a  political party to do. We've done it and we're the only ones who have. The Greens  and Liberals -

Lipson: - You haven't changed that position in six months. It's the same position,  essentially, that you had at Christmas-time last year that was not acceptable to the  Greens or the Opposition. What's changed?

Bowen: Well it is a substantial concession - substantial compromise on behalf of  the government. We've made it clear, we were happy to talk to the Opposition and  see what else we would need to do to make this work.

Lipson: Then why didn't you speak to Scott Morrison this week then and why didn't  Prime Minister Julia Gillard speak with the Opposition Leader Tony Abbott?

Bowen: Well of course - I mean, I speak to Scott Morrison regularly as Minister  and Shadow Minister -

Lipson: In a formal sort-of consultation process?

Bowen: Well the Prime Minister and I have both made it clear, through various  means, that we are available to speak to the Opposition, that we wanted to speak to  the Opposition -

Lipson: Why not officially, formally invite them?

Bowen: Well we've done that. No. No, hang on, we have, we have David, to be  clear.

Lipson: This week?

Bowen: Now let's be clear, we did that. We had discussions, they broke down. The  last piece of correspondence from us to the Opposition says we stand ready to re-begin these negotiations at any point. That's the position.

Lipson: Why not give it another prod, this week?

Bowen: Well we have, but we have. The Prime Minister said very clearly, 'I am  available', in -

Lipson: Not with a phone call though.

Bowen: Well frankly this is Year 7 stuff from Tony Abbott, saying, 'She didn't call  me'.

Lipson: Well why not get above it?

Bowen: Well we have got above it, David, by saying we are available. Let's not get  bogged down to who called who here, the government's position is very clear: we  want this sorted. The Opposition's position has been, 'Never ever, over my dead  body; not going to happen' - pretty different approaches.

Lipson: Malcolm Turnbull said this week, 'Why not just try Nauru, leave Malaysia  aside for now, if it doesn't work then you can go to Malaysia, at least we'll be doing  something, at least we'll be trying something that could save lives'. Why not go  down that path?

Bowen: That's not the Liberal Party's position. If that was the Liberal Party's  position that would be something we could talk to them about. The Liberal Party's  position is 'never ever Malaysia, over my dead body', as expressed by -

Lipson: Their position was the amendment that was moved by Scott Morrison, that  would rule out Malaysia, to be passed through the Parliament, that would allow  Nauru. Why not pass that this week, get that going, if it doesn't work then we can  look at Malaysia later on?

Bowen: Well again, that is not the Liberal Party's position. I know Malcolm Turnbull  said that, but he was not indicating a Liberal Party position, we have to deal with  what the Liberal Party's position is. But on your question -

Lipson: Scott Morrison made that point this week several times. That was what  was the sticking point, he moved that amendment, if that had gone through then  you could've reopened Nauru.

Bowen: The amendment is designed to cripple government policy. Let's go through  - look. Nauru in and of itself as a detention centre offshore, all the expert advice to  us is would not work. Why? Well look at the history: when Nauru was opened, boats  kept coming, it was full, then they had to open Manus Island as well because more  boats kept coming, and the biggest single maritime disaster in relation to an asylum  seeker boat, SIEV X - the loss of 353 lives, men, women and children, was when  Nauru was open. So this idea that, well we could open Nauru and that would at  least avoid the drownings, I'm sorry, it just doesn't work. We -

Lipson: Surely it would be something though? I mean, it's better than a deadlocked  Parliament, it's better than nothing.

Bowen: We have to put the case as to good policy and we've put that and we've  moved substantially and compromised. And compromise means two parties coming  together and working out a mutually acceptable way. What's happened here is the  government's come and tried to work out a mutually acceptable way and put things  on the table, the Opposition has not compromised, they've lectured. Now a  compromise does not result from a lecture, a compromise results from good-faith  discussions.

Now this is bitterly disappointing. As I say David, I could've been spending today  putting together, as Immigration Minister, the detailed operational elements of a  very comprehensive offshore processing regime, and the time for arguing over  Nauru and Malaysia, in my view, has come and gone. Have you heard one Liberal  MP say - or one Greens MP - say if you had Malaysia and Nauru implemented  together, in operation together, it would not provide a huge deterrent to people  risking their lives? You haven't and you won't, because it is inarguably the case.

Lipson: So do you expect, or would you welcome, Parliament coming back during  the winter break to sort this out?

Bowen: Parliament would only - that would only have any utility if it was clear that  something was going to pass. If there had been a breakthrough, if this expert panel  that we've set up, for example, put out its report to Members of Parliament and we'd  had discussions and it was clear we'd reached a position and something could then  pass the Parliament. Bringing the Parliament back to talk at each other and yell and  go through all this again is not going to achieve anything.

So that's why we've tried to - we've tried to do something a bit different here,  something a bit innovative, to try and break this deadlock and say, 'Well let's get rid  of the political rhetoric, let's get some policy evidence on the table, let's really try  something different through a formal structure of consultation between the parties'.  Invite the Liberal Party to nominate a representative to the cross-party reference  group - I hope they do - invite the Greens and the independents - I believe they  will - and let's try and get this sorted. Now if - we've asked for that to report in good  time before Parliament resumes so that we can, when we resume, sort this out. And  I think that's what the Australian people want, it is certainly what the government  wants and it would save lives.

Lipson: Chris Bowen, thank you.

Bowen: Thank you.

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

