Contact Jamie  Mt Barker Electorate Office

Tel: 08 8398 5566

Email: jamie.briggs.mp@aph.gov.au

Current Articles | Archives | Search



Media Release - Labor's 'building the detention centre revolution'  cost each Woodside resident over $38K - Thursday, 19 April 2012  19 April 2012 in Media

Chris Bowen’s attempts to spin Labor’s border failures as good  for the Woodside community and good for Australia, shows just  how desperate and out of touch Labor has become on their  border protection failures, Shadow Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship, Scott Morrison and Federal Member for Mayo,  Jamie Briggs said.

“Labor’s spin has no limits, trying to cynically pass off their  border failures as some type of economic stimulus package for local residents. It’s a joke,” Mr  Morrison said.

“It shows just how desperate and out of touch the Gillard Government has become. Not content  with creating chaos on our borders and in detention centres around the country, at exorbitant cost  to the taxpayer by dismantling the Howard Government’s strong border protection policies, Minister  Bowen now wants Australians to thank him for it.

“Minister Bowen not only presides over a broken and failed border protection regime, he is now  insisting that his government’s failed policies, which have seen over 16,600 people arrive on illegal  boats, are good for Australia.

“Despite how Chris Bowen wants to spin this, Labor’s failed border protection policies have wasted  billions of dollars, resulting in a blow out in their budget of $3.9 billion with more on the way.

“The Coalition remains committed to proven border protection policies that stop the boats, get our  border protection system under control, end the billions in wasteful spending and close facilities  like Inverbrackie that stand as the proof of Labor’s border failures,” Mr Morrison said.

Mr Briggs said: “The government has spent $64.8 million on the facility at Inverbrackie.  That’s  $138,229 for each of the alleged 463 jobs created by Labor’s failed policies, and $38,006 for each  of Woodside’s 1,705 residents.

“Chris Bowen says that he ‘hopes’ the Woodside community will ‘continue to reap the benefits’ of  the facility.  No Australian is reaping any benefit from Labor’s failed border protection policies that  has cost the Australian taxpayers an extra $3.9 billion to date.

“The anger expressed by local residents over the Inverbrackie facility was never directed at asylum  seekers but towards the Gillard Labor Government who announced this facility without any  consultation.  But to say that this is all somehow a perfect ending and a great thing for the  Australian economy is fanciful,” Mr Briggs said.

Search this site:

Contact Jamie

Friends of Jamie



Join Jamie's  E-newsletter



Facebook

Liberal Party Website

Labor Waste Website





Govt Debt: $138,565,478,868 Your share: $6,044

Federal Budget 2012-13



Jamie's Latest Tweet

loading tweets...







Â© Jamie Briggs MP 2011 | Authorised by J. Briggs, Shop 1/72 Gawler Street, Mt Barker SA 5251

Home

About Jamie

Mayo

Media Centre

Photo Gallery

Mobile Electorate Office

Blog

Useful Links

Privacy Policy & Disclaimer

Accessibility Policy

Datasearch Web Design

Login

Home About Jamie Mayo Media Centre Photo Gallery Mobile Electorate Office Jamie’s View Survey Online Office



Page 1 of 1 Media Release - Labor's 'building the detention centre revolution' cost each Woodside ...

6/06/2012 http://jamiebriggs.com.au/MediaCentre/Media/tabid/64/articleType/ArticleView/article...

