

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ABC 7.30 Report

18 December 2012

Subjects: Cuts to foreign aid budget, asylum seeker policy

E&OE…

CHRIS UHLMANN A short time ago I spoke with Julie Bishop the Shadow Foreign  Minister who is also acting as Opposition Leader.

Julie Bishop, welcome to 7:30.

JULIE BISHOP Thank you.

CHRIS UHLMANN Why can't the Australian Government spend its aid dollar in whatever  way it wants to?

JULIE BISHOP This decision to cut the aid budget is bad on many fronts. First, foreign aid is  meant to be for overseas development assistance and this is not being spent overseas, nor for  development assistance. Secondly, the Gillard Government has now made itself the third  largest recipient of foreign aid after Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, the Gillard  Government is now the third largest recipient.

The Government also promised in the last two elections that it would dedicate 0.5 per cent of  the gross national income to foreign aid and they're clearly breaking that promise.

CHRIS UHLMANN So you’ll restore this money to the budget then?

JULIE BISHOP Well the budget is clearly in disarray. The reason they're pinching money out  of the foreign aid budget is because their border protection policy is a disaster. It would have  to be the worst policy failure of a generation. So they're taking money out of the foreign  budget to pay for their failed border protection policies, and that is highly inappropriate.

It also damages Australia's international reputation because this government promised an  increase in aid as a key plank in its bid to win votes from other countries for a seat on the  Security Council.

CHRIS UHLMANN But looking at that you've also pledged, haven't you, to meet the  millennium goals which is 0.5% of gross national income by 2015 which means you would  have to get the budget from $5 billion to $8 billion and that would include restoring this $375  million. So are you pledging to meet those goals?

JULIE BISHOP Chris, the Government has already pushed out that commitment. It was  bipartisan - 0.5 per cent of gross national income by 2015. The Government's already pushed  that out, they've already broken that promise.

CHRIS UHLMANN But are you going to break it because it's a pledge you made as well?

JULIE BISHOP But Chris the budget in 2013 will not be the budget we thought we were  going to be inheriting in 2014 if we should win government. So let me make this plain. We  have not changed our policy. The Government has broken its commitment and the  Government is now taking money out of the foreign aid budget to prop up its failed border  protection policies. When we see the true state of the budget, because clearly this is in crisis,  clearly the Government's not going to honestly deliver a surplus, then we will be in a position  to make commitments and put things in priority but until we see the state of the budget it's  impossible for us to judge.

CHRIS UHLMANN Certainly though the Government has pushed out its millennium goal  pledge from 2015 to 2016, to 2017, that's a clear breach of what they said they were going to  do. But you also signed up to that pledge and you said you’d meet that goal by 2015, what  I’m trying to establish is are you also, like the Government going to break that pledge?

JULIE BISHOP We're not going to break the pledge because we can't do it. We can't actually  achieve it because this $375 million is going to be spent in 2013 so by the time we get to the  election the money's already gone, it's already been spent. So when we can see the state of the  national accounts we will be in a position to commit to the promises that we intend to make  during 2013 in the lead up to the election.

CHRIS UHLMANN But the last point on this, they're Millennium Goals, they were signed  up to in 2000 with budgets sight unseen you said you would get to this mark so it doesn't  matter what the state of the budget is.

JULIE BISHOP Oh, yes it does.

CHRIS UHLMANN Do you intend to meet the pledge that you made in 2000 to meet this  goal?

JULIE BISHOP At the last budget when the Government broke its commitment to 0.5 per  cent by 2015 we said it will now be impossible to meet that. The Government's broken it, we  can't now do it because by the time we came into office should we be elected it would be  2014. You can't possibly double the aid budget in just 12 months. That's the mess that the  Government has now left.

CHRIS UHLMANN But the United Kingdom of course made that pledge back in 2000 and  it's going to get to 0.7 per cent of gross national income and David Cameron said when you  make a promise to the poorest people in the world you should keep it. Do you agree with  that?

JULIE BISHOP Well, that's why I'm so appalled by this decision to cut the foreign aid budget  by $375 million and redirect it elsewhere, because this government made a commitment to  not only the poorest countries but countries around the world when it was seeking their

support for a seat on the Security Council. The Australian people have learned that they can't  trust Julia Gillard, neither can countries around the world.

CHRIS UHLMANN Just looking at the realities, if not a single boat arrives from today and  you take Government next year, you will have around about 9,500 people in detention of  some form or another, either in the community, onshore or offshore and the budget numbers  for that are already locked in. This is money that you are going to have to find, isn't it?

JULIE BISHOP Chris, there are a number of things that we're going to have to find, to clean  up the mess after Labor. We're going to have to find significant savings because this  government has delivered record deficits and now plunged us into a record level of gross  debt. It's something like $250 billion and the four largest budget deficits on record. So of  course we're going to have to find significant savings.

But we will stop the wasteful spending, none of these pink batts and overpriced school halls  and cash giveaways and the like. We will also put in place policies to stop the people  smuggling trade, we will dismantle the trade, and as we have done before we will move  people through the detention network. When we left office in 2007 there were four people  who had arrived by boat in the detention network, now 30,000 people have arrived.

CHRIS UHLMANN But you can't just wish away the people smuggling trade and the Chief  of the Defence Force General David Hurley said today that the turning back the boats is an  operational technique not a solution to people smuggling. So surely you can't be saying that  simply doing that is going to stop the trade?

JULIE BISHOP The Coalition has never said that just turning back the boats when it's safe to  do so in itself is the solution. It's part of a range of measures and we've always advocated a  range of measures ever since the Government unpicked the suite of policies that the Howard  Government had in place that had dismantled the people smuggling trade. It's one of a  number of things that we must do.

General Hurley did say that of course his job is to implement government policy and Angus  Houston, no less, said that turning back the boats where it's safe to do so is physically  possible. We're determined to do it. See, Chris, this is a battle of wills between the people  smugglers and the Gillard Government. Currently the people smuggler s are winning.

CHRIS UHLMANN And perhaps one day it will be a battle of wills perhaps between you  and the people smugglers and when you change tactics they will change tactics as well. What  makes you think turning back a few boats now is going to make a difference given the suite  of measures you’re talking about have almost all been adopted by the Gillard Government?

JULIE BISHOP Chris, we have the commitment to do it, we have the will, we have the  experience in government to tackle the people smuggling trade. We have the experience,  we've done it before and we will do it again .

CHRIS UHLMANN But circumstances have changed.

JULIE BISHOP Yes, they have and we will continue to put in place the kind of measures that  will dismantle this terrible trade. We want to stop people getting on boats and making that  dangerous journey to Australia.

Now, this would have to be the greatest policy failure in a generation. Hundreds of people  have died at sea. The budget has blown out for border protection by $6.5 billion and 30,000  people have turned up in Australia or are coming to Australia by boat. We will stop the  people smuggling trade, we have the commitment to do it and Labor has been so half hearted  in this, we're determined to achieve it.

CHRIS UHLMANN Alright well Julie Bishop we'll have to leave it there, thank you.

JULIE BISHOP It's been my pleasure.

- Ends -



