CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH DAVID LIPSON, SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

FRIDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2012



SUBJECTS: Visit to Nauru and Papua New Guinea, boat arrivals, Expert Panel  recommendations, Humanitarian Program, returns to Sri Lanka.

DAVID LIPSON: Chris Bowen has been touring Nauru. He’s currently in Papua New  Guinea looking at the facilities there for offshore processing. I spoke to him a short time  ago.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well, there’s been very good progress made, David. I’m very pleased  with the work that’s gone in from the Australian Defence Force personnel, my  department, other agencies and Nauruan officials. And to take what was a very run  down site and turn it into what is now accommodating people in a relatively short time  has been quite a lot of work. I’m very pleased with the work. We have capacity now  there of 500. Of course, I’ll be making further announcements in coming weeks about  further increases to that capacity and steps to make that centre more permanent.

LIPSON: Have you been given any indication of what legal rights to appeal the Nauru  Government will afford asylum seekers?

BOWEN: Well, this will be done under Nauruan law, not Australian law. We announced  that some time ago. We have previously referred to merits review, as recommended by  the Expert Panel. The Expert Panel recommended a small panel for merits review of  processes. We’re working with the Nauruan Government on the details about that.  Nauruan law does provide for some avenues of appeal in various places, in various  elements. But of course it’s quite different to the Australian levels of appeal in the  multiple courts that apply in Australia.

LIPSON: But have you been given any guarantee that asylum seekers will be afforded  reasonable treatment in the eyes of the Nauruan law?

BOWEN: Well, yes, Nauru is now a signatory to the Refugee Convention, of course.  They have a Migration Act and they are working very hard to make sure that this done  in accord with all the relevant principles and international obligations. We’re helping  them with that.

LIPSON: What about Manus Island? You’re meeting the PNG Government there today.  When will it be up and running?

BOWEN: Well, I met with the Governor of Manus Island last night. I’m meeting with  Prime Minister O’Neill this morning. Again, very good work being done, a very  substantial ADF presence on Manus Island working hard to get that up and running,  again in very difficult circumstances. There’s been a lot of Royal Australian Air Force  aircraft flying in all the material, all the Defence Force personnel. I expect we’ll see that  centre up and running and transfers occurring in coming weeks, and again I’ll make  more announcements about that at the relevant time.

LIPSON: More generally, we’ve seen 58 boats and nearly 4,000 asylum seekers arrive  since you announced offshore processing. It seems pretty clear that offshore processing  alone is not enough to deter asylum seekers from getting on boats. So which of the  other 22 recommendations that you’re trying to implement will see a slowing or a stop  to asylum seekers arriving by boat?

BOWEN: Well, David, it’s a package. You can’t cherry pick this one or that one and say  this one’s fine and this one’s not important. They’re all important. The package is  important. That’s the Government’s approach. It’s not the approach of the Liberal Party  or the Greens Party, but it’s our approach to say this is a package and only if we do  them all will this have the full impact. I’ve always said that offshore processing can be  an important part of the package and is an important part of the package, but by itself  is obviously not the answer in and of itself.

But we are obviously dealing with people smugglers who are spinning hard, lying hard,  saying, ‘Look, don’t worry about it, you might get sent to Nauru for a short time but  then you’ll be processed in Australia and resettled in Australia’, all of which we know is  untrue. And that message is getting out there from us that these are lies from the  people smugglers.

But it does take time. You’ve got people who are in a desperate situation, very keen for  a better life in Australia, and also people smugglers who are very desperate to keep the  profit that they’ve made in the past and will say or do anything. But I think -

LIPSON: To implement all of those 22 recommendations, though, particularly several of  them, would take a long time even with Opposition support. Are you saying that it could  be years before we see an end to people arriving by boats?

BOWEN: I didn’t say that, David. But what I’m saying is that all the recommendations -

LIPSON: But it would take a long time, wouldn’t it?

BOWEN: Some of them will take longer than others. But you also can look at not only  the implementation of Nauru and PNG; the implementation of the increase in our  refugee intake to 20,000 is very important. It’s started, we’ve already started to see  people being processed under that increase. That is very important and it would be a  very backward step if that were ever reversed.

The changes to family reunion are very important and again, we’re communicating those  around the region. The returns to Sri Lanka have been important and we continue to  talk to people about their options there.

That sends a very, very strong message that people who have paid their money to  people smugglers to come to Australia have then under these new arrangements  decided to return to Sri Lanka. And as I say, I think that’s been a very important  development and we’ll continue to talk to people about their options.

All of those things do have an impact. But it also takes time for those messages to work  through the region and for people to get those messages about the new arrangements  that are in place in Australia.

Ends





