MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE  AND TRANPORT  LEADER OF THE HOUSE



TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP  MARRICKVILLE, NSW

1 OCTOBER 2012



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Issues:     Alan Jones’ comments; Tony Abbott; Sydney University Liberal  Club function; Newspoll; Newman Government cuts; Plain  packaging; Superannuation; Infrastructure NSW report; Nauru;  James Ashby; Twitter trolls; Wheat deregulation

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Thanks everyone for coming along today. Just a few  months ago, my electorate office was the scene of a quite  extraordinary demonstration in which people engaged in  hateful statements, hateful banners, and aggressive  behaviour which required the presence of substantial  numbers of Australian Federal Police.

Alan Jones' comments are just the latest event in

hateful engagement in the political process.  I think this  event marks a real step away from the way that politics  used to be conducted in this country.

Since the last election, Tony Abbott has been engaged

in the longest dummy spit in Australian political history.  He's called for a people's revolt. He's engaged in personal  attacks and vilification against the Prime Minister. This  has sent a signal to those people on the conservative side  of politics that there is nothing too low, nothing out of  bounds, nothing that goes too far in personal attacks.

However, just as I think many of us had thought it

couldn't go any lower, Alan Jones managed to find a real  trench. Alan Jones' comments are nasty, vicious and have  no place in Australian public life. Alan Jones' non-apology  rubs salt into the wound. Today, there's an article in which  he puts at the top that he regrets making the statements  and then goes on to again vilify and attack personally the  Prime Minister.

On the Sydney Uni Liberal Club function, of course, the

organiser was the president of the Sydney Uni Liberal  Club. They've had a cultural problem for a long time with  the right wing at Sydney University. I saw it first hand  when I was a student there in the early 80s. We know  Tony Abbott's form when he was a student at Sydney  University.

And we know now that Alex Dore, who was the Liberal

candidate for Grayndler at the last election, pretended that  he hadn't heard the comments and that perhaps they  weren't made. We've now heard that in a room full of  people, not a single person objected to the comments, in  spite of the fact that there were federal and state Liberal  Party MPs present, including a member of Tony Abbott's  front bench.

Not one word of complaint, not one person walked out,

not one person raised objections. And as far as I know,  Sussan Ley is yet to make a statement.

Tony Abbott, of course, has yet to condemn the

comments himself. He just put out a two line statement  essentially saying that it wasn't acceptable. But they've  engaged in this campaign, day after day after day, and it  is time that this extraordinary event be used to say  enough is enough. The campaign of personal attacks  against the Prime Minister must stop, attacks against  people's families must stop. Those associated with this  gathering must stop this behaviour.

I mean, the statements that were made in a speech are

one thing, but the auctioning of a jacket made of chaff bag  in a conscious premeditated decision, signed by Alan  Jones, bought by Alan Jones at the auction - it just defies  common decency that that could occur.

This was a comment about taking the Prime Minister of

our nation out to sea and dumping her in a chaff bag and  yet many months later, that's seen as somehow  acceptable. This extraordinary engagement is very  different from the way that politics used to be conducted in  this country.

Happy to take questions.

QUESTION:                          Will you boycott Alan Jones' show?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Yes.

QUESTION:                          Indefinitely?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Yes.

QUESTION:                          And does that go for every Labor frontbencher?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I speak for myself. I just think that Alan Jones should not  be given any oxygen by people. You don't do an interview  with Alan Jones because what occurs is that he has  friendly people on his show. He makes comments and  Tony Abbott sits there and says ‘yes Alan, you're right’.  That's the extent of the interview.

People will make their own decisions on this but I

certainly am of the view that this is just a yard too far. I'm  someone who engages in interviews across the spectrum.  I've been on Andrew Bolt's show and I think I’m the only  Minister to do it. I think you've got to engage but there  comes a point whereby it's just gone beyond what is  reasonable.

QUESTION:                          Nicola Roxon says she would go on the Alan Jones  show as part of, you know, the wider public debate and  the need to put policy ideas et cetera forward. Would you  wish that all other members didn't [indistinct]…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No, that's a decision for her. I'm answering for myself in  terms of my engagement with Mr Jones. I've had  associations with Alan Jones going back to the South  Sydney Football Club and during that period had a  reasonable amount of contact with him but really, I mean,  this is losing the plot.

To actually think that yesterday's so-called apology

was a reasonable way to conduct himself is extraordinary.  It’s not just about the statement, but the chaff bag, and the  statement after where he not only made the comment  about the Prime Minister's late father, but he went on after  laughter from the charming young men and women of the  Sydney Uni Liberal Club.

These are people who aspire to be tomorrow's leaders.

Alex Dore was the endorsed Liberal candidate in this seat  (Grayndler). He was given the imprimatur of the Liberal  Party. These people want to see themselves as  Australia's future leaders.

Well, we've just seen - the whole of Australia has seen

- an insight into what is the modern Liberal Party. They  not only laughed when that occurred, not only did no one  object, but Alan Jones went on to say the problem with  some people in the Liberal Party is they don't go hard  enough. They're not prepared to say these extraordinary  things about the Prime Minister.

Just recently, we had the extraordinary event outside

Parliament House in Canberra where he made allegations  against the police saying that they had stopped people  getting to that demonstration which was not true, which  was shown to be not true.

If a politician made these sorts of mistakes then they

wouldn't be sitting in the House of Representatives.

QUESTION:                          Have you spoken to the Prime Minister yet?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I was with the Prime Minister on Saturday. It was her  birthday and she saw the Swans have a win. I spoke to  her then. I haven't spoken to her since these events  broke.

QUESTION:                          Do you agree with calls for Jones to be sacked?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   People have got to make a judgement about what's  acceptable. I think Jones' behaviour is just completely  unacceptable and 2GB have got to make the decision of  whether they want to associate themselves with this sort  of behaviour.

They're not called shock jocks for nothing, you know,

they're designed to shock. But this, I think, is just so far,  so far out of the bounds of what is reasonable and decent.  I mean, why would someone want to listen to someone  who had those sort of values on public display?

QUESTION:                          Why don't you think Tony Abbott's response has been  enough?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   It was pathetic. He waited til 3 o'clock in the afternoon to  put out a little two line statement. I don't see the word  condemn in there, I don't see any strong words opposing  what has occurred and it compares with where Tony  Abbott is on other issues.

This is a culture that's been nurtured by people like

Alan Jones. This is a culture of the modern Liberal Party.

We see it in Parliament all the time and we have these  debates in Parliament about parliamentary standards.  This is what we are dealing with in terms of the culture of  the Liberal Party that says anything goes, that engages in  personal abuse day in day out, which is particularly strong  in its abuse against women. There is a pattern of  behaviour here that continues to occur.

QUESTION:                          Alan Jones said yesterday he didn't want to say sorry  through the media, he'd prefer to say sorry to her  personally and the Prime Minister's office have said that  she doesn't [indistinct] return or take a call. Should he  publically say sorry?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Well, would you take a call from this bloke? I wouldn't  take his call either.

Alan Jones, clearly had an opportunity to stand up and

give a short statement, apologise, say it was wrong,  retract, say it was wrong for him to sign a chaff bag to be  auctioned off, say it was wrong to say what he did about  the Prime Minister's father, say it was wrong to say what  he did about the Prime Minister, say it was wrong for the  Liberal Party to be engaging in smears and attacks on the  Prime Minister. He had an opportunity to do all that and  then get off.

Instead, we had some words of explanation, we had  criticism of the journalist for reporting it, we had criticism  of the event saying it was off the record and the  implication of that is it would have been okay if he wasn't  caught and it wasn't recorded. Then, he went on to repeat  slur after slur against the Prime Minster and the  Government.

It was the worst attempted clean up I've ever seen.

QUESTION:                          In other matters, you - Labor has been trying to rebuild  a little bit of support federally and at a state level based on  Campbell Newman's cuts in Queensland. The latest  Newspoll shows that might not be working. Do you have a  comment on that?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Our focus in Queensland isn't on the polls, it's on the  damage that's been done by Campbell Newman's cuts to  health, to education. Our focus is on the fact that prior to  the election, people did not think that he was going to do  what he has done in Queensland and we'll continue to  engage in that.

There are real federal implications. At a time where  Federal Labor is putting a record amount of investment  into health and education, Campbell Newman's  Government is stripping money out.

We have an absolute responsibility to argue the case on  those issues and we'll continue to do so.

QUESTION:                          Are you surprised people probably aren't as worried as  you think they should be about Queensland's cuts?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   No, I'm not surprised by the media's focus on a poll of a  few people at a particular point in time. What I'm focused  on is the national interest. The national interest means we  need more money not less in education and health - that  we need to prioritise those issues for the future.

QUESTION:                          The plain packaging legislation has come into effect  now. Do you think retailers will have enough time to get all  those packages off the shelves in time for the 1 December  deadline?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I'm sure that it will be resolved. People have known this  has been coming for a very long time and I notice that  some retailers have already put in place the changes well  in advance of the timeline that will make it mandatory.

QUESTION:                          On superannuation, Nick Sherry says that we should  start maybe looking at some of the generous benefits that  the public service and government ministers get to make  [indistinct]. Do you think you should be cutting yours for  example?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   We have changed our superannuation. We did it  substantially a few years ago.

QUESTION:                          Have you had any briefings from Infrastructure New  South Wales on its long awaited report into [indistinct]?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I've had ongoing discussions with Infrastructure New  South Wales. They've been very cooperative but of  course this is a report that's theirs. They will quite rightly  give it to the State Government first, not to us.

But I certainly think that Mr Greiner has been engaged

with Infrastructure Australia in particular, and  Infrastructure Australia will continue to cooperate with  Infrastructure New South Wales. They actually shared a  building for a while, the same premises, but the New

South Wales Government didn't seem to like that so they  moved into their own facilities.

When Infrastructure New South Wales bring down their  report, I'll be asking Infrastructure Australia to have a look  at it and give us advice.

QUESTION:                          Is it likely to [indistinct] more federal funding?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I'd ask Infrastructure Australia to have a look at the report.  You can't ask me a question about funding for a report  that I haven't seen, that hasn't been handed even to the  New South Wales Government. We don't do funding that  way. We wait for assessments from Infrastructure  Australia.

QUESTION:                          Chris Bowen said that by the end of September there  would be 500 asylum seekers on Nauru. We've only got  150 at the moment and more than 1000 that have arrived  in the last fortnight alone. Is the policy that you've  implemented working?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Now, let's be very clear. What Chris Bowen said and the  Government said was that Nauru wasn't ready to be just  opened in a day or two, that it would require time to  become established and had Tony Abbott and the Tories  not delayed the legislation then we wouldn't be dealing  with this issue now.

QUESTION:                          James Ashby is considering calling a suit of defamation  against Nicola Roxon for comments she's made regarding  him dropping his sexual harassment. Do you think that  those comments were appropriate?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Which comments?

QUESTION:                          That it was a vexatious case and that it was appropriate  for him to drop all proceedings since the Commonwealth  has settled?

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   I think Nicola Roxon's comments are entirely appropriate.

Can I make this point? This spontaneous legal action took  place on the Friday afternoon and Tony Abbott was out  there with a statement 9am Saturday morning about the  Ashby claims that were splashed that morning in the Daily  Telegraph.

Yesterday we got two lines at 3 o'clock in the afternoon  about the Sydney Uni Liberal Club incident with Alan  Jones.

QUESTION:                          Well, the Commonwealth settling the case would imply  that Ashby has a case.

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   It doesn't imply that at all. And if you look at Nicola  Roxon's statement, that makes it very clear the  Commonwealth has a responsibility in terms of taxpayer’s  money.

The Commonwealth has responsibilities and indeed the  Commonwealth has made it very clear and the Attorney-General has made it very clear that she doesn't resile  from any of the statements that have been made on this  issue, nor do I.

QUESTION:                          Just in regards to Alan Jones, there were reports that  Chris Bowen's wife made some Twitter comments about  Alan Jones. Is there an onus on certainly front bencher  families et cetera to also be…

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Let's keep families out of this. Just an idea. Just a  thought. How about we keep people's families out of this  and particularly women?

If you look up Twitter and look at my account, I've had  people suggesting that my wife was the person who  allegedly made whatever comments they were. That's the  sort of stuff that's going on, on Twitter, every day.

I was criticised by some people on the progressive side

of politics for congratulating the Daily Telegraph on their  campaign about some of the hate stuff that goes on on  Twitter. I stand by it. My congratulations to the Daily  Telegraph and any other section of the media that wants  to point out that this sort of campaign that goes on is not  on.

QUESTION:                          Yes [indistinct].

ANTHONY ALBANESE:   Okay, with regard to the Wheat Board issue and when the  Parliamentary debate will come on - the Government is  dealing with this in the normal way. Our priorities when  Parliament resumes is the dental reform legislation, the  clean energy legislation, and also the wheat marketing  board legislation.

We would expect there'd be a vote on this between

now and the end of the year and it really will be really  interesting to see whether it is the case that Barnaby   Joyce is writing the Coalition's economic policy because  that's the only explanation if the Coalition having said that  they supported wheat deregulation, having being lobbied  so strongly particularly by wheat farmers, in Western  Australia who really want this legislation to be carried.

So, Julie Bishop and other people in the west will have to  decide whether they're actually prepared to do what they  said they would do and back this reform.

Thanks very much.

ENDS







