twitter.com/catherinekingmp  facebook.com/catherinekingmp





THE HON CATHERINE KING MP  PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR HEALTH AND AGEING



MEDIA RELEASE

28 NOVEMBER 2012



COMMUNITY AWARENESS GRANTS AWARDED TO SUPPORT  DONATELIFE WEEK 2013

Parliamentary Secretary for Health and Ageing Catherine King today announced  $533,000 in Community Awareness Grants which will support 22 organisations to  conduct community awareness and education events as part of DonateLife Week 2013.

DonateLife Week is the national awareness week to promote organ and tissue donation  and will take place from Sunday 24 February - Sunday 3 March 2013. The theme of  DonateLife Week 2013 is ‘Make your wish count. Discover, decide and discuss organ  and tissue donation’.

Ms King said, “The DonateLife Week 2013 community events provide an excellent  opportunity to reach out and engage with those Australians who may not yet have  considered organ and tissue donation.”

“DonateLife Week is also a timely reminder to all Australians, who have made the  decision to donate life, of the need to ensure their loved ones know their decision. It’s a  time to remind your family about your wishes and make your wish count because in  Australia the family will always be asked to confirm the donation wishes of the deceased.

The Community Awareness Grants are administered by the Organ and Tissue Authority  as part of its Community Awareness and Education program to promote organ and  tissue donation.

“The Community Awareness Grants provide an important opportunity for communities  across Australia to get involved in promoting organ and tissue donation, and in doing so  normalising decision-making and family discussion about the benefits of donation for  transplantation.

The activities that will be undertaken during DonateLife Week 2013 include community  walks, film competitions, sporting events, university outreach, engagement with  Indigenous communities and information sessions with culturally and linguistically  diverse communities.

Ms King said, “We will be calling upon all Australians to make their wish count during  DonateLife Week by registering their donation decision on the Australian Organ Donor  Register and, most importantly, sharing that wish with family and close friends.”

The full list of the 22 successful Community Awareness Grants recipients is at  www.donatelife.gov.au.

MEDIA CONTACT:  PETER DWYER 0409 866 054





Community Awareness Grants to support DonateLife Week 2013

Organisation Description  Funding

allocated  (GST ex)

Macarthur  Diversity  Services  Initiative

This project includes information stalls at four festivals  with a focus on engaging with culturally and linguistically  diverse communities, including a discussion panel during  DonateLife Week 2013 and local media campaign.



$2,300.00

Gift of Life Inc The Gift of Life Inc. annual DonateLife Walk will be held  in Canberra during DonateLife Week. This event is an  established part of Canberra’s annual awareness week  activities for promoting organ and tissue donation.



$30,000.00

Melbourne  Heart FC

Activities will include an A League football match during  DonateLife Week 2013 (Sunday 24 February) and a  Melbourne Heart FC (MHFC) player ambassador to  promote organ and tissue donation.



$15,000.00

Lions Club of  Moyhu  A basketball and netball round robin between local  secondary school students, Emergency Services and

Local community groups will be held during DonateLife  Week 2013 to engage young people on the subject of  organ and tissue donation. The day will include donor  family speakers and distribution of DonateLife materials.



$8,000.00

Ethnic  Broadcasting  Association of  QLD

A series of two 2-minute radio segments focusing on  awareness, dispelling myths, discussing and knowing  family wishes and promoting DonateLife Week 2013 will  be produced.  The segments will be translated into Greek,  Arabic, Italian, Vietnamese, Cantonese and Mandarin and  broadcast on rotation on Radio 4EB for three months.  DonateLife resources will be distributed to support and  accompany the segments and a 6-page newsletter  featuring information on the project will also be  developed.



$25,600.00

Eurobodalla  Renal Support  Group

This project is to conduct an information event, including  live radio broadcast from the event and interview with  people by radio station 2EC.



$3,820.00

Heart and Lung  Transplant  Trust Victoria

An online photography competition called ‘Life Flashes’  will be promoted through social media with entrants  encouraged to contribute photographs that either raises  awareness of organ and tissue donation generally or  photographs that represent their own experience of  transplant. A short list of images will be printed onto  canvas for display at the Alfred Hospital during  DonateLife Week 2013.



$2,000.00



Organisation Description  Funding

allocated  (GST ex)

Hobsons Bay  Police  Community  Consultative  Committee

A basketball round robin between local secondary school  students, Victoria Police and other Emergency Services  will be held during DonateLife Week 2013 to engage  young adults about organ and tissue donation. DonateLife  materials and a survey will be distributed, and donor  families will speak about their experience



$6,000.00

Regional  Development  Australia Far  North  Queensland and  Torres Strait  (RDA  FNQ&TS)

This project comprises focus groups and staging of  community events to engage Indigenous communities in  Far North Queensland. Community consultation will  determine the most culturally appropriate format for the  community days which may include arts display or  theatrical plays prepared by and presented by the local  school.



$71,152.30

University of  NSW  Activities will be conducted to engage students and staff  at the University of NSW during O Week and the first

week of semester which coincides with DonateLife Week  2013. Activities will include student ambassadors  conducting short speeches to classes about organ and  tissue donation, flash mobs and a student barbeque and  activity on the UNSW website ‘the Hub’.

$7,721.00

Netball  Australia

This proposal is to promote awareness of organ and tissue  donation through events in each state and territory,  including community clinics and championship team  games, the use of netball players as ambassadors  including the development of Community Service  Announcement (CSA) and a digital campaign.



$47,500.00

Transplant  Australia

The proposal is to secure at least 40 university and higher  education campuses in Victoria to engage in DonateLife  Week 2013 activities and to stage two cricket matches to  raise awareness for organ donation involving the  Australian Transplant Cricket Club and the Indian  Welfare Association.



$16,930.00

VIC Regional  Nurse Donation  Specialist  Group

DonateLife Week 2013 community events will be held in  eight major regional areas across Victoria and will  include community walks, cricket games or short film  awards nights.



$58,080

Victorian  Metropolitan  Nurse Donation  Specialist  Group

A family-friendly Community Day will be held in  Melbourne during DonateLife Week 2013.

$26,850.00

Hunter New  England Area  Local Health  District

DonateLife Week 2013 will be promoted through the  “Have the Discuss, Discover & Decide chat over a  coffee” campaign in 12-15 Gloria Jeans’ coffee houses in  NSW.



$13,200.00

Organisation Description  Funding

allocated  (GST ex)

Townsville  Intercultural  Centre Ltd.

A one day event engaging Townsville’s multicultural  community including refugees and migrants will be held  during DonateLife Week 2013, together with a series of  health workshops with students in the Townsville State  High School English as a Second Language class.



$6,000.00

The  Groundswell  Project Inc.

This project assists young film makers to create a short  film, capturing and sharing stories between donor  families, transplant recipients and young Australians. This  project builds on the success of FilmLife 2012.



$90,200.00

Bugalwena  Health

A gathering of Indigenous families on the North Coast of  NSW will be held during DonateLife Week 2013 to  discuss organ and tissue donation and distribute a  brochure and merchandise specifically designed for the  Indigenous community.



$5,123.70

The Prince  Charles  Hospital  Foundation

The Cycle of Giving bike ride will take place from  Sunshine Coast to New Farm Park (outside Brisbane  CBD), to promote the life-saving benefits of organ and  tissue donation and paying tribute to donors, donor  families and clinical staff who make donation possible.



$19,825.00

Central Coast  Local Health  District

The Central Coast Mariners Football team will promote  DonateLife Week 2013 during a match held during the  week, including promotions and an information stall.



$10,163.00

Artback NT:  Arts  Development  and Touring

The Gift of Life play will be performed in Indigenous  communities in the NT as part of a two week tour to raise  awareness of organ and tissue donation.



$61,935.00

Perth North  Metro Medicare  Local

A community event will be held during DonateLife Week  2013 with Indigenous community members.

$5,000.00

TOTALS (GST EXCLUSIVE) $533,000.00







