1









Christine Milne   Australian Greens Leader





Friday 30 November 2012

Press conference

Transcript

Subjects: Palestine vote, RBA inquiry, Leveson inquiry, COAG

CHRISTINE MILNE: First on the vote in United Nations, I am very pleased to see that the  overwhelming global consensus is to give recognition to the Palestinians as a non-member observer  state in the United Nations. I remain disappointed that Australia wasn’t part of the overwhelming  global consensus and the extent to which that damages us in the Security Council over the next few  years remains to be seen. If you look at the countries that voted against, only nine of them, and a  number of them in our region, and I think that that really demonstrates that we are out of step in  relation to where we need to be in the global community with that consensus.

On another matter I have just been to the hearing with the Reserve Bank Governor Glenn Stevens,  and I have to say that you really need to ask the question was the Reserve Bank naive, were they  turning a blind eye because of the difficult jurisdictions in which these companies were working,  in  terms of the payment of millions of dollars into tax havens, the fact that you had people inside the  bank actually alerting them back in 2007 and yet there was a high degree of naivete, not asking the  questions, just accepting reports and so on. I really think the Australian community is really going to  be wondering how we had such a failure of governance at the corporate level inside the Reserve  Bank.

JOURNALIST: On media reform we’ve seen the Leveson inquiry in the UK release its  recommendations overnight, what do you think of that model of reform and are you happy with the  pace of media reform in Australia, and thirdly have you had any meetings with Senator Conroy over  media reform in Australia?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Firstly to the Leveson inquiry, I welcome the outcome of the inquiry. Of course  I’m not across the detail of it, it’s many hundreds of pages, except to say that the overwhelming  conclusion, not in the words of Leveson, but it clearly gives effect to it and that is self-regulation is a  dead duck. And that’s what’s actually been the recommendation, that every powerful institution  needs an oversight, and what Leveson is trying to do is not in any way take away freedom of the  press but rather to bring in stronger levels of accountability and that’s what the Greens have always

2



argued for. One of the conclusions in relation to Rupert Murdoch's influence was that he didn’t  actually have to intervene in the sense that many politicians had a coinciding view of the world with  Rupert Murdoch so that there was never any discussion of self-regulation or the concentration of  media ownership and I would suggest to you that the same thing has happened in Australia where  it’s an unspoken thing that politicians are reluctant to look at this issue of concentration of media  ownership and that’s something that the Greens have spoken out on for a very long time. And in  terms of media addressing the issue here in Australia, the Greens have been calling for it for a long  time just as indeed we have been calling for the Reserve Bank to come before the Parliament for a  long time, we’ve been calling for that, we’re disappointing that it hasn’t been dealt with by the end  of this parliamentary year but we are certainly looking forward to it being dealt with next year.

JOURNALIST: Have you had any meetings with Senator Conroy in relation to media reform in  Australia?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Certainly over the last six months or so Senator Ludlam as our spokesperson has  met with Senator Conroy and yes we’ve talked to the Minister about this. I know that he is keen to  progress media reform and it’s unfortunate it hasn’t got to the Parliament until well, next year.

JOURNALIST: So you would like it to happen?

CHRISTINE MILNE: I would very much like it to come before the Parliament as quickly as possible  because we do need to deal with this and it’s going to be very interesting in the UK to see this  disconnect that exists between the community and the Parliament. Whilst there may be a  coincidence of views between politicians and Rupert Murdoch in the UK, there certainly isn’t as far  as the community is concerned, it wants much stronger independence in the oversight of media and  I think that’s what the community wants and indeed in this Parliament here at the end of the year.

Overwhelming conclusion you can draw is that the Parliament has obsessed about one thing, the  AWU but the community is thinking about entirely different issues. The community is really  concerned a) about the extent of poverty in Australia, the inadequacy of Newstart, the charities are  really worried about the numbers of people now approaching them for assistance at this time of the  year and their inability to cope with that, we’ve got other people very worried about the impacts of  global warming, we’ve got these extreme weather events going on around the country right now  and the adequacy of the ability of emergency services and health services to be able to cope, and yet  we’ve got a Parliament obsessing about who can outdo one another to be as cruel as possible to  refugees, and who can outdo each other in terms of claiming corruption for things that happened  years ago. I think the Parliament needs to get back in touch with the community, and hopefully that  might be one good thing about the summer, people get back to their electorates and have people  say to them why don’t you get on with the things that we care about, and that is put money into  public education, dealing with the environment, and next week we’ve got COAG coming up and this  is something the community’s worried about.  To think that the Federal Government would be  taking its riding instructions from the Business Council of Australia, and undermining environmental  law around the country. People are terrified about what Campbell Newman is doing in Queensland,  let alone Barry O'Farrell in New South Wales, Ted Baillieu in Victoria, and Barnett in Western  Australia, Lara Giddings campaigning against the heritage listing of the Tarkine, these are things that  people are really worried about, it’s going to come to a head next week and this is something that

3



the Government had better realise the community wants to hear why they are abandoning their  responsibilities to the states and undermining any genuine environmental protection.

JOURNALIST: Just on the vote on Palestine, there are reports that one of the reasons why the Prime  Minister was forced to change her stance from a no vote to abstaining from the vote is because of  votes in Western Sydney, with electorates with a high percentage of voters who are from the Middle  East, would you be disappointed if that was the case and do you think that that’s what happened?

CHRISTINE MILNE: I have no idea about what goes on in Labor caucus meetings but I do think it  showed a lack of leadership. We have to have an independent foreign policy, it’s very clear that  under the leadership of Prime Minister Gillard, Australia is falling into the same trap we were in with  Prime Minister Howard and that is being the deputy sheriff to the United States. President Obama  recognised that the US dropped the ball and needed to get back into the Asia-Pacific area. And Prime  Minister Gillard has facilitated that without question, without bringing it even to the Parliament.  We’ve got a US base in Darwin, we’re facilitating US access into the Indian ocean, we are now  running behind US foreign policy and I think that was the crux of the objection from Labor Party  people I’ve spoken to, we need an independent foreign policy, and we’re not going to get it if we’re  just being seen to be a lap dog to the United States. And of course Afghanistan is the other classic  case, and I am very pleased the Greens were able to bring on a vote in the House of Representatives  to try to get a date to get our troops out of Afghanistan, that would be the best Christmas present  we can give our troops.



