



Sunrise with Mel and Kochie, Big Guns of Politics



7 September 2012

KOCHIE: The former opposition leader expressed his disappointment at the current state  of Australian politics saying it rewards spin and dishonesty.

TURNBULL: It seems to be that we don’t simply have a financial deficit, we have a  deficit of trust.

KOCHIE: Mr Turnbull also criticised his own side over its tactics in question time saying  there is too much focus on asylum seekers and the carbon tax.

MEL: Let's get some reaction from our big guns of politics. Environment Minister Tony  Burke and Shadow Treasurer Joe Hockey. Good morning to both of you. Joe has  Malcolm Turnbull been disloyal?

HOCKEY: No. I read the speech. He showed it to Tony Abbott before he gave it. Anyone  who has actually read the speech would know it was heavily laden with criticism of the  other mob and in fact praising us on holding the line on a range of different issues.  What he was saying was saying let’s go to the British system of having the Prime  Minister turn up to one question time a week but I don't think that works in Australia.

KOCHIE: What do you think Tony, do you reckon it would work saying Prime Minster  only turn up to one session and more ministers be used to answer questions.

BURKE: In the first place, I think it doesn't matter what your structure is, the quality of  what is actually asked will drive the tone of question time.

HOCKEY: It should be answer time not questions time. It's not the question, it's the  answer that's a problem.

BURKE: Well have a go at asking some more of us some questions.

HOCKEY: We only go for the weakest links so you are safe, you are ok, a strong  performer.

BURKE: The actual system that is being proposed there was tried in Australia in the final  years of the Keating Government and the argument was put back by John Howard, he  said this means the Prime Minister is only working part time and I think that actually  killed it forever. It does work in Great Britain, you can mount an argument for it but I  don’t think having tried it once, Australia will ever go back there.

MEL: Ok let's talk Queensland. Kevin Rudd stepped back in to the spotlight, joining the  public sector union fight against the Queensland Governments job cuts. Tony is this  about trying to link Tony Abbott to Premier Newman's cut backs.

Burke: Absolutely and that's a link that a whole lot of us have been making. There is no  shifting from that. There has been a story of how Campbell Newman has operated that  we think Tony Abbott is a very close fit on that. So no fudging on that absolutely.

KOCHIE: Joe that's pretty reasonable?

HOCKEY: Well it's pretty reasonable because the Labor party in Queensland racked up  $100 billion of debt. Campbell Newman, all strength to his right arm, he's showing  incredible courage to try and fix up a State Government that has been in complete  chaos, an absolute mess during the term of Labor and Campbell is showing the sort of  courage and doing the right thing by the people of Queensland that hopefully gets  Queensland back on the rails. It's a great state, it deserves better and that's why they  voted overwhelmingly for Campbell Newman.

BURKE: That's a massive number of families now without a lifeline.

HOCKEY: That's just not right.

BURKE: If you sack that many people, they don’t have a livelihood that's what happens.

HOCKEY: Julia Gillard has said he has sacked 26,000 people, in fact it's been reduced by  4000 people so far. 4000 in total. So this is a spin that's coming out of Labor. They  create the debt, they create the problems and then when we go to fix them we get in  trouble. Well I say all strength to Campbell, he's a terrific Premier.

KOCHIE: Ok just quickly this morning we have been talking about the radical proposal to  punish parents if their kids are clumsy. The mums and dads of children who show up  too often to the emergency ward, could be accused of neglect even if their injuries are  minor. Joe a bit harsh do you think?

HOCKEY: It's ridiculous. It just looks to me like just another bit of the nanny state. Just  put a helmet on the kids, put shin pads on them and they will be fine.

MEL: Have you tried that?

BURKE: I want kids to be able climb a tree and muck around without thinking they are  going to end up in court.

HOCKEY: Absolutely, absolutely.

BURKE: It's way over the top.

MEL: So the Federal Government's Institute of Family Studies. Are we going to far on  this are we getting too caught up in issues. Surely the current system is working.

BURKE: I don’t mind studies coming out and throwing different ideas around and all of  that, but ultimately let kids have a childhood. Let them muck around.

HOCKEY: Yeah let them fall out of trees that's the way it should be.

