Chris Bowen MPMinister for Immigration and Citizenship  Chris Bowen MP

Minister for Immigration and Citizenship

Asylum seeker legislation  Thursday, 28 June 2012

Interview with Richard King, 2SM Mornings

Richard King: Joining me now is our Federal Minister for Immigration, Chris  Bowen. Good morning, Chris, and thank you very much for your time this morning.

Chris Bowen: My pleasure, Richard, good morning to you.

King: Yes, it was certainly a hot debate and I think a lot of people are of the opinion  that surely both sides - the program is coming from Newcastle; I spoke to Bob  Baldwin, one of our local Federal Liberal MPs, and put to him - that it seems  strange that both sides of Parliament can't sit down and sort this one out, but it  certainly hasn't happened yet, Chris.

Bowen: No, it hasn't, and I'm with you; it should. We've got the situation that both  sides of Parliament agree that processing people in another country saves lives.  Both sides agree that it should happen, but we've been unable to reach an  agreement. In fact, we've asked the Opposition to negotiate with us, we  commenced the negotiations last year, the Opposition broke those off.

We've made it clear we have a standing offer for them to negotiate. We've made  significant compromises: we've offered to open a detention centre on Nauru, not  something the Labor Party traditionally has supported, but we recognise it's  important to the Liberal Party. So we said, 'Well, why don't we do both? Malaysia is  important to us; Nauru is important to you. You say Malaysia won't work; we say  Nauru won't work. But together they're going to work, so why don't we just do that?'  The Liberal Party has rejected that, unfortunately.

King: Yeah, alright. Look, this is indicative of our listeners' thoughts on this one,  and this is an email I mentioned earlier that came in from Joyce who says, 'Hi John  - it was sent to John Laws - I'm sick and tired of hearing people blaming Tony  Abbott for the problem with the boats and asylum seekers losing their lives, saying  he is trying to make political points. What short memories people have. Who was it  that had a good policy that was working and who changed it when they came into  power saying they knew what was best?' And that's the perception, that the policy  under John Howard was a good policy and it was worKing, and people, I think, are  scratching their heads wondering why it was changed, Chris.

Bowen: Well, look, the key is here, there's a couple of points. I mean, I can go  through that, it was actually a Liberal Party MP. He said, 'Well, you know, we like  the political advantage out of this.' It was an unnamed Liberal Party MP said this to  a journalist, so that's where that's come from.

Now, what's very clear here is that when I became Minister for Immigration 18  months ago, I looked at it, it was very clear to me, that regardless of the policies of

the past - now, we can argue about the policies of the past, what worked and what  didn't and what were the factors in play, push factors and pull factors etcetera - the  situation now is that offshore processing can save lives.

Now, all the expert advice to us, to the government which was made available to  the Opposition, is that wherever the merits or non-merits of the Pacific Solution, for  want of a better word, in the past, it won't work now because Nauru is seen and  justly as just a Christmas Island further away; it's a processing centre. People get  processed on Nauru; if they're refugees, they get brought to Australia. And the  Liberal Party yesterday said that they wouldn't leave people on Nauru for more than  12 months, so the people smugglers would say, 'Well, if you're a refugee you might  have to spend 12 months on Nauru, but you might have to spend time on Christmas  Island or in detention centres anyway so its okay, you'll end up in Australia.'

And that won't stop people coming. What would stop people coming is if we said  'Look, there's 43 million asylum seekers or refugees in the world. You've got to wait  in Malaysia with the 100 000 asylum seekers in Malaysia. You'll be processed just  like them. Just because you can afford a people smuggler doesn't mean you can  get permanent resettlement to Australia.' That's what the Malaysia agreement is all  about.

Now, as I say, Richard, I know some people would disagree with that; other people  would say Nauru. My position is, well, do both, both are going to work. We can do  both tomorrow, if we pass the Bill today, we can, I can start implementing both  immediately. Obviously, Nauru and Malaysia would both take a little bit of time to  get up and running, but both could be implemented and we could start saving lives.

King: Alright. Well, the Greens obviously won't be voting for it. They're hell bent on  not allowing any offshore processing if they had their say and they're talKing about  a long term solution. I heard Greens leader Christine Milne waxing and waning long  and loud about this last night and yesterday, suggesting that if all the money spent  on offshore processing had been devoted to achieving a long term solution, that  perhaps we wouldn't have the problem now and that's onshore processing.

Bowen: Well, that's wrong, she's wrong. I mean, I accept, I respect her position,  and as I've said, look, I think the Greens are fundamentally wrong and naïve about  this. They just think that increasing the refugee intake means that people will just  come the normal way. Well, you know, they don't recognise the fact that people get  rejected for asylum. You know, and if they get rejected for asylum, they're going to  come by boat anyway and try their luck. And it also doesn't recognise that, you  know, for example there's 100 000 asylum seekers in Malaysia, there's similar in  Thailand. You know, the idea of just increasing it to 20 000 and we'll just get the  ones who would have come by boat, that just doesn't cut the mustard.

Now, as I say, I do accept that they believe that and that's their genuine, long held  position. The point I make is that the Labor Party and Liberal Party should be able  to work this out because we both believe in offshore processing; the Greens don't. I  think they're wrong, but, you know, they just don't believe in it. But the Liberals and  Labor Party do believe in it, so we're the two parties that should be able to sort it  out.

King: Alright. Well, Tony Abbott is saying it's doomed to failure in the Senate today.

Bowen: Well, that's up to him. I mean, you know, he can pass the legislation. He  can say, 'I don't agree with everything the government is doing, I don't agree with  Malaysia, but they should be able to get on with the job and try and see if it works.'

That's what Kim Beazley said back in 2001. Remember, we've been here before,  Richard, how John Howard needed Labor Party support to get Nauru through in the  first place, but Kim Beazley, when he was Leader of the Opposition, said, 'Look, I  don't agree with it at all, but you're the government; I'm going to give you the  authority to do what you want to do.' And that's what he did with the Pacific  Solution. There wouldn't even be a Nauru without Kim Beazley's support, and all  we're asKing Tony Abbott to do is the same as what John Howard asked Kim  Beazley. This isn't about the hung Parliament, this about getting a Bill through the  Senate just like John Howard didn't have the numbers in the Senate.

King: Well, we'll wait with bated breath and hope that sense prevails and hope that  it's not doomed to failure, but thank you very much for your time this morning, Chris.

Bowen: Nice talking to you, Richard.



