



Transcript of interview with Amelia Adams  Nine afternoon news  15 August 2012

Topics: High Court decision on plain packaging; Houston Expert Panel Report

AMELIA ADAMS: The asylum-seeker legislation has passed through the Lower House  today. And it's not the only triumph for the Gillard government, it's also scored huge a legal  victory against big tobacco companies over plain cigarette packaging. The High Court  found the government's laws are valid.

Nicola Roxon started this fight as Health Minister; she's now the country's top legal officer  and joins us from our Canberra's studios, Attorney-General good afternoon, thanks for  joining us.

NICOLA ROXON: It's a pleasure.

AMELIA ADAMS: You must be very pleased with today's result.

NICOLA ROXON: Look, I am very pleased but ultimately there's a victory for every  family that's lost someone to a tobacco related disease. And I think it promises many good  things in the future for parents who worry their children might take up this dangerous habit.  So good news all round and we're certainly delighted with the High Court's decision.

AMELIA ADAMS: And it is a world first, this legislation, do you think the rest of the  world is watching?

NICOLA ROXON: We certainly know the rest of the world is watching because big  tobacco companies have challenged every country that's ever tried to introduce changes to  limit the harms from tobacco. And the message for other countries around the world is that  brave governments can take on big tobacco and they can win. And now I know many other  countries will look at what the right next step is, for them.

AMELIA ADAMS: Alright, so how soon will we see this plain paper packaging in place?

NICOLA ROXON: Well the first of December is when these laws come fully into effect.  After that time, you won't see any tobacco products sold in anything other than drab, green  packs. From the first of October some consumers will see cigarettes sold in plain packaging  as there's a transition period allowing time for small-business and others to sell their current  stock and re-stock with the new products that are in plain packaging.

AMELIA ADAMS: Attorney-General, just finally on asylum-seeker legislation, it's now  through the Lower House but there's no getting away from the fact that it is a backflip for  the government.

NICOLA ROXON: Well, I don't think the community is interested in that sort of analysis  anymore. They've said to us loud and clear just do something to stop people losing their  lives at sea. We've taken the advice of our expert panel. We're implementing those  measures. It is a very complex area where there are no good options, all of them are  difficult. And we've just said we're prepared to roll up our sleeves, take their advice. Some  of the things are a change for us, some of them are things that we've been arguing for, for a  long time... but the public just wants us to get on with taking action and that's what the  parliament's done today.

AMELIA ADAMS: Alright, Nicola Roxon, we'll have to leave it there. Thank you for your  time this afternoon.

NICOLA ROXON: It's a pleasure.



