





ABC Interview

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

London

30 January 2013

QUESTION: Senator Carr, thanks very much for your time. If we can  we'll start with Australian domestic politics. The Prime Minister has  announced an election date. Surely a long election campaign might  just annoy the electorate and backfire?

BOB CARR: No, there was going to be a long election campaign  anyway because of the nature of the parliament and the expectation  the election could be, well, anytime. The Opposition has got to  assume it could be held any time, the media assumes it could be held  any time. You've got the most boring theme in Australian political  coverage; speculation about an election date. Well none of that can  happen now. None of that can happen. You've just got an agreement  - universal knowledge of the election. I think that's a good thing.

We can get on with governing, the Opposition can get on with finally  developing policies, and the Australian people know when it's going  to take place. It gets rid of all the uncertainty. That's the value of it.

QUESTION: Robert McClelland's leaving his seat. Trish Crossin's been  dumped recently. It looks to some commentators like the party's  been cleansing itself of Rudd supporters now in anticipation of this  election.

BOB CARR: No, Robert McClelland decided after having served as a  minister and been in politics for some time to give it away. He does  so with the good will of all of his colleagues and our expectation that  he'll make a big contribution in some other area. That wouldn't strike  anyone as surprising.

QUESTION: Has the party been trying to cleanse itself as it were,  though, of Rudd supporters?

BOB CARR: No. I can understand that the Prime Minister's intent on  seeing that we have an indigenous woman within our ranks. I did the  same thing when I chose Linda Burney to be our candidate in a safe  lower house seat in the New South Wales parliament with,  conveniently, Kevin Moss the sitting member retiring at that time.  We do want to boost indigenous representation. Sometimes it takes  a bit of leadership from the top to make that happen.

QUESTION: The election will be held on Yom Kippur. Malcolm  Turnbull said that he's disappointed with that. There's one Labor  backbencher, Michael Danby, who has said he's going to boycott  because of that. Do you run the risk of alienating Jewish  constituents?

BOB CARR: Pre-poll voting. That's why you've got pre-poll voting.  You can very, very easily go to a polling place in the at least three  weeks leading up to an election and cast a pre-poll vote. And a lot of  Australians do it. A very large number of Australians do it and that's  one of the advantages of having that system. It's in the electoral

office in your electorate. It is easy - even easier to go there because  you've got a choice of any weekday to go there.

QUESTION: Well, given that what do you think of Michael Danby's  response?

BOB CARR: I think he needs to look at the electoral practice. A way  around this is to tell Jewish citizens that you cast a pre-poll vote. It's  even easier than going and voting on election day, you - anytime of  your choosing, any weekday - go to the electoral office, fill out a  form, and get to vote. It's not the remotest difficulty.

QUESTION: Are you disappointed with his response, therefore?

BOB CARR: Oh, no. No, I just think it needs to be pointed out that  any citizen can vote in the weeks before polling day. You've got a  justification, it'll be accepted by the electoral office. And at your  convenience, you turn up at an electoral office, fill out a form, and  get to vote.

QUESTION: Senator Carr, British Prime Minister David Cameron is on  his way to Algeria to discuss the situation there and in Northern  Africa. How do you think that the west must deal with the threat  coming form that region?

BOB CARR: Well, the west has got an interest in saying that a fragile,  vulnerable state in the Sahel or in the West of Africa, however you  define the region of Mali, should not be a vast base, a training  centre, a state at the disposal of al-Qaeda. And riding some tribal or  ethnic grievances against the government of Mali, al-Qaeda is  attempting this. So it's a legitimate western interest to say this  should not proceed, and an African interest as well.

I think the French approach has been extraordinarily positive. The  French need to be congratulated; and congratulated as well on

seeing the ultimate role as being for Africans themselves. Our job as  part of the west is to see that the African forces have got the  training, the equipment, the boots, the uniforms, the logistical  backing to be able to complete this assignment. And that is to bring  peace and stability to northern Mali.

Now, it is important that the government of Mali make very explicit a  political road map so that the grievances of non-extreme people who  played a role in this are accommodated. That you've got some of the  tribal or ethnic elements, for example - who aren't part of al-Qaeda  but were allied for a time with al-Qaeda - they've got an opportunity  to participate in government in Mali in the future.

And as part of any counter-insurgency you see if you can sheer off  part of the force who's trying to bring down the government by non-violent means. If they can be accommodated politically, it leaves al-Qaeda without the allies it previously had. So that's got to be part of  the big pictures solution.

QUESTION: Intelligence sources are reported as saying that the west  has very poor intelligence in the region, that there isn't enough grass  roots integration with Islamic forces there. What do you think is the  situation there?

BOB CARR: Yeah, we take Australia's position - in the last year we  provided $44 million in humanitarian assistance across the Sahel and  even after last year's coup in Mali we went on providing Mali with  support; $10 million in humanitarian support. So we've been  engaged. It's very hard to get intelligence in an area that's been  described as large as Germany and thinly populated and I don't think  any western government could be indicted for not having at its  fingertips the sort of intelligence that you might have in other  circumstances.

It is very hard with the key challenges being that we've immediately  stopped an al-Qaeda driven take over of a vulnerable and fragile  state. We've given that state the breathing space in which to  broaden its support and to incorporate tribal elements that have  been opposed to it, to take support from al-Qaeda. And to involve -  this is the third point - to involve West African forces themselves in  the restoration of peace and stability in the north. And we're there  providing humanitarian assistance.

I'm very, very proud that one part of Australian assistance will be  funding UNICEF in Niger to look after some of the kids who've been  stranded without their parents in this humanitarian crisis where the  convulsive movement in the north of Mali has pushed hundreds of  thousands of people south.

QUESTION: It's a serious situation and you yourself have compared it  to Afghanistan. Prime Minister Cameron has said that it's a global  and existential crisis so some are asking why only $10 million from  Australia at this point if we're going to prevent more exposure down  the track.

BOB CARR: Well money's going to UN agencies, the World Food  Programme for example, and it will spent effectively. We'll continue  to assess the situation. We're there with the other contributors in  Addis Ababa, and we think the level of our contribution is  appropriate. It's not Australia's immediate sphere of influence.  We've given far more proportionately to Afghanistan, of course. But  our help is appreciated.

QUESTION: In Syria, there are now reports of bodies in a river in  Aleppo which is pointing towards what could be the biggest mass  execution of the civil war. What's your reading of the situation  there?

BOB CARR: Well you're looking at mass crimes. Mass crimes. And  that's got a horrible resonance out of Bosnia, out of Rwanda, out of  the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

And it underlines the urgency of getting that ceasefire in place, and  that means overcoming the Russian and Chinese objection to that.  And getting the transition to a plural democratic Syria that will come  with the departure of Assad, and all sides accepting the transition  plan agreed at Geneva in the middle of the year.

Now, short of that, I will push with as much energy as I can, the plan  to have medical supplies with the country, and hospitals inside the  country and medical personnel inside the country protected. I can't  believe that three weeks ago the world has been able to witness an  agreement on the exchange of prisoners between the different  forces in Syria, and can't get an agreement from all parties to this  dispute, not to shell hospitals. Not to use hospitals as bases. To invite  doctors and nurses to return to the country to fulfil their  humanitarian function, and to allow medicines to get to the  pharmacies and the hospitals.

QUESTION: Given these recent reports and the fact that it's more  than three months since you said we have to trust in the spirit of the  Arab spring, surely, it could be argued, that the international  community has to do more than supply humanitarian aid. And that -  can't we be doing more with this position on the UN Security  Council?

BOB CARR: No, this is what - the peace plan that was developed by  Kofi Annan, when he was working for the UN and for the Arab  League, a joint special envoy, is valid now, as it was late last year.  And that is - I should say in the middle of last year - tragically it's

gone on that long. And that is to get a ceasefire, and to get  adherence to a transition inside the country.

I would urge Russia, without impugning Russia, without vilifying  Russia, I think there's been too much of that, to think again about  how its legitimate interests, can be expressed in this part of the  world. And I take, as it's presented, Russia's reservations about Libya.  The western world has got to lay off castigating Russia and accept  the legitimacy of some of their concerns, and urge Russia to work  with America. I think this is the realistic way forward. To get that  ceasefire involving the departure of Assad with protection for other  elements in the coalition that stands behind Assad, legitimate  elements. To get Assad out of the way, and to get a transition that  will protect all parts of the Syrian community, including its  minorities.

QUESTION: Don't what appear to be executions now show that that  plan, that Annan plan, has not worked?

BOB CARR: The alternative is to stay on the sidelines and do nothing  because, under international law, you can only have that ceasefire,  and that transition plan, if it's backed by the Security Council. And at  the present time there is no majority among the five permanent  members of the Security Council that'll lock that into place.

QUESTION: What else is the Australian Government preparing to do  in Syria?

BOB CARR: We're increasing our aid to flow to refugees out of Syria.  We are the fourth largest contributor, I think. Australians can be  proud of that. And the tents in Za'atri refugee camp, the food being  distributed, the child protection that is provided there, because

tragically, tragically, so many youngsters cross the border without  parents, is very largely there because of Australian support.

We're increasing our aid by another $10 million, and that will assist  refugees who've ended up in Lebanon, Jordan, I think Iraq as well,  and Turkey. Helping the refugees who've been forced out of their  country. It cannot abate in any serious way the extent of this vast  humanitarian tragedy which has seen millions of people displaced  within Syria's borders, and seen others have to seek the support of  friends and relatives outside the country, or make their own  arrangements. And the desperate position of those who ended up in  the tents, and who've been there since I inspected Za'atri refugee  camp in the middle of last year.

QUESTION: Do you know anything more about the fate of Australian  man Mohammad Yusuf al-Kakouni, who was abducted in Syria last  year, and have you offered any more help to his wife, who had been  complaining that the Australian Government hadn't been doing  enough?

BOB CARR: The Australian Government's done everything it can. We  have not got an embassy in Syria. We represented - we make our  representations through the Syrian Embassy in Cairo, but this is a  nation locked into a savage sectarian civil war, and we've warned  Australians repeatedly about not travelling there. I think DFAT - I  think I'm right in saying that DFAT has continued to be in contact  with his wife, and we hope for the family that he is well.

QUESTION: Regarding the kidnapping of Australian man Warren  Rodwell in the Philippines, what are the developments there?

BOB CARR: I'm advised that there is another video that's being  released and we continue to work with the Government of the

Philippines about securing the safe handing over. We don't, of  course, pay ransoms. If we were to pay ransoms in cases like this or  any others, it would be an invitation for a terrorist group to seize  Australians in all circumstances. It would make Australians targets  wherever they were in vulnerable parts of the world. I've spoken to  Mr Rodwell's sister and she, I understand, has been kept informed by  the Australian Federal Police who are working on this case in the  Philippines and with Philippines authorities. It's probably better not  to say more about it, given the fragility of his circumstances.

QUESTION: You've also had an announcement about an agreement  regarding Burma and education there. What does that involve?

BOB CARR: Well, we and the UK, we and Germany, have very  strongly committed to expanding education in Myanmar. One of the  tragic - start that again.

When I was in Myanmar talking to opposition figures and people in  government, I was struck by the fact that such a low percentage of  the population actually gets to go through primary school. It's one of  the key indicators of lack of development. Talking with Gordon  Brown, former Prime Minister of the UK, only yesterday I was  reminded that throughout the world, by the way, 61 million are not  in school. Children who should be, who are not in school, and that's  an awful indictment of children's rights and the lack of respect  accorded them in the world. In Myanmar, we can do something  about it.

We are now - again, Australians should be proud of this. We are now  the biggest aid contributor to Myanmar, and the bulk of the aid goes  in schooling. It means training teachers, it means setting up the  schools with equipment, even building schools, and we're going to  do more of this with our partner.

QUESTION: In that country there's been the continuing fighting with  Kachin separatists that has US and China worried. What's the  Australian Government doing regarding that issue?

BOB CARR: I've discussed it only a few days ago with a minister in the  Myanmar Government, and I was heartened to have him underline  the importance of reconciliation. They know that reconciliation  between the majority and the minorities in Myanmar is the key to a  stable democratic future. So they're committed to that, they talk the  language of reconciliation, they're being coached by other countries  in the world on how you deliver reconciliation in these difficult post-conflict situations. But the people of Myanmar have suffered  enough, through decades of dictatorship and economic retardation,  and they ought to be able to look to an end to these ethnic conflicts  that have been one part of the mix of Myanmar's problems.

QUESTION: And finally, Senator Carr, we're talking in Britain where  the Prime Minister has announced that there'll be a referendum to  decide whether or not the UK stays in the EU. What's in Australia's  best interests?

BOB CARR: Australia really benefits from having a strong Europe. It's  probably fair to say, I say this after talking to British MPs on both  sides, that some of the bureaucratic aspects of the European Union  have given rise to a backlash in the UK, a country that's been torn  over the decades between embracing Europe and moving it past  from Europe. I think a lot's going to be clarified when the British  Government tells us what the referendum choice presented to the  British people will be. We want to see a strong Europe, we want to  see a strong United Kingdom. What the relationship will be is up to  the people of the United Kingdom to determine.

QUESTION: Mr Carr, thank you very much for your time.

BOB CARR: A pleasure, thank you.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



