

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  SKY NEWS INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: Government’s border security secrecy, Indonesian-Australian relationship

DAVID SPEERS: We just saw a little earlier Angus Campbell the Lieutenant General  in charge of Operation Sovereign Borders in front of a Senate Estimates Committee  strongly defending the secrecy surrounding boat arrivals under the new  government’s regime. We know the Opposition have a great concern about this. To  tell us more about it the Shadow Minister for Immigration Richard Marles is with me  now. Thank you for your time.

RICHARD MARLES: Good afternoon David.

The General insists this is an important measure, the secrecy, because it denies  people smugglers information on whether their boats get through, where they are,  in effect, the release of payments, it can help them sell their business if they get this  official information from the Australian Government. Do you accept his arguments?

RICHARD MARLES:  First thing I'm not going argue with a General, because that's  precisely what the Government are trying to set up here, to have a General argue  with us. And in that sense what I'm going to point to is the policy that the Liberal  Party put out before the last election and what Scott Morrison himself has been  saying in terms of the management of information. Now the point I would make  there is if there is really an issue in the Government issuing press releases whenever  a boat arrives, and providing the Australian public with the information that we  would all expect then why are they going the Friday briefings at all? Because all of  this information is ultimately coming to light.

SPEERS: Angus Campbell says it is about striking a balance between transparency  and what is good for their operations at sea. That you do need to update the public  but not on an ongoing basis.

MARLES: What is implied in that comment is that there is ultimately a balance to be  struck here. So this is a matter of judgment, there's nothing absolute about this. And  that is what Scott Morrison is saying is there something magical about an  operational matter and no one can ever talk about it. Let’s be clear, when Scott  Morrison himself was the Shadow Minister he put out a press release every time a  boat came here. I don’t think the Coalition were particularly shy about telling the  Australian people and presumably people smugglers exactly how many boats had  come to Australia and how many asylum seekers had come to Australia.

SPEERS: But it is, now I know you don’t want to argue with him but it is the  General, and yes Scott Morrison flagged this secrecy prior to the election, but it is  the General now arguing why is it necessary and making the case.

MARLES: Let's not focus so much on who is making the argument because that is  exactly what the Government is seeking to do. Let's just look at the content of what  is being said and the sense of that. We live in a day and age where people who are  getting on those people smuggler boats have mobile phones and GPS technology. I  mean if the people smugglers don't know where their own boats are who would? So  I think there are lots of means; social media, families here in Australia telephoning  families in the source countries about whether people have made it. There are a  million ways in which this information is being communicated. What we have got  here is the Government refusing to tell us what is going on. Because the reality is  they promised to do toe-backs and they're not doing toe-backs. They promised to  buy boats in Indonesia, they are not buying any boats in Indonesia. That’s the real  issue.

SPEERS: In the several weeks it's been in operation, and we have had updates at  the end of each week. What are we being denied that has really mattered?

MARLES: Firstly we have been denied the standing of the Parliament. So last week  we had this situation, Scott Morrison was asked the question about whether or not a  boat had arrived in Darwin, just the fact of whether a boat had arrived in Darwin. All  of that had of course been reported so the whole world knew that was the case.  Refuses to answer in Parliament but tells us in the press conference on Friday. Now  the point I would make about it is this. If Scott Morrison were to mislead, or indeed  if anyone were to mislead a press conference, that's a bad article. As a Minister  misleading the Parliament you lose your job. The probity associated with the  Parliament is much greater, the gravity of being upfront with Parliament is much  more serious -

SPEERS: But is he misleading Parliament if he does inform Parliament, like the rest  of us, at the end of each week?

MARLES: He is not informing Parliament, he is just doing a press conference. And  the onus upon him in terms of presenting material that is accurate is nothing like  what it is in press conferences compared to what it would be in Parliament. That's  why we have Question Time. Question Time is the principle means by which we hold  governments to account because the consequences of misleading Question Time by  a government are so significant. And I think this is the matter that ought to be of  concern to the Australian people. We are watching Scott Morrison and this

government just treat the Parliament and Question Time with contempt and in the  process they are treating the Australian people with contempt as well.

SPEERS: Now things are fairly tense it would seem with Indonesia at the moment.  You did raise some concern in Parliament this afternoon, about perhaps, Indonesia  not being as cooperative, what do you think they may do?

MARLES: The point that we were trying to make was that if you look at one  measure particularly that we raised which is automatic visas on arrival for Iranians  arriving in Indonesia. This was something that the then Rudd Government  negotiated with Indonesia, and the Indonesians were prepared to do this and that  was not to give automatic visas on arrival. It has been a really significant measure.  It has slowed down the flow of Iranians coming through Indonesia and then getting  on a boat.

SPEERS: Why would you raise this today, are you trying to egg on Indonesia here?

MARLES: Of course not. In circumstances where we have been saying from the  outset and well before all that's appeared in the last two days. We have been saying  from the outset that the only way in which you can go about your relationship with  Indonesia when it comes to asylum seekers is on the basis of cooperation. We made  the point that this government has been seeking to dictate terms to Indonesia from  day one and they've ended up with egg on their face.

SPEERS: To that end in the efforts of patching things up, do you think Tony Abbott  should apologise for these spy claims?

MARLES: Look, I think that what is - firstly our relationship with Indonesia is a very,  very significant relationship and when the then Opposition Leader now Prime  Minister, talked about having a foreign policy more based on Jakarta rather than  Geneva, I will credit him for this. There is no doubt that Indonesia is one of the most  important bilateral relationships that we have. This now has to be worked through  very carefully and words matter greatly -

SPEERS: And he's flatly refusing to apologise.

MARLES: Words with matter greatly in terms of how things are carried out.

SPEERS: And would an apology help?

MARLES: The point I want to make is this, we do have some guidance here in  terms of how to proceed. With the revelations that Edward Snowden has made and  the way in which that's rippled across the world and in effect that is what we are  now dealing with here. We do have, in a sense, the first case which was between  the US and Germany. Now both the President of the United States and Chancellor  Merkel were on the phone to each other almost immediately. There is some  guidance there as a pathway towards repairing the relationship -

SPEERS: The President reportedly apologised directly to Chancellor Merkel. Are you  saying that is what Tony Abbott should do?



MARLES: We are not being prescriptive in relation to the government, and we do  not want to politicise this. We want to try and support the government on this -

SPEERS: Well, it’s pretty clear - you either think he should or he shouldn't  apologise.

MARLES: No I don’t think it is as clear as that -

SPEERS: Are you saying he should follow President Obama's lead?

MARLES: I'm saying the path that the US and Germany walked together gives us  some guidance in terms of how to deal with this information coming to the fore -

SPEERS: - But what does that mean? It's a good path to follow?

MARLES: It's a good path to follow but I guess the point I am making -

SPEERS: So apology is a good thing?

MARLES: Let me -

SPEERS: Well it is a pretty clear question.

MARLES: The reason it is a difficult question to answer is this: I'm not sitting in the  chair. I am not sitting in Julie Bishop's chair nor Tony Abbott’s, and Bill Shorten and  Tanya Plibersek aren't either. We don't have at our disposal all the information, the  cables and the communications. We understand they are the ones sitting in the chair  and we want to support them in doing what needs to be done to repair the  relationship.

So I am not going to sit here and be prescriptive to the Government about what  they should do which is why I don’t want to answer the question that you’ve asked  me because frankly I'm not in a position to answer it not having that information at  hand. The only thing we are suggesting is, there is a road that has already been  walked here by both Germany and the US - it's an example to looking at.

SPEERS: Shadow Minister for Immigration and Border Security. Thanks for joining  us.

MARLES: Thanks David.

ENDS

