JOH





LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH

6 May 2013

TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MHR  REMARKS AT HONORARY CITIZENSHIP CEREMONY FOR RAOUL  WALLENBERG,  CANBERRA



EO&E...........................................................................................................................................



Your Excellency, Prime Minister, ladies and gentlemen.

It would have been so easy to have looked the other way. Millions did. They concluded that there was  nothing that could be done in the face of such evil, or that perhaps nothing much was really happening after  all, or that some of the victims might have somehow had it coming. But others did what they could to help.

Of all the examples of resistance to Nazi tyranny, Raoul Wallenberg’s is perhaps the most flagrant. He  remonstrated with death squads; he distributed thousands of Swedish passports to people awaiting  deportation to death camps. He badged whole buildings as Swedish diplomatic institutions to help shelter the  Jews within. In an era when executions were on an industrial scale, his was an industrial scale rescue effort  and it ultimately cost him his life.

Raoul Wallenberg matters today, nearly 70 years after he disappeared into a Soviet camp because, in part, of  the contribution those he rescued from the Holocaust have made to Australia. Australia owes so much to  Jewish people, especially to those who came as refugees from war-torn Europe, some of whom Wallenberg  himself saved, such as Frank Vajda, who is here today.

Mostly though, Wallenberg matters because of the importance of good example. Passivity in the face of evil  can so easily become complicity. Wallenberg refused to accept that nothing could be done, that nothing  could be done to help those who would be victims.

That’s why he now belongs to everyone. To Jews, to whom he was one righteous among nations. To  Christians, for whom he might be seen as the ultimate Good Samaritan. To all people of goodwill who  accept the golden rule to do to others as you would have them do to you, but often lack the courage to live  by it.

It’s a privilege to support this act of citizenship. Raoul Wallenberg should be a citizen of every country  which respects human dignity. He does not rest in our land, may he always rest in our hearts.

[ends]

2423014

