

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW SKY AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2013  CANBERRA

SUBJECT/S: Temporary Protection Visas; Indonesia; Intelligence



KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda, thanks very much for your company this  morning with me now the Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles. Mr Marles,  thanks for your time, this story today that Scott Morrison is going to use his powers  under the Migration Act to put a ban in place on temporary protection visas you and  the Greens blocked the temporary protection visas in the Senate. The Minister has  been able to achieve the same outcome any way hasn’t he?

RICHARD MARLES: Well what the Minister has been seeking to do by putting in  place temporary protection visas is essentially to put Australia back on the table. The  fundamental question Kireran that Scott Morrison has been unable to answer is, will  a temporary protection visa, if he had his way, be offered to somebody who is yet to  arrive in Australia?  And of course if that is the case then he has in fact put Australia  back on the table and undermined the PNG arrangement. That was always our  concern about putting TPV’s back in place. He’s talking about…

GILBERT: You know that they’re adopting the PNG arrangement and Nauru and  that for those that arrive that’s where they’re being processed, they’re not being  (inaudible) visas -

MARLES: But that’s exactly the point the moment that the PNG arrangement was  put in place was the moment that the whole policy of Temporary Protection Visas  became redundant -

GILBERT: Except for the 33,000 here -

MARLES: Yes but the basis upon which the government sought to put in place  temporary protection visas was as a deterrent. Now it’s only a deterrent if you are  talking about potentially offering a TPV to somebody in the future. Scott Morrison is  in the paper today saying that the shop is now shut. The reality is we shut the shop  on the 19th of July with the PNG arrangement. He has been seeking to re-open the  shop and offer a different product.

GILBERT: But this relates to the 33,000 people already here, not to those that  arrive and his argument is that he wants to send the sign of intent, a message of  intent to people smugglers that they are serious even for those who that are already  on Australian soil -

MARLES: And at that point this argument stops making any sense at all. If Scott  Morrison is very clear that no one in the future will ever get a Temporary Protection  Visa because Australia is now off the table well then whatever he does in relation to  the 30,000 people who are here makes no difference in terms of sending any signals  to people smugglers because people smugglers are dealing with those who will come  in the future. And in relation to those people who are here, there is no point in being  nasty or mean to those people for the hell of it. Australia will pay for that in a million  different ways. Stopping processing those who are already here is a very costly  decision which is going to be paid for by Australian tax payers, actually in relation to  that group -

GILBERT: So you think he’s over done the deterrents in this sense?

MARLES: There’s no deterrents, there is no deterrents. It makes no sense that  there is any deterrents here at all the only -

GILBERT: But doesn’t it, you know by being tuff so to speak which both major  parties have been in an auction basically for the last couple of years -

MARLES: Well no -

GILBERT: He’s just taking it a step further.

MARLES: Well all he’s doing is being mean for the hell of it and in the process he is  going to cost Australian tax payers. What we need to see here - this is not walking  down a rational path in the country’s interest and that’s the way in which we ought  to approach the question of how to deal with the 30,000 -

GILBERT: How much was it going to cost anyway to have the group on bridging  visas subsequent to their being settled elsewhere?

MARLES: Having people on bridging visas means they are on the government tab.  Not processing them means they are on the government tab for as long as they are  no longer processed and that’s the decision that he’s made so there is no -

GILBERT: No no, but the decision you made in blocking the TPVs means that  people can’t work -



MARLES: No, well that’s not -

GILBERT: They could work couldn’t they?

MARLES: They can work if they are processed, they can work if they are given a  visa, which is his choice to give or not to give and obviously if they are found not to  be genuine refugees then they are sent back to their country and they’re off the  government tab.  But what he is now doing in terms of those who are on bridging  visas who are there with government support, he is keeping 30,000 people on the  government tab indefinitely, that’s the decision he’s made.  And in terms of what he  was seeking to do with TPVs, this didn’t work as a deterrent at all because all it did  was put Australia back on the table it was actually precisely the opposite. And you  know Kierian you go back to the Howard years, TPVs didn’t work.  It was one of  those policies which if you look at the graphs the number of people who came after  the introduction of TPVs actually increased.

GILBERT: But they won a mandate for it didn’t they? I mean they mentioned it - I  can’t recall how many times it was mentioned, thousands and thousands of times  over the last couple of years.

MARLES: I think the mandate that everybody was seeking was a mandate to deal  with what is a very difficult issue and definitely to stop the boats and to deal with  the problem of those people coming by boat and the drownings at sea.  Now there is  no mandate for putting Australia back on the table which is what Scott Morrison  would be trying to do if he had TPVs in place.

GILBERT: The Foreign Minister is going to miss the last Parliamentary sitting day  this week, going to Jakarta to start the talks with Dr Natalakowua.  Is there any  prospect that this can be smoothed over in the next couple of months do you think?   Or are in Indonesians really got their back up over this?

MARLES: I think a couple of points here, we obviously support the government in  what it does in terms of moving passed the Snowdon material and the impact that  it’s had on our relationship with Indonesia. And it is a good thing that there is a  dialogue being established between the two Foreign Ministers and obviously we wish  the Foreign Minister well in that endeavour.

I would make the point in the space of asylum seekers, and this very much predates  the Snowdon material, this government has had bad relations with Indonesia, it has  been putting up policies before it become the government, which the Indonesians  did not like. So that has not helped at all and I think it is important that if the  Foreign Minister is going, which she obviously needs to do, that these ridiculous  ideas; of buying back the boats, of having community wardens, turning back the  boats, these policies which Indonesia didn’t want, which are never going to work,  the government needs to abandon them and the positive thing to do would be to  abandon them as a sign of good will to Indonesia.

GILBERT: But the former government had its own issues obviously with live cattle  and so on that you were able to smooth over aren’t these things inevitable and in  countries that have their own foreign policy are not always going to agree?

MARLES: No course we’re not always going to agree and I have no doubt that in  time we will smooth over the relationship with Indonesia and its obviously very  important for Australia and indeed Indonesia that we do that. My only point is this,  this government, even before it became the government had silly ideas which  annoyed the Indonesians when it came to asylum seeker policy -

GILBERT: Do you think that this can be resolved in the next couple of months or  will this drag out through next year which is a Presidential election year in Jakarta?

MARLES: It is impossible to put a timeframe on that I think what there needs to be  is active diplomacy on the part of Australia to resolve it as quickly as we can but it is  impossible to put a timeframe on that but it doesn’t help to try and resolve our  relationship with Indonesia so long as you have our Prime Minister out there sticking  by, stubbornly, policies which are never going to work which are not being  implemented and which are basically annoying to the Indonesians.

GILBERT: I want to ask you finally about this ASIO raid that Attorney General  Brandis has confirmed happened at the office and home of a lawyer representing  East Timor in legal action at The Hague, relates to allegations by East Timor, from  East Timor, that Australian spies had bugged the East Timorese cabinet room back  in 2004 during oil and gas negotiations.  So basically their allegation is that the  spying took place for commercial gain.  What do you make of these reports over the  last 24 hours and the suggestion that the whistle blower former spy has had his  passport confiscated and unable to go to The Hague either?

MARLES: Look these obviously are impossible matters for people in public office to  comment on and it’s very important that both those who have been in government  and those who are in government don’t comment on these issues.  It actually  undermines Australia’s security the moment that we do start to talk about these  issues.  And that goes back really to the damage that Edward Snowdon did in  revealing this material, not just to our relationship with Indonesia but to America’s  relationship with Germany and indeed to global security.  It doesn’t help anyone to  be walking down the path of pulling apart and commenting on these intelligence  matters and I think it’s a very import principal for all of us here to abide by.

GILBERT: What about the debate about the media reporting of it and Tony Abbott’s  comments relating to the ABC?

MARLES: Well I think it is a matter for the media to make its assessment of the  way in which it acts in the national interest but I certainly think that the material  Edward Snowdon has put out there has been damaging to international security,  there’s no doubt about that and in that sense it has been damaging to Australia’s  national interest and you only need to look at how this has played out between us  and Indonesia to see that so I think we can only speak for ourselves and from the  point of view of the opposition we very much support the government in what it

needs to do to deal with this issue and we are not about to comment on intelligence  matters.

GILBERT: [inaudible] …the one relating to Indonesia at the moment but there is  every likelihood that we will see others relating to other important partners including  China?

MARLES: Well I think if other material comes to the fore it is going to be obviously  important for the government to do all it can in what will be a very difficult situation  there and it’s not a situation which will be unique to Australia they’ll be able to look  to other countries such as the US and as to how they are going to deal with similar  issues but we will be supporting the government in this because it is a very difficult  road that needs to be walked down but I think we all need to be clear here that  what Edward Snowdon is doing is damaging international security and is therefore  damaging to Australia’s national interest.

GILBERT: Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles, appreciate your time.

MARLES: Thanks Kieran.

ENDS

