

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

ABC Radio with Alexandra Kirk

13 May 2013

Subjects: Foreign aid budget, Paid Parental Leave Scheme

E&OE…

ALEX KIRK The Government is again deferring its commitment on the aid budget? What is  your response?

JULIE BISHOP This is more evidence of a budget in chaos. There’s no promise that Labor  can make that is believable. There’s no forecast, no target that Labor can put in the budget  that anyone can believe. They have already pushed out the promise to meet their commitment  of 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income for foreign aid by 2014, they’ve already broken that  promise - last year. They intend to break the promise again this year by pushing out that  commitment for another 12 months.

And this idea that they can raid the budget to the tune of $375 million because of a blow-out  in their asylum seeker budget is outrageous. The boats keep coming so it’s farcical for Labor  to claim that they’ll be able to reduce spending in processing asylum seeker claims when  they’re just raiding the foreign aid budget to do it.

ALEX KIRK Do you say then that the Government shouldn’t give any foreign aid money to  the asylum seekers into the community?

JULIE BISHOP This is about spending money on asylum seeker claims onshore. It’s not  about spending it offshore, say Manus Island or somewhere.

ALEX KIRK Would that be alright if they did that?

JULIE BISHOP There’s an arguable case for that under the relevant international guidelines.

But what this Government’s doing is raiding the foreign aid budget to the tune of $375  million for onshore processing of asylum seeker claims and in my mind that’s entirely  inappropriate and they are talking about putting a cap on it. So they think it’s ok to put a cap  on a raid on the aid budget.

ALEX KIRK The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, the OECD,  allows this to be done, they say it’s within the guidelines of using foreign aid money. So if  the OECD says it’s ok, why don’t you agree?

JULIE BISHOP I question that. The OECD is clearly looking at the situation such as the  offshore processing we have on Manus Island or Nauru. The idea that the Government can  lose control of its forecasts and its budget in the detention network and the processing of  asylum seeker claims and then go and raid the foreign aid budget is unacceptable in my view.

ALEX KIRK Except that the OECD guidelines say that it can?

JULIE BISHOP You can read it that way. I do not, that was clearly not what was intended.  So what next, it loses control of the detention network in Western Australia so therefore they  can use foreign aid money?

ALEX KIRK It can’t be used for detaining asylum seekers but it can be used for sustaining  them.

JULIE BISHOP Alex they can come up with every excuse they want. The fact is the  Government’s lost control of its budget and it doesn’t matter what promises it makes it will  break them next year, it doesn’t matter how many caps they say they are going to put on the  raid on the aid budget, they’ll break it again next year.

This is from a Government that has over 500 times promised a budget surplus in 2013 and  they are about to deliver their fifth record deficit. They just can’t be believed.

ALEX KIRK If you win the election, which is on the cards, would you seek to reverse this?

JULIE BISHOP The first thing we would do, should we be fortunate enough and honoured to  win the election, would be to put in place performance benchmarks for the aid budget. This  was recommended by the independent committee that looked into Australia’s foreign aid  budget and it hasn’t been taken up by the Government. It’s a fundamental recommendation,  to put in place performance benchmarks so that every dollar spent is assessed against these  performance benchmarks.

ALEX KIRK So what about restoring the money that’s been used for asylum seekers, restore  that to the foreign aid budget for overseas aid projects?

JULIE BISHOP We intend to stop the boats. Under Labor the boats keep coming in record  numbers, 21,000 arrivals this financial year alone and the Government wants us to believe  that they’re going to reduce the budget for processing asylum seekers.

ALEX KIRK But no one thinks that you’re going to be able to stop the boats instantly so  you’re still going to have to deal with the thousands of asylum seekers that have arrived.

JULIE BISHOP There is a budget for the processing of asylum seeker claims and we will  work within that budget. We won’t raid the foreign aid budget in order to do so.

ALEX KIRK So would you restore the money that the Government now is diverting next  financial year in the foreign aid budget.

JULIE BISHOP We would like to repair a lot of the damage that Labor has done but until  such time as we see the true state of the budget we don’t know how widespread that damage  is and we don’t know how we’d be able to repair all of it over what timeframe.

So until we see the true state of the budget - I fear it’s going to be very bad, there have been  four record deficits already, Wayne Swan is on track to receive the fifth record deficit in  Australia’s history - let’s see the true state of the budget and see what repair job has to be  done by an incoming government.

ALEX KIRK Would this be a priority though? To restore the money back to the foreign aid  budget and then use some money garnered from somewhere else to pay for asylum seekers in  the community?

JULIE BISHOP There is an asylum seeker budget. We intend to stop the boats and we intend  to operate within the budget assigned for detention networks and asylum seeker claims. We  do not intend to raid other parts of the budget to make up for shortfalls.

Now Labor just cannot even be promised on this. They maintain that they’ll now put a cap on  the raid on the foreign aid budget, I don’t believe them on their past record, on their broken  promises I don’t accept that.

ALEX KIRK Just on a broader issue for the Coalition - your Paid Parental Leave Scheme,  business is saying that if you go ahead with it and you put an extra tax on business then it will  wind back or get rid of some of their own maternity leave schemes because there would be  one in place and therefore they would be winding back their own schemes. What do you say  to that?

JULIE BISHOP It was always intended that the existing schemes would be rolled into the  Coalition’s Paid Parental Leave Scheme, that was always intended. The 1.5 per cent levy on  only large business was intended to ensure that all businesses, including small businesses,  would be able to implement this productivity and participation measure.

We have an ageing population, we need to ensure that more people can continue to be  involved in the workforce, continue to be taxpayers and this measure is an economic  measure, productivity and participation measure designed to grow our economy.

ALEX KIRK So you were always expecting that business would get rid of the schemes they  already had in place?

JULIE BISHOP No they would roll them into the Scheme. There’s the Government scheme,  there would be the existing scheme that businesses have and the much more generous and  appropriate scheme that the Coalition has proposed and is taking to the next election.

ALEX KIRK But you always expected that business would wind back the things that they  already have in place?

JULIE BISHOP Well it’s not a question of winding them back, it’s rolling them into the  Coalition’s scheme so that there would be six months paid parental leave as a workplace  entitlement not a welfare entitlement. In other words it would be paid on the same basis as  annual leave and sick leave and that is at real wages, not the minimum wage.

ALEX KIRK And so therefore people wouldn’t be double dipping, so they wouldn’t be able  to get two schemes, one paid for by business and then the more general Paid Parental Leave  Scheme of the Government?

JULIE BISHOP That’s self evident.

ALEX KIRK Thank you.

- Ends -



