MEET THE PRESS

16 JUNE 2013

INTERVIEW WITH JULIE BISHOP

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Well, welcome back to Meet The Press.  You can join in the conversation throughout the program on our Facebook page or  using the Twitter hashtag #mtp10. Well, it's been another rough week for the Prime  Minister, Julia Gillard, with a series of unfortunate incidents stealing the headlines.  There was the lewd Liberal fundraiser menu, questions over her partner’s sexuality  and, of course, Kevin Rudd re-emerged with several attention-grabbing outings this  week. It seems her hold on the Labor leadership is becoming increasing tenuous, with  a new Galaxy poll in News Limited's Sunday papers showing a return to Mr Rudd  would boost Labor's vote to 50-50 with the Coalition on a two-party preferred basis.  It's likely to add to instability as politicians return to Canberra for the last sitting  fortnight before the election. Joining us now in the studio is Deputy Opposition  Leader Julie Bishop. Thank you for your time this morning Ms Bishop.

JULIE BISHOP: Good morning.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Let's start with gender wars. You said during the week that  the Prime Minister was creating a false gender war. But in light of the week that was,  the Mal Brough menu scandal, the Howard Sattler interview, isn't it time we started  talking about gender? What has been false about the gender discussion?

JULIE BISHOP: Kath, I was hoping I could come on this program this morning and  talk about the Coalition's plans to deliver stable and competent government for  Australia. But it seems that yet again the public are being distracted by the Labor  leadership merry-go-round, the silly speeches about men in blue ties, false claims  about the Coalition changing abortion laws, mock dinner menus that were never used.  And I think it's time that the Parliament, and the Labor Party in particular, focused on  our plans to make Australia a stronger and better community, not divide people by  class or gender. And the role of prime minister should be to unite people, not to create  divisive wars when one didn't exist. And I use particularly the example of the Prime  Minister raising abortion as an issue for the next federal election. It is not an issue. It  should not be used in this way. And for her to claim that the Coalition would change  abortion laws, and that abortion would become a play-thing of male politicians if the  Coalition were elected, was as insulting as it was false.

SARRAH LE MARQUAND: Ms Bishop, Julia Gillard was widely condemned for  raising abortion and a lot of people said it's not going to be an issue under an Abbott  Government. Some other people have come forward and pointed out that if Senator  John Madigan is in control of the Senate that it could well become an issue and it's not  such a fanciful notion after all.

JULIE BISHOP: The trouble with the Prime Minister raising it in this way, it was to  portray herself as some kind of victim of sexist attacks. But, in fact, she's using this  kind of claim and sexism generally as a defence against legitimate criticisms of her  performance. Whenever a question about her integrity or her honesty or her

competence is raised, she claims that people are using sexism against her, or they are  misogynists. And in fact, she's using it against her own party - and I'll come back to  that. But on the question of abortion, Julia Gillard in 2006 agreed entirely with Tony  Abbott's terminology when he described abortion as being a circumstance that should  be safe, legal and rare. And Julia Gillard said - she embraced those words and said,  “That's exactly right. We want to see a circumstance where abortion is safe, legal and  rare.” Tony Abbott said, “Abortion is a matter for the state governments.” Again,  Julia Gillard agreed with him and said, “Yes, it's a matter for the state governments.”  So, Tony Abbott hasn't changed his position, the Coalition hasn't changed the  position. So, why is it that the Prime Minister says it will become a play-thing of  Coalition politicians? That was offensive. Now, in the case of Senator Madigan, he  may well raise whatever he wants in a private members' bill, but the Coalition will not  change the laws relating to abortion, we will not change our stance on it. And there  was no evidence-

HUGH RIMINTON: But what about the regulations?

JULIE BISHOP: - of the Prime Minister upon which she could base such a false  claim.

HUGH RIMINTON: Well, what about regulations? Not just laws, but regulations.  Because under Medicare, things can be adjusted by - you know, what is covered - is  covered by regulation, not by legislation.

JULIE BISHOP: We will not change the current approach, regulations or legislation.

HUGH RIMINTON: Can I just ask you - are women in Australia today disadvantaged  by their gender?

JULIE BISHOP: I don't believe so. When you see that we have a female Governor-General, when the Prime Minister is a female, the most privileged and powerful  position in the land is held by a female, women can achieve whatever they want in  life, whatever they set their minds to in Australia. We have the laws to protect them.  What I find offensive about this current gender war is that the Prime Minister is using  it as a shield against legitimate criticism. And her own party are being bluffed into  keeping her as their leader, because if they seek to remove her on the grounds that  she's lost respect or she's incompetent, then they will be labelled as misogynists for  removing Australia's first female prime minister. And I think that's where the debate  has gone completely off the rails. When a woman uses her position to prevent  questions about her competence for the position, then they're using gender as a shield  and a sword, and not to debate the real issues.

HUGH RIMINTON: Do you think women will be comfortable with hearing the most  senior woman in the Coalition saying that women are not disadvantaged, when pay  rates are lower for women than for men, when directorships are significantly lower?

JULIE BISHOP: The laws are there to give women opportunities. We have to change  attitudes. There have to be changes in attitude. We have seen some attitudes in recent  months that clearly are inappropriate and unacceptable, and offensive language,  vulgar language, is unacceptable in any circumstance. I'm not saying that. I'm not

saying everything's equal. But I'm saying women have broken through the so-called  glass ceiling. There are women in very powerful positions in this country, and that  gives other women the opportunity to see that they can achieve things in this country.  The laws are there to protect them. Attitudes are another thing, and I think that starts  at the top.

HUGH RIMINTON: How would you change attitudes?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, for a start, I would, um, insist on higher standards in the  Parliament. When a shock jock who is paid, makes a living, out of shocking people by  overstepping the boundaries and breaching the norms of decency, well then I would  refuse to answer their questions in an interview. I would walk out of an interview, if  it...



HUGH RIMINTON: So, she behaved the wrong way by...?

JULIE BISHOP: No, I'm just saying that it's unacceptable for that kind of behaviour  to go on, and people should take a stand. Now, the Prime Minister was perfectly  entitled to refuse to answer the questions that Howard Sattler put to her, for example,  and she was perfectly entitled to terminate that interview. And that's what I would  have done. So, set high standards and live by them.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Are you concerned that if Tony Abbott is elected in  September, that women's voices will be lost, when you look at the numbers in Cabinet  alone will drop by 50%?

JULIE BISHOP: Not at all. I'm the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and I would  hope to be the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party if we were honoured to be the next  Government of Australia. And my voice certainly won't be silenced. And we have a  number of women in our shadow ministry, we have many talented women in the  party, and we have many very, very talented female candidates. But this again is a  false debate. It should be about people's competence. In the Liberal Party, we are pre-selected on merit, on our ability to do the job, not on a gender quota.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: So you don't agree with quotas?

JULIE BISHOP: Absolutely not. I believe that every person who takes a position in  the Parliament should be judged on their competency, on the merits of what they can  offer, on their performance, on the way they conduct themselves, not on their gender.  Now, every woman on the Labor side has been brought into Parliament based on their  gender. Every woman on the Liberal-National side is there because they’ve earned the  right through competence, through merit. And I believe in merit-based promotion.

HUGH RIMINTON: So they don’t deserve to be there, on the Labor side?

JULIE BISHOP: I'm just saying they came through in a system that says, "You have a  woman for this seat." We come in through a system that says, “You have the best  person for that seat.” And yet, again, this is where the Prime Minister does herself no  favours by being so hypocritical. She wants to portray herself as the champion of  feminism, champion of women, and yet when she's got an opportunity to support a

woman going into a seat like Bateman, the safest Labor seat in Victoria, she would  back one of her so-called faceless male colleagues who have supported her. And when  she got an opportunity to support a female Senator in the Northern Territory, in Trish  Crossin, she took her support away from her.

SARRAH LE MARQUAND: Isn't the danger, though, that any discussion about  gender in this country is framed in this sort of partisan nature? Can we try to broaden  it out beyond the Parliament, if we will?

JULIE BISHOP: Please!

SARRAH LE MARQUAND: What are you worried about the impact of the - some of  the more toxic commentary of the last few years? What impact might that be having  on young girls and women in terms of turning them off pursuing a career in politics?

JULIE BISHOP: Well, politicians do have a role to play. Politicians should not seek  to divide the community. That's why Julia Gillard's comments upset me so much. I  find them astounding, that she's labelling people as women-haters, misogynists, when  there's absolutely no evidence to back that up. And so if you keep making these false  claims of misogyny, it's a very confusing message for young people. I try and portray  myself as a politician, not as a, you know, a woman who's got there because she's a  woman. But I'm happy to be judged on my performance, what I do, what I don't do,  and I think that's the debate we need to have, as opposed to confusing people with  these false claims of misogyny, where there is utterly and absolutely no evidence for  it.

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: You're watching Meet The Press. Well, the  Coalition has vowed, if elected, to close a loophole that has allowed foreign-born  criminals convicted of violent crimes to stay in Australia. Those convicted of criminal  offences and sentenced to one year or more in jail will have their visas cancelled and  could be banned from re-entering Australia for 20 years. Our guest this morning is  Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop. Ms Bishop, if we can just clarify - basically  people who have achieved refugee status or have been processed as asylum seekers  are going to be deported. If that's the case, if so, where do they go?

JULIE BISHOP: This actually applies to non-citizens, people who are guests in our  country, people who are on visas. And if they commit a criminal offence that is  punishable by jail of 12 months or more - so that's a very serious criminal offence -  then they would have their visas cancelled and they would be deported.

HUGH RIMINTON: Does that include asylum seekers?

JULIE BISHOP: That would include anybody who is in Australia who commits - who  is here as a guest, who is here on a visa, and commits an offence. They will be  deported. The rights of appeal would also be taken away, except in particular  circumstances, and they have been laid out in the policy.

HUGH RIMINTON: International law says you can't deport an asylum seeker or  refugee back to the place where they have fled, so where do you deport them to?

JULIE BISHOP: This will apply to any non-citizen and anyone who is a guest in this  country. And-

HUGH RIMINTON: But the question is, where would you deport an asylum seeker  to? You can't send them back to the place that they’ve fled. Where do you send them?

JULIE BISHOP: We would send them back to the place where they came from. And-

HUGH RIMINTON: The place that they’ve fled? That's against international law,  isn't it?

JULIE BISHOP: And - no. What I'm saying is that Australians deserve to be protected  from people who come here and then commit crimes, punishable by more than 12  months, and then we would seek to send them back. Now, obviously there are going  to be circumstances where countries may not take them back, and I understand that.  But we have to put some... laws in place - in Australia.

HUGH RIMINTON: What about the places that will take them back, but where  they're going back into - where they’re going back into danger? That's the - that’s  against the law of refoulement.

JULIE BISHOP: We have to- Well, we're not going to breach international laws.  We're not going to breach international treaties.

HUGH RIMINTON: So where will you send them?

JULIE BISHOP: But we’re sending people back if we're able to send them back. And  in the case of non-citizens who have breached our laws, then I think the Australian  public would agree that they can no longer live off Australian hospitality.

HUGH RIMINTON: But if you can't send them back because of international law,  where are you going to send them?

JULIE BISHOP: -That they have breached their right to be here. Well, in each case,  we will deal with it on the circumstances of that case. Now, in the case of a - a person  who's here on a - a tourist visa, or a person who's here on a temporary visa in some  form or another, if they commit a crime, I think everybody would agree - a serious  crime - they have forfeited their right to be a guest of this country, and that's where  we'll send them - back home.

HUGH RIMINTON: Effectively, would asylum seekers be exempt from that, or  refugees who have been found to be refugees, because of our international  commitments under the - under refoulement?

JULIE BISHOP: We won't breach - we won’t breach international laws. But we  should have, as a matter of principle, a policy in place that says, “If people who are  guests of this country break the law and are found guilty of a serious criminal offence,  then they no longer have the right to stay in this country.” And we would take away  the rights of appeal that are currently being used by foreign criminals. They are

currently being used to stay in this country. And we would say that entry would be -  re-entry that is - would be barred for 20 years, not the current 10 years.

SARRAH LE MARQUAND: Is there potentially a disconnect between what's being  promised and what can actually be delivered? Only two days ago, for example, the  Vice-President of Indonesia said that this talk about the promise about towing boats  back to Indonesia, that they're simply not going to be party to that. So, is what's being  promised now in Opposition really going to be introduced in reality after September?

JULIE BISHOP: First, it's false to claim that ours is a tow-back policy and it's false to  put those sorts of questions to the Indonesian Vice-President as being representative  of Coalition policy. What happened under the Howard Government, and what can  happen again, is that Indonesian flag boats with Indonesian crews that have come  from Indonesian ports can be turned back. That's what happened in 2002. In fact, Julia  Gillard was the shadow immigration minister at the time. And she applauded the  Australian Navy for turning boats back, on international waters, back to Indonesia,  and they went back - four of them. And Ms Gillard said at the time that turning boats  around was a very important plank in dismantling the people-smuggling trade. She  supported it in 2007. Kevin Rudd, before the election, said that he would embrace a  policy of turning around boats where it was safe to do so in international waters. Now,  there is no suggestion that anything that we would do, nor anything the Howard  Government did, would violate Indonesian territorial integrity. We've never said that.  And it's absolutely false to call it a tow-back policy, and infer in some way-

HUGH RIMINTON: That wasn't the question that was put to him, actually. It was  “turning back” not “towing back”.

JULIE BISHOP: No. It was -

HUGH RIMINTON: But “turning back”. So-

JULIE BISHOP: No. Well, I agree with what the Indonesian Vice-President said,  absolutely agree with him. He said that there won't be a violation of Indonesian  territorial integrity, and there won't be, and there wasn't under the Howard  Government. And what Julia Gillard embraced when she was shadow immigration  minister, what Kevin Rudd embraced as leader of the opposition, is in fact Coalition  policy. Today we’ve seen another boat arrive. There are now 44,000 people who have  come to Australia via the people-smuggling trade. Hundreds and hundreds of deaths  at sea, a $10 billion blow-out, and no-one in the Government is taking responsibility  for it. The decision that the Australian people have to make in September of this year  is whether Labor have the competence, the capacity, and the policies to protect our  borders and stop the boats, or whether the Coalition's policies, which have been  proven to work, will work again.

HUGH RIMINTON: Just quickly-

JULIE BISHOP: That’s the judgment they have to make.

HUGH RIMINTON: Just very quickly, because we're almost out of time - who was  the better prime minister - Julia Gillard or Kevin Rudd?



JULIE BISHOP: I don't think it will matter to Labor's, um, fortunes at the next  election whether they have Julia Gillard or Kevin Rudd. Because they both embrace  the same policies on border protection that have failed. And I think the next two  weeks we're going to see a continuation of the Labor leadership merry-go-round,  where Kevin Rudd stalks Julia Gillard and Julia Gillard stalks Kevin Rudd across the  country as they vie for media attention. And then, for some inexplicable reason,  apparently it seems that it's Bill Shorten who is going to decide who is the prime  minister of this country. I think the people are sick of this game, this play-thing, the  office of prime minister being passed around like a game of pass-the-parcel. And what  they're looking for is a leader who will unite the country and a party, a Coalition, that  will deliver strong, competent and stable government and provide the opportunities  that this country can offer the people who live here.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Well, Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop, we look  forward to the next two sitting weeks of Parliament. Thank you very much for your  time on Meet the Press this morning.

JULIE BISHOP: It's been my pleasure.

