

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW WITH MARK PARTON, RADIO 2CC  FRIDAY, 6 DECEMBER 2013

SUBJECT/S: Asylum seekers

MARK PARTON: Christmas Island’s got a touch of Gilligan’s Island about it this  morning. You would’ve heard the news.

[Theme song to Gilligan’s Island plays]

Little bit, little bit of Gilligan’s Island here.  Labor and the Greens have cast the  doubt of the effectiveness of the Government’s border protection policy after an  asylum seeker boat made it to Christmas Island undetected.  Now it’s been  confirmed, 28 asylum seekers made to Christmas Island without being detected after  it is believed their boat sank. I don’t think they were on a three hour tour. Their  presence became known when a few of them were spotted walking along the main  road into town. Fourteen of the asylum seekers have been picked up but the  remaining 14 are unaccounted for. Let’s go to Richard Marles who’s the Shadow  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, he’s on the line now. Morning  Richard.



SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION,  RICHARD MARLES: Morning Mark, how are you?

PARTON: Excellent. You’re got major concerns here, why?

MARLES: Well, before the election the Coalition said that they would bring to this  area of policy all the discipline and focus of a targeted military operation.  I think the  question that arises today is with that discipline and focus, how is it that a boat has  managed to arrive at Christmas Island undetected? With all that discipline and focus,

how is it that we’ve had a group of asylum seekers in Australia for three days before  anyone even noticed?

PARTON: I get that, I understand that but why would this lead us to questioning  the entire policy in terms of Scott Morrison and Tony Abbott suggested that they  would stop the boats, and obviously to stop the boats you’ve got to slow them in the  first instance.  They’re succeeding in slowing the flow of boat people here aren’t  they?

MARLES:  No, I don’t think that’s true Mark, and this is the point that we’ve spoken  about before.  If you look at the two weeks prior to the election, after the PNG  arrangement had been in place for the better part of two months, we had seen the  flow of boats reduced to just two a week -

PARTON: Yeah.

MARLES:  That’s before the election but that is after the PNG arrangement, that is  the game changer. So what the Government has been doing since then, to be fair,  has been making sure that the PNG arrangement continued, that is a good thing and  that is what’s actually stopping the flow of boats.  But the reality is that in the last  week, we’ll find out for sure today, we believe four boats have arrived in the last  week, just this week.  The flow of boats at the moment is really no different to what  it was immediately prior to the election.

PARTON: What I can hear is you having it both ways, because when we get twelve  months into the term of this Government, what I can hear from you this morning  Richard is that if indeed the figures that we get regarding flow of boat people are  dramatically decreased, you’ll take credit for it, if they’re dramatically increased it’ll  be the Coalition’s fault.



MARLES:  Well we’re just simply stating the facts. There has been a reduction and  a significant reduction in the flow of boats. That is a fact, it’s totally true. But the  date where the change in the graph occurred is not 7th of September, it’s the 19th of  July.  It’s the PNG arrangement which has made that change, now Scott Morrison  was very critical of the PNG arrangement when it was first put in place -



PARTON: Indeed.

MARLES:  He’s been to PNG since he’s become the Minster, not a single clause of  the PNG arrangement has been changed and he has confirmed that, he confirmed  that at last week’s briefing.  So they are backing in the very arrangement which they  criticised because it is that piece of policy which is working. So sure, we are going to  take credit for policy that we put in place.  We would expect that the Coalition are  able to maintain the level of boat arrivals which we had achieved prior to the  election, which was two a week.

PARTON: If Scott Morrison were here though, would he not argue that when you  guys adopted this PNG policy, you did so after a barrage of opposition doing what

they’re supposed to do, and that’s hassle the hell out of you over it and it was them  that lead you to do it?

MARLES:  Well who knows what Scott Morrison would say, but were he to say that  it would be very disingenuous.  The fact of the matter here Mark is this is an area  which has been evolving over the years.  The fact is that if you adopted the policies  that the Howard government had in place during the early 2000s, they simply  wouldn’t meet the circumstances as they present themselves in 2013.  We went  through a process of dealing with that evolving set of circumstances and that lead us  to the PNG arrangement. It’s working.  It’s actually why it’s important that we don’t  have Temporary Protection Visas which is what we stopped during the week.

PARTON: Why are they so evil?

MARLES:  Well, the problem with TPVs is if you look at the Coalition policy, the  Coalition is actually seeking to put Australia back on the table. What the PNG  arrangement did and why it is successful is because it takes Australia off the table.   If Scott Morrison is putting in TPVs as a deterrent it implies that there would be  people not yet in Australia who might get a TPV, and because of that he would  argue they won’t come.  But the moment that you are saying that people in the  future might get TPVs is the moment you’ve just undermined the PNG arrangement.   The PNG arrangement means that no one should be getting any form of visa in  Australia at all. And that is the problem, if you look at the suite of measures that the  Coalition bring to bare in relation to this area of policy, they’re all outdated by about  ten years or more, and that I think is the issue we find ourselves in. The Minister is  caught in a time warp, he’s clearly not in control today and the best thing he can do  is back in what Labor did, and that is the PNG arrangement.

PARTON: Richard just before I let you go, you’re going back to the initial premise  for the interview or the initial reason for the interview, is these people come  undetected into Christmas Island. Wasn’t there a boat load that sailed into Geraldton  last year?

MARLES:  Well, there was and I must say the language that I’ve used with you this  morning is nowhere near as severe as the language that was used by the Coalition  when that occurred. What is clear is that the Coalition before the election said they  would bring to this all the military, all the focus and discipline of a targeted military  operation. That’s their language. Today they need to answer to the language. How is  it that with that language, that we’ve had people in Australia for three days without  anyone even noticing, and that is the question that Scott Morrison needs to answer.   It’s what he said prior to the election, he needs to be held to account for it today.

PARTON: Richard thanks for your accessibility, it’s wonderful to have you on this  morning.

MARLES:  It’s a pleasure Mark, thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524

