THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT



17 June 2013

TRANSCRIPT OF LAUNCH OF AEC ONLINE ENROLMENT - CANBERRA

SUBJECT: AEC online enrolment; asylum seekers; ALP leadership; Electoral Disclosure  Reform.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

DREYFUS: I'm very pleased to be here with the Australian Electoral Commissioner, Ed  Killesteyn, and my Parliamentary colleague, Parliamentary Secretary, Andrew Leigh, the  Member for Fraser at this launch of an online registration tool which is going to help us  get more young people to register to vote.

Perhaps I shouldn't say just young people but particularly young people who we think  are likely to take advantage of this new online registration tool. And it's a move away  from what my children had described to me - they'll all in their 20s - as not online even  though it has been possible for a long time to go online, get the form that you need to  register to vote and fill it out, you have to use a printer.

But according to a lot of young people to whom I've spoken, the previous system was  not really online registration. What we have now with this new application is full online  registration where you will be able to fill out the entire form online using your smart-phone, using your iPad or tablet or of course using a PC, fill out the entire form and then  sign online using, depending on what application you're using, a stylus or a mouse or  your finger.

And that's a real achievement. It's something that is going to help us deal with what has  been for many elections now, I don't just say in recent times but for many elections  now, the problem that the youngest cohort in the Australian population doesn't quickly  enough get themselves registered to vote and it's produced the outcome which is not  new as Ed would explain that as at now about 500,000 or greater than one-third of the  estimated 1.4 million eligible Australians - that's eligible to vote, are people who are  aged 18 to 25 years of age.

The statistics are that only one in two 18-year-olds are presently registered to vote and  two in three 19-year-olds are on the roll and that gives you a rate that is considerably  lower than the 91.2 per cent participation rate that we have. So my urging to everybody  who has not yet enrolled and I'm speaking particularly to people in the younger group in  the population is - don't leave it until the last minute. You've got approximately two  months from now. If the rolls close on 19 August, you've got approximately two months  from now to get enrolled and it's never been easier to get enrolled to vote that it is  today with this online application.

And I'm going to hand over to Ed to see if he's got some comments to add to that.

KILLESTEYN: Thank you, Attorney. And I do appreciate your enthusiastic support for this  new facility. The Minister has been effectively on my back now for a couple of months  to make sure that this was released within a good period of time before the election. It's  the last one of a series of reforms that has been pursued by the Parliament and the AEC  - both legislative reforms and administrative reforms over the last few years to make  enrolment easier.

2010 was the first reform where we released an online update facility, but it didn't allow  new enrolees to come on board. Then in 2012 Parliament passed legislation to allow us  to directly enrol people - another great initiative to help us bridge this 1.4 million people  who are not currently enrolled. We also have new legislation which will allow us to work  with the tax office. So for example, where a young person entering the workforce for  the first time will be able to not only apply for a tax file number, but also apply for their  enrolment at the same time.

All of these initiatives are designed to make it easier for people to get on the roll. And I  think that's extremely important when you look at the 1.4 million figure. I do stress  however, notwithstanding that it's easier - it's still the responsibility of all individuals to  get on the roll when they're eligible or indeed when they move addresses. It is  compulsory and that remains notwithstanding the fact that we're making it easy as  possible for people to get on the roll.

This will be important as we head into the election - 1.4 million people not on the roll -  you cannot vote unless you're on the roll. So as the minister has said, we the AEC, the  Government - obviously Parliament encourages more and more people to get on the roll  as possible. And of course to have your say. Thank you.

DREYFUS: Now are we going to have a demonstration?

KILLESTEYN: We're going to have a demonstration. We have two young enrolees who  are going to look at the system.

DREYFUS: Two people who are very competent, but I don't think claim special  competence in IT, on their iPads enrolled to vote. And I don't think - I didn't time it, but I  think it was under five minutes, and that's something that's going to be possible for  everyone in Australia with access to a smart phone, to an iPad, to any kind of tablet, or  to a PC, which is not everyone in Australia as yet but it's almost everyone in Australia  and it's particularly younger people. And thank you very much for that demonstration.

QUESTION: Attorney-General, given that Interpol has withdrawn its red notice, will that  change the situation for Mr Sayed Latif?

DREYFUS: What I said last week is that we're a country that respects the rule of law, and  it's important that there be proper investigations before we jump to conclusions, and I  also said last week that what we don't want to see is politicians playing with national  security, politicians seeking to make political points out of national security matters,  they should let - politicians who are thinking of doing that should desist, they should let  things take their course.

QUESTION: Will this man remain in the Villawood Immigration Detention Centre despite  Interpol's moves?

DREYFUS: Well, you've seen that Interpol have left in place some aspects of their notice,  and he will remain in Villawood Detention Centre.

QUESTION: Shalom Mark, I just wanted know, more than 50 per cent of Aboriginal  people are old enough to vote unenrolled, is that because they don't feel part of the  franchise do you think?

DREYFUS: We've got a great deal of effort, and I'll refer to Ed to add to this in a minute -  but we've got a great deal of effort in getting everybody in Australia who is eligible to  enrol, to enrol to vote.

For a long time there have been difficulties in reaching people in remote parts of the  country and of course that applies in particular to a lot of indigenous communities  which is where the non-enrolment is to a larger degree, and there are special programs  that are directed particularly at indigenous communities. Ed?

KILLESTEYN: Thank you Minister. Yes, I think when you look at indigenous Australians,  they're the least likely to be enrolled, the least likely to vote, indeed the least likely to  get their vote correct. And so for the last four years now, the Government has funded  what we call the Indigenous Electoral Participation Program, it's a $14 million program  and that funds the AEC to implement a range of strategies both with suburban  indigenous community as well as rural and remote. And that program is looking pretty  successful.

QUESTION: The percentage of young people who are yet to enrol to vote, or who don't  vote in these elections, how has that panned out over the years, are we seeing an  increase in the number of young people who are not enrolled?

KILLESTEYN: Indeed. If you look at the statistics since the mid '90s you see the growth in  the number of people who are not enrolled. And there does seem to be a generational  issue I guess with young people coming through. It doesn't mean they're not interested  in politics, it doesn't mean they don't get involved in politics, but the sort of traditional  way of getting involved in politics through the ballot box is one of the things that we are  - a challenge with, I think, with youth.

QUESTION: You're making it more accessible via iPads to enrol, but what do you think  are some of the other issues that are behind this increase?

KILLESTEYN: Look, our role is to make it as easy as possible to get on the roll. That's  what our task is. We will encourage people, we will look at all sorts of ways to make it as  easy as possible, after that it really is for the community generally to encourage people  to express their views through the ballot box.

QUESTION: In the United States they use pop bands and things like that to promote  that. Do you have a favourite band? Do you see maybe Peter Garrett doing something?

KILLESTEYN: I'm not sure my bands would necessarily be particularly appealing to youth  at this stage. But we've got a range of activities focussed on youth, from using Facebook,  to Twitter, to something we call E-rock, which is to use festivals where youth will attend.  You will generally see an AEC officer at all of these festivals including festivals that have  particular appeal to indigenous communities.

QUESTION: Mark, they say when you're young you vote Labor, when you get older you  vote conservative. So this is something that the Labor Party will be interested - because  they probably need [inaudible]?

DREYFUS: This is about basic democracy in Australia. We want everybody in Australia  enfranchised, that means enrolling to vote. We've got a very successful compulsory  voting system in Australia, it's a concern that only 91.2 per cent of Australians who are  eligible to vote are enrolled.

But this online application which means you won't need a printer, you won't need  paper, you won't need a pen, you won't need an envelope, you won't need a stamp - it's  very accessible, it's going to enable everyone in Australia to get online and enrol. You  don't any longer have an excuse, I'd urge everyone to get out there and enrol.

QUESTION: Speaking of democracy, are you confident you won't be casting another  vote this week in caucus?



DREYFUS: I'm confident that we are here in Canberra for two weeks, for the remaining  two parliamentary sitting weeks. There's 100 bills on the Senate notice paper, I'm  wanting to make sure that as many of them get passed, because they've already passed  through the House of Representatives. That's the business of the Parliament this week.

QUESTION: There is no way you can see the leadership question being revisited?

DREYFUS: The business of the Parliament this week is legislation, and that's what you're  going to see going through the Senate.

QUESTION: What would you say to members of the Labor caucus who have been  spooked by today's Nielsen poll, with a two in front of that vote [inaudible]?

DREYFUS: As I have been I'll be talking to members of the Labor caucus about what I  heard from people in my electorate last week which is that they're absolutely sick of the  way in which the Prime Minister was treated last week, the kind of language that we  saw.

They want to see a better tone in political debate in Australia. And I heard that, I listen  to the people in my electorate.

QUESTION: How would you sum up last week? I mean pretty sordid generally speaking?

DREYFUS: I think we saw some dreadful things said, I don't think Australians want to see  that kind of language being used, I don't think Australians want to see the kind of  interview that Howard Sattler conducted with the Prime Minister. And in fact, I don't  think Australians want to hear from Opposition members like Joe Hockey saying that he  didn't respect the Prime Minister. I think people want to see respect for our Parliament,  they want to see respect for office holders, I certainly respect all of my colleagues in the  Parliament on both sides and I try to practice those politics.

QUESTION: There's 100 bills the Senate needs to go through in the next two weeks - are  the controversial electoral funding reforms still on the agenda, will they be part of it?

DREYFUS: Well, that's one of the bills that's sitting on the notice paper.

QUESTION: Any chance of it being passed in the next two weeks, being revisited?

DREYFUS: It's one of the bills that's sitting on the notice paper, and I'd have to say not  every bill of the hundred will actually pass through. That's inevitable. You get this at the  end of every session, where some bills that are passed through the House don't manage  to get through the Senate.

QUESTION: Have you spoken to the Coalition at all about whether they'd revisit it?

DREYFUS: We are going to continue to speak to the Coalition about getting their  support because it's a reminder of course that we've had a minority government in  Australia since the August 2010 election. And we need their support on a number of bills  in both the House and the Senate, or we need the support of the cross-bench members  in the Senate or the House.

So we've talked this week, and will be talking this week as we have talked every week  with other members of Parliament about the passage of legislation.

ENDS

