The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Incident on Manus Island, illegal maritime  arrivals, skilled migration, Miranda by-election  Monday, 21 October 2013

Interview with Lyndal Curtis, ABC 24

Lyndal Curtis: Scott Morrison, welcome to Capital Hill.

Scott Morrison: Thanks, Lyndal.

Lyndal Curtis: The incident that occurred between Manus Island last Friday  between members of the Papua New Guinea police force and the Defence Force,  what exactly happened?

Scott Morrison: Well, there was some sort of skirmish between them. It was  unrelated ultimately to the operations of the centre. We prepared staff to be moved if  they had to be, but they didn't have to be and the whole matter was dealt with fairly  promptly. The centre was back in operations fairly quickly.

Lyndal Curtis: Were those police and members of the Defence Force on Manus  Island because the processing centre's there?

Scott Morrison: Not all of them, no.

Lyndal Curtis: Do you know what caused the skirmish?

Scott Morrison: It's not clear at this stage, and we've sought further reports on this.  The information that I've had provided to me, I have released.

Lyndal Curtis: Have you sought an assurance that this won't happen again?

Scott Morrison: We work with the Papua New Guinea authorities all the time, and I  was up there just the other day on Manus Island. I met with the base commander,  the secretary of the Immigration Department is up there today and I'm sure will be  taking the opportunity to take some further briefings and have some more  information over the course of the week.

So you're always working with people to make sure that there's a stability to the  operations there. I mean, there's been an incident. There were incidents previously.  It's a question of how quickly you get the centre back on operations, and they move  very quickly as the staff up there do a very professional job.

Lyndal Curtis: You said in a press release yesterday the incident was quickly  defused by centre staff, so that work - did centre staff step in the middle of it to try to  defuse it, to try to settle things down?

Scott Morrison: Well, the specifics of that haven't been provided to me, but there is  - I mean, Manus Island and particularly Lombrum base is not a big place, and they  all work with each other and they're all known to each other. Our staff up there are  very capable and have established relationships and taking steps to try to defuse the  situation is exactly what I would expect them to do, and that's what they've done.

Lyndal Curtis: Given that the staff stepped in to defuse it, that there were  transferees, detainees who were reported to be frightened by this, given that  possible evacuation plans had to be put in place, this is not an incident that you  would like to see repeated?

Scott Morrison: I don't think these incidents are, but when incidents occur you  respond to them appropriately and properly and try to resume normal operations as  soon as you can, and that's what's occurred on this occasion. And if it were to occur  again I'd expect the same sort of professional response which is measured and calm  and deals with what's in front of them.

Lyndal Curtis: Is Manus Island safe?

Scott Morrison: Well, I was only there recently, and I've also got a force protection  assessment team which is going up there over the course of this week which I  instructed after being there with General Molan, the Prime Minister's Special Envoy,  who visited the facility with me and that was one of the suggestions that he made to  me and I straight away agreed and we put that in place when he return and that's  underway now.

Lyndal Curtis: The force protection, in terms of Australian military or some other  sort of Australian security?

Scott Morrison: This is to, firstly, to undertake a sort of third party assessment  about what the situation is there. That's a routine thing you would do in facilities like  this, to give yourself the peace of mind that what you have in place with your  providers, with your operations, is suitable to deal with potential threats and incidents  that can occur. That's just a matter of good planning. It's a matter of being  precautionary.

We don't want to see a repeat of what happened under the previous government at  Nauru, where at the end of the day, locals had to turn up with iron bars. That's not an  outcome I want to see repeated, where there was the burning down of a facility that  cost taxpayers millions of dollars. Now, we want to avoid that, and to do that that's  why we've instructed the force protection review to be done.

Lyndal Curtis: And who's conducting that force protection review?

Scott Morrison: Through - under the commander of the JATF (Joint Agency Task  Force) under General Campbell.

Lyndal Curtis: So it's been done under the leadership of Operation Sovereign  Borders?

Scott Morrison: That's right.

Lyndal Curtis: And...

Scott Morrison: That brings together civil as well as military professionals.

Lyndal Curtis: And would they look at this incident as well, specifically?

Scott Morrison: I'm sure they'd take account of what occurred in that situation, as  well as reviewing the general operations up there and what potentially could occur.  But also there were serious incidents that took place a year ago or thereabouts,  people jumping fences, getting access to petrol and cars and things like that under  the previous government's arrangements, and I want to be satisfied that the  appropriate force protection measures are place, and that's why I've asked General  Campbell to do that.

Lyndal Curtis: You have instructed your department to call asylum seekers coming  to Australia by boat illegal arrivals. What's wrong with...

Scott Morrison: Well, that's not quite right. What I've said...

Lyndal Curtis: What have you done?

Scott Morrison: ...is that previously they were referred to as irregular maritime  arrivals or unauthorised maritime arrivals and I'm saying when they're using that  term, they should refer to them as illegal maritime arrivals because under the  Convention on People Smuggling it is, illegal entry is defined when people come not  with the permission to enter your borders, and that's what's occurring here. That's  what we're trying to stop. Illegal maritime arrival is what we're trying to stop.

Now, we're not double minded about the issue, we're not conflicted about it, as the  previous government was. I don't feel the need to embrace any sort of politically  correct language. I mean, asylum seekers are still asylum seekers. Refugees are still  refugees, and those terms are applied appropriately where they are. But when we're  talking about the manner of somebody's arrival, well, it's an illegal maritime arrival  and that's what I've instructed and it's the term I have used for years so it should  come as no surprise.

Lyndal Curtis: Just a quick question about the legalities or the process. If someone  arrives by an illegal method, is an illegal arrival...

Scott Morrison: An illegal entry.

Lyndal Curtis: An illegal entry - the point at which they claim asylum, do they  become asylum seekers?

Scott Morrison: Well, it doesn't change their mode of entry. It's not illegal to seek  asylum. I've never said that. I never would say that. I know what the law is on those  things. But what we're trying to do here is stop people illegally entering Australia, and  I'm not going to embrace some sort of language which somehow tries to justify it or  validate it. I want to stop it, not encourage it. I don't want to condone it. I want to stop  it. We're not conflicted about it. Others might be, but that sort of conflict and that sort  of double mindedness led to the policies the previous government had, which  resulted in 50 000 people turning up illegally on boats.

Lyndal Curtis: One of the previous government's policies was changes to the 457  visas. That went through Parliament not long before the election. You've called the  former government's approach heavy-handed regulation and red tape. Will you be  seeking to repeal that legislation?

Scott Morrison: We're looking carefully through those issues at the moment. In my  consultations with business on this, what they're tired of is changes every 10 minutes  in the migration system as was occurring under the previous government. We'll look  at this soberly, we'll work out what's the best way to go forward, and when and if  legislative changes are required then we'll bring those to the Parliament. There are  some regulatory issues that can be addressed in the first instance. There's also  administrative issues that relate to those measures that come in place in a few  months' time and we'll deal with that first, but what we want to assure people,  whether they're employers or employees, is that we won't be engaging in sort of  hasty mismatches and constant changes to the system. That just makes it hard for  everybody.

Lyndal Curtis: So this legislation was due to take effect from the end of this year, so  are you saying there are things you can do to soften the impact of that legislation  that Labor passed while you're working out what else to do on 457s?

Scott Morrison: Correct.

Lyndal Curtis: And you're fully prepared to do that? You'll talk to business before  taking those steps?

Scott Morrison: Well, that is - we'll talk to business and we'll talk to other  stakeholders affected by this, which is something the previous government refused  to do. I mean, the previous government said there were 10 000 visa rorters in the  457 system and the minister at the time had to admit that he just made that up and  he used that as a basis to bring legislation to the Parliament. Now, I found that a  fairly appalling process, and I'm not going to go down a similar hasty, made-up  process. I will go through a proper process.

Lyndal Curtis: One final question: there was a by-election in New South Wales for  the state seat of Miranda. Labor took that seat with a 27 per cent swing against the  government. Is that an aberration or a warning to Barry O'Farrell?

Scott Morrison: Well, that was in my own Sutherland Shire, the Shire, and the  specifics of the previous member's resignation I think were the key factor here. I  mean, that was frankly one of the most appalling acts I have seen by a member of

Parliament to walk out on both their party and their community, and by contrast, the  now-Labor member, returned Labor member, Barry Collier, had a good track record.  And so the return of Barry Collier, combined with the acts of the former member, I  think combined to produce a fairly significant result for the Labor Party.

Now, I think what we have to learn and we have to acknowledge, and I've already  issued an apology to the people of the Shire, is that that sort of behaviour just isn't  on and, frankly, we got what we deserved for that member's acts. But the Liberal  Party members who came out and supported the party, I thank them, but they had to  do it under pretty difficult circumstances and those circumstances were created on  our side.

Lyndal Curtis: Scott Morrison, thank you very much for your time.

Scott Morrison: Thanks a lot, Lyndal.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm208955.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 22 October 2013 at 12:03 AEST



