



THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  Member for Maribyrnong  Shadow Minister for Education and Workplace Relations

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO NATIONAL   INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY  TUESDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2013



SUBJECT/S: Labor Leadership Ballot; Parliamentary Entitlements



FRAN KELLY: Bill Shorten, good morning welcome to Breakfast.

BILL SHORTEN: Good morning, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: How will Labor be different under your leadership compared to  the leadership under Anthony Albanese?

BILL SHORTEN: Well let me say at the outset I think Anthony could do a very  good job. The particular proposition I bring to the leadership is that we must  position Labor to be relevant to the lives of Australians in the future. I think there  are not too many swinging votes in Parliament.

What I think is important, on one hand, is to hold the Abbott Government to  account. But on the other hand, to give people positive reasons to vote for Labor.  So I believe I can help position Labor to be relevant to the future of Australians  through a vision of Australia writ large and during the campaign I’ve taken the  opportunity to talk about some of the ideas which I think would appeal to people  about Labor.  One of which is becoming unambiguously the party of science,  research and innovation, which leads to better jobs and also, by tackling some of  the issues of greatest social disadvantage in Australia, including the treatment of  disability, pensioners, and the victims of domestic violence.

FRAN KELLY: What about becoming a more representative party, a party of the  people? Anthony Albanese, who is running against you, has committed to  implementing, for instance, the mothballed Faulkner-Carr-Bracks reform

recommendations after the 2010 election, one of which was to reduce the power  of the unions by having rank-and-file elected to the Party conferences. All about,  basically, diluting the union power and making the party more open and  representative. Do you also commit to implementing those reforms?

BILL SHORTEN: I commit to making sure the Labor Party is a much boarder  party.

FRAN KELLY: Do those reforms go to that?

BILL SHORTEN: They do, there’s a chapter about building a 21st Century Labor  Party. I’m interested in how we get more people into the Labor Party. I think the  fact that we have 44,000 members is fine, but we really should be much larger. It  is crazy in the 21st Century that it’s difficult to join the Labor Party online. We  don’t need to conduct our matters in the manner of the 1920s.

I also think we need to be a party who involves more people in our preselections.  And thirdly, I also think we need to be a party who has a more diverse range of  candidates. It is important that politics in Australia, that the main parties don’t  have a system which sees people coming from older, white Anglo-Saxon men,  that we are in fact a party who recognises that merit is spread throughout our  community and therefore all members of our community should have the  opportunity to represent Labor in Parliament.

FRAN KELLY: So basically that is a tick on those key Faulkner-Carr-Bracks  reforms - you will go with those?

BILL SHORTEN: Yeah, I believe that we do need to open the Party up. I do  believe we need to make it easier to participate in. I do believe we need to give  people more say. What I also think though, along with rebuilding the Labor Party,  we need to be a party of ideas for the future.

The Australian economy keeps changing. Australian society keeps evolving. The  rise of Asia, there’s Australians growing older, there’s the march of women  through institutions of power, there’s the digital revolution, we need to be  sustainable, the fact that we are not going to rely just on mining for our future.  Labor has policies, but needs to develop even better policies to how we speak to  the lives of Australians living in the future.

It’s important that we don’t define ourselves on opposition just by what we are  against in terms of the Abbott government, but we need to define ourselves also  by what we are for, for the future.

FRAN KELLY: In terms of better ideas, what lesson have you learnt about  leadership when you review Labor’s past 5 years?

BILL SHORTEN: Probably two or three. There’s the obvious point about not  being disunited, either publicly disparaging each other, but also even privately  leaking to journalists putting other people down. So that’s one, if you haven’t got  something positive to say about your colleagues best say nothing.

But I think even along with that, even as importantly, leadership is about getting  the best out of a team. It’s not about a couple of individuals making all the  decisions. It’s not about personalities. It’s not about individuals. It’s about how do  you coach a team so that all the people in the Labor team, both inside and  outside of Parliament, feel engaged and involved. I truly believe that a champion  team can always beat a team of champions.

FRAN KELLY: Who’s in your team to the extent - I presume this is quite an  expensive exercise, you’ve been all around the country speaking with the rank-and-file members, it’s been quite extensive -  who’s supporting you financially?  Are the unions supporting your campaign?

BILL SHORTEN: Some unions, the issues been that there’s been two national  mail outs, there’s been telephone town-halls, which are pretty interesting  developments where hundreds of people can come online and talk, and also  visiting people. I’ve done big and small functions around Australia. I’ve spoken on  at least 43 occasions to groups of ten and twenty right up to groups of nearly a  thousand.

FRAN KELLY: As you’ve spoken to people all around the country what’s the  feedback on Labor’s election loss? Are the membership blaming the feud  between Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard? Are they angry? What are they telling you  they want, if you could pick out one message you’re hearing? And I know you’ve  been talking to a lot of people.

BILL SHORTEN: I’m not sure it’s possible to pick one but I’ll say this; people  have been positive about being given a say. They recognise that it’s a circuit  breaker with the past, so they’re positive about being given a say. I think there  are a couple of other themes. One is that people want to see an end to  disunity. Another is that people want to see Labor be positive about the future. I  also think it’s fair to say that for branch members, immigration and refugees have  been a pretty big issue as well.

FRAN KELLY: These are tough issues and Labor worked hard to try and answer  some of those questions and came up short, didn’t have the answers that the  public wanted.  Labor’s primary vote in September was 33.4 per cent. So the first  choice of just 1 in 3 voters.  You, yourself, suffered a swing against you, a  significant swing against you. Labor is likely to have to serve in opposition for at  least two terms, if not, three. Do you have the heart, do you have the ticker for up  to nine years in opposition as Opposition Leader?

BILL SHORTEN:  Well, I’m around for the long haul, and so, yes. But I also think  that Labor needs to be careful in assuming that there’s a cycle in politics. I mean  you’re right, barely 34 in every 100 people put a number one next to Labor at this  election, so our challenge is how do we rebuild? But there is no natural cycle in  politics.

We’re not conservatives in Labor. We don’t just assume that it becomes our turn  to be in government after a certain point of time. Government has to be earned,  so that’s why I’m running. It’s not a matter of people who may be around for the  long haul saving themselves for later.  Either you think that the Labor team is  worth something or you don’t. That’s why you run when you can.

I also think we can win in one. I think the Coalition has fallen into government,  perhaps off the back of our challenges, rather than their positive vision for the  future.  Governing requires doing homework and I’m not sure that the Coaltion’s  done all their homework.

FRAN KELLY:  I want to get to you on parliamentary entitlements.  Can I just ask  you briefly though; Tony Abbott is acknowledged as a very aggressive opposition  leader. Is that the template you’ll adopt?

BILL SHORTEN:  No, I’m not sure that just being relentlessly negative is the  right way for Australian politics. In a minority parliament it might have paid off for  Mr Abbott, but I think Australians are hungry for a positive agenda and just  because we are in opposition doesn’t mean we have to surrender the idea of  being positive.

FRAN KELLY:  Can I ask you now on parliamentary entitlements - we’re  speaking with leadership contender, Bill Shorten - Tony Abbott has repaid $609  for attending a wedding of Peter Slipper.  He’s already handed back over $1000  for the cost for Sophie Mirabella’s wedding, to attend there. In your view, now  that the money has been returned, is that the end of the matter?

BILL SHORTEN:  I think most Members of Parliament wouldn’t deliberately dittle  their expenses.  But what I also think is that this most recent controversy shows  that the guidelines need to be as unambiguous and as black and white as  possible. So I’m open to working with both the experts on the Labor side and the  conservative side about making sure the guidelines are unambiguous because  you can’t have this sort of discussion going on which undermines confidence in  the system.

FRAN KELLY:  And already parliamentarians from both sides are having their  entitlements and claims scoured through. MPs get invited to a lot of events,  anniversaries, birthdays, all sorts of things. There’s a suggestion that some MPs  claimed for attending Bob Hawke’s 80th birthday celebrations back in 2009.  Did  you?



BILL SHORTEN:  No, I didn’t get invited.

FRAN KELLY: If they did, would that be an appropriate use of entitlements?

BILL SHORTEN:  Well, I know that MPs are pretty conscientious. So what they  do is they would get someone in their office to check with entitlements about how  it works. Clearly though, to go back to both of your questions and to what I said,  there does appear to have been more confusion and uncertainty around what’s in  and what’s not in, and it does need to be cleared up because it is important that  people have confidence that their elected representatives are serving their  interests and not anything else.

FRAN KELLY:  So do you regret that Labor, in government, did not table a  review of the parliamentary entitlements, didn’t act on that?

BILL SHORTEN:  I think Labor tried to tidy up a whole range of these matters  from study tours, to gold passes. I do think that Labor worked hard on a range of  these matters, but clearly there’s an issue which both sides and the government,  are going to work through. I don’t think most MPs, the vast, vast majority, are out  to do anything wrong, but if there is this confusion and there is this uncertainty  then it needs to be cleaned up for the public confidence in the system - full  stop. It does need to be sorted.

FRAN KELLY:  Bill Shorten, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.

BILL SHORTEN:  Thanks, Fran.



ENDS

