The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Operation Sovereign Borders, boat turn-backs to  Indonesia  Monday, 11 November 2013

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB The Ray Hadley Morning Show

Ray Hadley: Let's get straight into now. Scott Morrison's in the studio with me, the  Minister for Immigration. The front page of the Fairfax newspapers today says boat  policy founders. Has it foundered?

Scott Morrison: Of course not. That's just the usual hyperventilating we get from  those who...

Ray Hadley: It's like they want...

Scott Morrison: ...have always wanted to...

Ray Hadley: ...they want you to fail.

Scott Morrison: Well, of course they want us to fail and what they won't  acknowledge is that we're succeeding, 75 per cent down on arrivals of illegal boats  since Operation Sovereign Borders commenced, our returns overseas have doubled,  we're getting things in order up on Manus and Nauru where the government left it in  a complete mess, and the last thing I think those hyperventilating about this issue  want to see is the government succeed, but the fact is the government is  succeeding.

We have got the upper hand on the smugglers for the first time in five years and we  are going to face challenges in the weeks ahead, particularly leading into the  monsoon. And as Christopher Pyne on the weekend, it'll zig and zag, but we're  heading in the right direction and we'll keep heading there.

Ray Hadley: I compared the numbers for the month of October with October 2012. It  was 2500 and 300 or thereabouts roughly.

Scott Morrison: That's right. We're down - look, we are down significantly and it's  due to no single measure. What it's due to is the government putting its resolve  across all measures on water, on land, and making sure offshore processing is  working not the way it was under the previous government.

Ray Hadley: Okay. Having said that, my listeners and I don't understand this, you've  got a vessel within Indonesian waters and the first thing they do because the

smugglers give them the number for our search and rescue people, is ring us, not  Indonesia. What's to stop us ringing Indonesia and saying fellas, you've got a boat in  strife there, can you get over and tidy it up for us, thank you, because it's not really in  our waters, it's your problem, not ours. Why can't we do that?

Scott Morrison: That's what we do on every occasion, Ray.

Ray Hadley: And what, they don't go?

Scott Morrison: They don't have a capability on their southern coast largely to effect  search and rescues.

Ray Hadley: But don't we have all those boats we gave them on the northern coast  of Java?

Scott Morrison: They are up on the northern coast of Java and so this is the  frustrating element of this.

Ray Hadley: Why are they there?

Scott Morrison: Because they're using them for things in the Sunda Strait where  they have actually been using the Sunda Strait before, but they don't have the port  facilities or support facilities on that southern coast to run search and rescue out of  those areas. Now, what we do is, as I said, we pass that on to Indonesia when it's in  their search and rescue region and we seek for them to take coordination of the  rescue that we have a legal obligation at - under international search and rescue  protocols that if we get a call that someone says they're in trouble, then you - if  you're able to, then you send a vessel to assist, otherwise people drown.

Ray Hadley: Don't you think this sends a really poor message to the people  smugglers after - and we're told now that - well, I don't know if you've confirmed it or  not...

Scott Morrison: Yeah.

Ray Hadley: ...but they're reporting that on a couple of occasions you'd made those  same phone calls you made over this vessel with 60 odd people on board and they  weren't answered either and they ended up being on Christmas Island. Doesn't it  send a poor message to the people smugglers, that, you know?

Scott Morrison: Oh, it's very frustrating, Ray, and - but we've had two successes  and we've had two...

Ray Hadley: What's the difference between the successes and the failures, then?  What happened then?

Scott Morrison: Well...

Ray Hadley: Why did they say yes and no?

Scott Morrison: Well, there's no real rhyme or reason to it necessarily. I think this  last instance became very problematic because it went very public. That's why we've  been so careful in our public comments not to run that sort of a commentary. I gave  an undertaking to the Indonesians that when we would deal with them on these  issues, we'd do it directly and we'll do it discreetly. And on the three previous  occasions, two - on two of those, the Indonesians took the people back with transfers  at sea, and on one occasion, they didn't, but on that occasion we were a much  further distance away from Indonesia than we were on this most recent occasion.

So on some occasions it'll happen, on other occasions it won't. The alternative,  which the former government used to do, was to just to - just leave it and not even  raise the question with Indonesia.

Ray Hadley: You couldn't turn - this boat wasn't taking water, you couldn't turn it  around?

Scott Morrison: No, this vessel no longer existed, Ray.

Ray Hadley: What do you mean?

Scott Morrison: So there was no vessel to turn around. They were transferred and it  wasn't in a seaworthy state.

Ray Hadley: What, it was sinking?

Scott Morrison: Yes.

Ray Hadley: So they were taken on board the naval vessel?

Scott Morrison: They were taken on board while the vessel was still in tact...

Ray Hadley: Right.

Scott Morrison: ...and the vessel was not in a seaworthy state to take anywhere  and the vessel was scuttled.

Ray Hadley: So in other words, if you don't put the people on board HMAS Ballarat,  I think it was, it sinks then and they sink on board?

Scott Morrison: Well - and that's not a situation that we can possibly tolerate.

Ray Hadley: No, well, of course not.

Scott Morrison: Yeah.

Ray Hadley: But - so in other words if they had stayed on the vessel, the point I'm  trying to make, would it have been easier to negotiate with Indonesia? Once they get  on board our vessel, does that make it more difficult?

Scott Morrison: Well, our policy was turn backs where it's safe to do so. Now, I  should stress this isn't a turn back. This is a search and rescue situation.

Ray Hadley: Right.

Scott Morrison: And so they're quite different circumstances, but when there's no  vessel and you have people on your own vessel, then there's only one of two places  you can go. You raise the question with Indonesia, as we did, as we have been  doing for eight weeks, and on this occasion they declined, on other occasions  they've accepted.

Ray Hadley: Now, what happens - you haven't announced them yet, that they've  arrived. You'll announce them next Friday, but just pretend they did arrive.

Scott Morrison: Sure.

Ray Hadley: How long will they last on Christmas Island before they're sent to either  Manus or Nauru?

Scott Morrison: 48 hours. It's the usual two day policy for transfers. And I was on  Christmas Island last week and was taken through that full process and it's been  quiet on Christmas Island for the last few weeks. I mean, we went for almost three  weeks without a boat arriving and I think that's a point that is often lost in all of this,  with all the excitement about the events that took place over the last couple of days, I  mean, the fact is no boats had even been coming for over two weeks.

And that is the whole point of this entire issue, that the boats stop coming, and we  are seeing those results. We certainly haven't declared any finality to any of that, but  we are getting the upper hand. This is working and we will continue to deploy every  measure we have available to us, which includes all of the measures we said we  would undertake before the election.

Ray Hadley: Just briefly, if we conclude, is the best message, if we do end up with  people on Christmas Island, to get them off Christmas Island very quickly and get  them elsewhere?

Scott Morrison: Absolutely, and under the previous government they settled in. I  mean, there were 2000 people on Christmas Island that the previous government left  there. They didn't fund offshore processing past 1 January and the arrangements for  capacity on both

Nauru and Manus Island were just insufficient and we've had to do an enormous  amount to get those up to standard, and so the resolve in pursuing all of these  things.

Last point I'd make too, Ray, is our disruptions are up significantly. We've disrupted  over 1000 people in the last eight weeks trying to come to Australia and we've  stopped them from coming.

Ray Hadley: Scott Morrison, thanks for your time. We'll leave it there.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm209515.htm   Last update: Wednesday, 13 November 2013 at 14:39 AEST



