

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Viewpoint with Chris Kenny

17 February 2013

Subjects: WA election, paid parental leave scheme, Kevin Rudd leadership challenge, Nick  Xenophon Malaysia deportation

E&OE…

CHRIS KENNY Thanks for joining us Deputy Opposition leader.

JULIE BISHOP Good evening Chris.

CHRIS KENNY First let’s look at Western Australia, it is the boom state, growth is great  there, a lot of investment of course, mainly because of the burgeoning mining industry. Now  given that Federal Government’s often get a lot of credit and do very well when the economy  is doing well, Western Australia should be a happy hunting ground for the Gillard  Government?

JULIE BISHOP Well this is a very interesting scenario Chris. Colin Barnett launched the  Liberal Party campaign today, he made a very compelling case for re-election, he pointed to  WA as the powerhouse of the economy, the lowest unemployment in the land based of course  on our agriculture, mining and petroleum resources and industries.

CHRIS KENNY But if things are going so well why would Julia Gillard be on the nose in  Perth, if things are going so well?

JULIE BISHOP Well Tony Abbott was there, he’s seen as an electoral asset for the Liberal  Party in Western Australia and he did issue a challenge to Julia Gillard to come and explain  the impact of her Carbon Tax and her Mining Tax on the Western Australian economy. And  it seems the first person she’ll have to convince is her own party state leader because at five  minutes to midnight we have the Labor leader distancing himself from Julia Gillard and  renouncing the Carbon Tax and the Mining Tax. He can’t get far enough away from these  two taxes that are bad for investment, bad for jobs and bad for our competitive industries.

CHRIS KENNY But hang on a second you’ve just been telling us how well Western  Australia’s going, how it’s booming and the Carbon Tax and the Mining Tax are already in  place. We know the Mining Tax has raised not very much money at all, but obviously these  taxes can’t be hurting Western Australia too much if it’s going so well?

JULIE BISHOP Well Chris that’s not right, you know that mining and resource projects are  long term, investment takes place over a long period of time, of course the projects that are  up and running are already in place but it’s the pipeline of projects we’re concerned about.



As for the Mining Tax, you realise of course that it hasn’t yet raised any revenue, in fact the  cost to administer this tax outweighs the revenue that it’s raised. But over time we know that  a Labor Government will broaden the tax, they’ll increase the tax, they’ll apply it to  commodities other than iron ore and coal - uranium, gold, nickel. So it’s a bad tax for the  West Australian economy and I believe that both the Carbon Tax and the Mining Tax will  play a part in the state election on the 9th of March. Western Australians just do not want the  burden of Federal taxes to pay for Federal Labor’s waste and mismanagement.

CHRIS KENNY Well let’s look at the Federal election campaign. We’re already in this  unofficial election campaign. It’s pretty clear from what you’re saying and what we’ve heard  for years now that your key policy agenda is going to be an anti-tax one, anti-Mining Tax,  anti-Carbon Tax and yet I keep coming back to this issue, it does my head into be honest that  you’re running this strong anti-tax, no tax agenda yet you’re proposing a new tax on big  companies to fund the parental leave scheme. At the very least aren’t you worried that this  actually muddies your message?

JULIE BISHOP No Chris this is a productivity measure. We want to ensure that parental  leave is a workplace entitlement, like annual leave, like sick leave, like long service leave and  that it’s paid at your salary with a cap. Labor wants parental leave to be a welfare entitlement  and so we have a fundamental disagreement. Now we’ve made it quite clear that because  Labor has so blown the budget, what is it $260b in borrowings now? That's the level of  Australia’s debt. We can’t afford this productivity measure. So it’s no secret there will be a  levy on big business but our plan is to pay down Labor’s debt, get rid of the interest payments  that runs into billions of dollars a year on that debt and the levy can be lifted. It’s a  productivity measure, it will help grow our economy.

CHRIS KENNY It is a big concession though to say that you are putting on this additional  tax. Now Wayne Swan’s had a hell of a week, a very very tough week, a very tough couple of  years actually but this is a point he made strongly in Parliament this week. That you are the  party that are offering a new tax and this is going to muddy the waters for you as we get  closer and closer to the election.

JULIE BISHOP Well I couldn’t disagree more Chris because it’s a productivity measure and  it’s designed to ensure that people who take parental leave can do it as a workplace  entitlement, not a welfare entitlement. And we wouldn’t be in this position if Labor hadn’t  blown the budget and spent it on pink batts and overpriced school halls and billions and  billions of dollars wasted because they unpicked the asylum seeker policies that had stopped  the boats. So we will ensure that once the debt is paid down, once we can get rid of these  massive interest payments then we’ll be able to lift this levy. It’s a productivity measure, it  will grow the economy.

Now this isn’t like Labor’s Carbon Tax that cascades through the economy and will increase  year on year on year, it’s not like the Mining Tax that they’re going to broaden and increase  over time. We'll put in a temporary measure, remove it once we have got the budget back  balanced - as Labor promised and have never delivered.

CHRIS KENNY Well just briefly today Julia Gillard announced another policy, an industry  policy where she’s going to try and force big investors to strike an agreement with the  government to source their product locally, Australian made and the like. Now this is bound

to be quite popular, quite populist, in my view it’s only going to stymie investment by  creating more red tape and more regulation for government, for business to deal with here.  Are you going to be strong enough to oppose this and say that the government should get out  of these decisions and leave these decisions to the people who are actually spending the  money?

JULIE BISHOP Well I am concerned that this will mean more red tape and in the five years  of this government we’ve seen 20,000 pieces of new regulation. The red tape is absolutely  killing small business in particular. What we want to see is more jobs, more investment, a  more competitive economy but it seems that Julia Gillard’s hell bent on ensuring that this is  burdened with red tape.



Now we haven’t seen the detail, they’re going to introduce legislation. Let's have a look at  what they’re proposing. Is it against WTO or any of our trade obligations? We just don’t  know, Labor have a track record when it comes to making grandiose announcements but the  devil is always in the detail.

But my concern also is that the government talks about innovation. Well over 100,000  manufacturing jobs have been lost since the Rudd/Gillard Government came to power. We  need to stimulate our economy and we don’t need it to be burdened with regulation and red  tape that stifles innovation.

CHRIS KENNY Well of course, now let’s look at the Labor leadership issue then. We need  to get to that. I don’t know whether you get to see the interview this morning with Kevin  Rudd, but here’s a little refresher anyway about Kevin Rudd suggesting that even if he’s  drafted by his colleagues, he’s not particularly interested.

Clip

Julie Bishop, do you believe Kevin Rudd, surely he wouldn’t be dishonest with us all about  this?

JULIE BISHOP I think the only person that needs to have an icy bath or a cold shower is  Kevin. He must be exhausted after this frenetic round of interviews where he’s been  renouncing any designs on the Labor leadership. In fact he reminds me of Julia Gillard in  2010 when she renounced any interest in challenging Kevin and said she was more likely to  play full forward for the Bulldogs than challenge Kevin, or she was more likely to fly to  Mars.



I mean this extreme language I think hides a deep and abiding conviction that Kevin wants to  be leader again. He is campaigning, oh sure, he says he’s campaigning but that’s the point,  it’s not against the Liberals, it’s against his own Leader and it’s not against Tony Abbott,  that’s not his target.

This is just making the government untenable. They’re so dysfunctional, Julia Gillard has no  authority, Kevin Rudd’s stalking her via the media, Wayne Swan’s discredited and  Australians are just longing for a sensible, credible, competent government and that’s what  we’re determined to deliver.



CHRIS KENNY Kevin Rudd did publish a column in the Sunday Telegraph today which I’ll  come to in some detail later on, but it extolled his family virtues, it was all about the value of  family and catching up with the kids and all of that sort of thing. Now I bet London to a brick  if Tony Abbott had written that column he would be decried, it would be another misogynist  attack, the claim would be that he was highlighting the fact that he’s a family man whereas  Julia Gillard is unmarried and doesn’t have children. Is that the game that Kevin Rudd was  playing today?

JULIE BISHOP Well I assume that somebody will ask Kevin and I’m sure he hasn’t given up  his frenetic round of interviews, I’m sure there will be plenty of opportunities to ask Kevin  whether he meant to contrast his strong and close family ties with that of the Prime Minister  and I have no doubt he’ll say it never entered his head.

And you’re absolutely right, had Tony Abbott written such a column about his wife Margie  and about her job as a childcare owner and operator and talked about his three beautiful  daughters and his three gorgeous sisters, well there would have been screams from the left,  screams from Labor that he was trying to attack the Prime Minister in some way. Well that  just underscores the falsity of these claims against Tony Abbott. Yes Tony’s got a wonderful  family, yes he’s a happily married man but that’s who he is.

As for Kevin Rudd well I think somebody else will have to ask him what his motives were  for writing such a column.

CHRIS KENNY We’ll have to wait and see what happens on the Kevin Rudd front. But just  briefly, do you believe that foreign minister Bob Carr has been strong enough in his  representations to Malaysia over the way they detained and then deported Senator Nick  Xenophon?

JULIE BISHOP Well this is a very unusual case. I spoke to Bob Carr last night about it and  he had a conversation with Malaysia’s foreign minister and it seems that Senator Xenophon  was excluded from entry because he was seen as some sort of risk to national security. Well I  can’t imagine Nick Xenophon being a risk to national security.



Perhaps the Malaysian Government think that independent members of parliament are trouble  makers, who knows?

CHRIS KENNY You might be onto something there Julie Bishop, I think they’ve been  trouble makers in Australia. But look thanks very much for joining us. We are out of time,  but I appreciate your time from Perth today. Deputy opposition leader Julie Bishop.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends -



