The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Update on status of transfer of rescued  passengers off Indonesian coast  Saturday, 09 November 2013

On Thursday a Border Protection Command (BPC) asset rendered assistance to a  vessel in response to a Search and Rescue (SAR) incident declared by the  Australian Rescue Coordination Centre. The incident took place in Indonesia's SAR  region (SRR), with the first request for assistance being made when the distressed  vessel was 43 nautical miles south of the coast of Java.

The rescue was successfully completed by the Australian BPC asset and, as  reported yesterday, all passengers were accounted for.

Given the incident took place within Indonesia's SRR and within close proximity to  the Indonesian coast, a request was made, consistent with our standing practice  under Operation Sovereign Borders, to transfer the passengers rescued to  Indonesia, in accordance with international search and rescue protocols.

On two recent occasions, Indonesia has agreed to these requests and facilitated an  on water transfer.

The Indonesian Government has advised Australian officials overnight that they are  reviewing the request put forward by Australia.

While we welcome Indonesia's review of our request, in the best interests of the  safety of the passengers and crew of the rescued vessel and the Australian vessel  that has been rendering assistance, earlier this morning I requested Lieutenant  General Campbell to transfer the persons rescued from the SAR incident to  Christmas Island for rapid onward transfer to Manus Island or Nauru. They will not  be resettled in Australia.

Details of this transfer will be included in the next operational briefing after the  persons have been processed for transfer at Christmas Island in accordance with  our standard practice.

Australia will continue to liaise with Indonesia in relation to these Search and Rescue  incidents on a case by case basis. We will continue to honour our commitment to  Indonesia to undertake this liaison privately and directly with Indonesian authorities.

The Government continues to have access to the full suite of Coalition border  protection measures to protect Australia's sovereignty, as part of Operation

Sovereign Borders, by preventing the illegal entry of vessels into Australia's waters,  as endorsed by the Australian people at the recent election.

In the first almost eight weeks of Operation Sovereign Borders there have been 561  illegal arrivals by boat, a reduction of more than 75%, on the same period leading  into the start of the operation.



See: Index of Media Releases

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm209447.htm   Last update: Monday, 11 November 2013 at 08:50 AEST



