Chris Bowen

SHADOW TREASURER  Media Centre

INTERVIEW WITH TONY JONES,  LATELINE  Posted September 27, 2013

TONY JONES: We're joined in the studio by the Acting Leader of the Opposition, Chris  Bowen. Thanks for being here.

CHRIS BOWEN: Pleasure, Tony. Good evening.

JONES: Now is it your position that the Abbott Government's plan to turn back asylum  boats threatens Indonesian sovereignty?

BOWEN: We've consistently warned that this was not only a dangerous policy on the  high seas, but also a policy which would endanger the bilateral relationship. And I think  that's being borne out.

This is an extraordinary and unprecedented development tonight from Minister  Natalegawa.

Diplomacy in Asia in particular is marked by considered understatement and private  discussions, and for Minister Natalegawa to feel forced to release his version of his  discussions with Minister Bishop; her first bilateral meeting as Foreign Affairs Minister, or  close to it, is quite an extraordinary development. And it does threaten the bilateral  relationship generally, and it threatens very much the cooperation which happens at an  operational level between both nations on border matters.

This is what we've consistently said: you need a regional solution, but one which is done  in cooperation with our regional neighbours and partners, not lecturing them, as we've  seen tonight from former Minister Downer.

JONES: I'll come to that and I'll come back to the Natalegawa press release in more  detail in a minute. But the question of sovereignty: does a ‘turn back the boats’ policy in  any way threaten Indonesia's sovereignty, as some have suggested?

BOWEN: Well the important point here is that Indonesia believes it does, and if  Indonesia believes it does, then that's a big problem for any Australian government.  Certainly in my experience in discussions with Indonesia they made it very clear that  that would be their view, should any government attempt this. Should any government  attempt to turn back boats or buy boats in Indonesia for that matter, which is a  ridiculous policy of the new Government, then this is very clearly their view that this is  an affront of their sovereignty. And you don't solve a regional and international problem  by lecturing other governments. You solve it by working with them.

We were told we were going to have a Jakarta-focused foreign policy. Well a Jakarta-focused foreign policy is apparently in practice telling Jakarta, ‘We don't care what you  think; we're going to do it anyway and we're going to endanger what is one of our most  important bilateral relationships.’ It's not simply good enough for the Prime Minister to  say, "We'll work these issues through”. Well, the Indonesian Government has made it  very, very clear in this extraordinary step this evening that they are not wanting to work  it through. They've made it very, very clear that they regard this as an affront.

JONES: Stick with the logic of this for the minute. Foreign Minister Natalegawa has  talked about boat buybacks and rewards to Indonesian informers as potentially  threatening Indonesian sovereignty. But the turning back the boats, in what way could  that threaten Indonesian sovereignty, particularly if you did it from inside Australian  contiguous waters?

BOWEN: Well it's up to the Australian Government to explain where they would conduct  these turn backs. They've said they won't even tell us whether one's been attempted in  an extraordinary change of approach when it comes to scrutiny and transparency and  whether it was successful or not. But they can explain whether it would happen in  Australian waters or they'd seek to do it in international waters and what the legal  situation there is. That's up to them to explain.

The important point is, as we have consistently warned, that the Indonesian Government  would regard this and other policies as an affront to them and their sovereignty. And it  would threaten, as I say, that very important cooperation which happens every day at an  operational level on our borders. All that work is very important, and this blustering-in  approach by the new government, by the Prime Minister and Ministers Bishop and  Morrison is endangering that cooperation.

JONES: Well Alexander Downer's point in the very strident comments he made directed  exactly at Foreign Minister Natalegawa were that Australia's sovereignty is threatened by  boats continually coming to Australia from Indonesia - Indonesian boats, Indonesian  crews, as he points out.

BOWEN: Well this matches the rhetoric we heard from then Leader of the Opposition  Abbott when he says these are Indonesian vessels, Indonesian flagged disgorging people  in Australian waters. The problem with that argument is that these are not Indonesian  asylum seekers. This is what Indonesia would say. These are people using Indonesia as  a staging post to get to Australia. And Indonesia would say this is Indonesia's problem  and Australia's problem and Malaysia's problem and the region's problem. And Indonesia  and Australia are co-chairs of the Bali ministerial group, which is designed - and I give  full credit to the previous Howard Government; they were also people who cooperated  with the Indonesian Government in setting up the Bali group and it was continued under  us as the appropriate clearing house for these sorts of issues.

Now they would say, ‘We're prepared very openly to work together with Australia’. That's  what they said to us. That's what they would say to the new Government. But they're  not going to be lectured and they're not going be told arrogantly by this new  Government, ‘We'll turn boats around whether you like it or not to your jurisdiction’.  They regard that as a grave affront.

We warned that this would be case. We warned that this important bilateral relationship  would be endangered by this policy, as well as warning that it would be a policy  endangering lives on the high seas. There have always been two big problems with  turning around the boats: it's dangerous and you're turning them around to a country  that does not want to cooperate with that particular policy. We've always said we'd have  arrangements with countries that agree to it and we managed to strike some of those

arrangements, whereas this new Government has said, ‘We will impose a policy on a  neighbour, a close neighbour and a friend, regardless of their views’.

JONES: Now, will the Indonesians get the impression that Alexander Downer's message  is a message - actually a coded message, if you like, or a diverse message from the  actual Abbott Government?

BOWEN: Well they may well do. It's simply not good enough now for the Prime Minister  and Minister Bishop and Minister Morrison to remain in hiding about this issue. We can't  realistically wait for Mr Morrison's briefing next week to have the chance to put a  question to a government representative about this. As I said, Minister - former Minister  Downer's language actually quite closely reflected Tony Abbott's language when he was  Leader of the Opposition about Indonesian boats disgorging people in Australian waters.

So, it's a matter for this Government now to clear this up, to either repudiate Mr  Downer's comments or to endorse them and to reveal, as Minister Bishop should've done  some time ago, what was actually said at the meeting. Minister Natalegawa has taken  that into his own hands ...

JONES: And that is - I think we can agree that this is an extraordinary move by the  Indonesian Foreign Minister. What do you think he's doing at such a sensitive time with  Tony Abbott only days away from going to the country?

BOWEN: Well I can only assume that he is saying that he needs to make it crystal clear,  given that he feels the message is not getting through to the Australian Government  about how strongly the Indonesian Government feels about this, and he's not impressed  by the characterisation of this being a minor issue which could be worked through. This  is much more than an irritant, Tony. Irritants do emerge amongst governments and  nations that are friendly and irritants can be worked through with goodwill and  cooperation on both sides. This is not an irritant to the Indonesian Government. This is a  clear matter of principle for them. We've consistently said that this was the case. The  Liberal Party arrogantly ignored that, and now, what's even more worrying, that the  Government of the nation, they're ignoring it still when we're meant to have a Jakarta-based foreign policy.

JONES: Well, one of the things he made a point of, that's Mr Natalegawa, in his press  release, is that the Australian Government wants to work behind the scenes to do this  quietly and without publicity. He's making that point. Is he thumbing his nose directly at  the new Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, by doing this?

BOWEN: Well, as I said, Asian diplomacy in particular is marked by understatement and  it's marked by ...

JONES: This is not understatement. This is quite unsubtle.

BOWEN: Correct. Correct, and this is what makes it such an extraordinary development,  such an unprecedented step by an Indonesian Foreign minister. I can't recall an  Indonesian Foreign Minister taking a step like this in relation to Australia ever before. It  underlines the seriousness of Indonesia's approach, it underlines what a threat this is to  an important bilateral relationship and it underlines the threat that it is to daily  cooperation.

JONES: Now, if Tony Abbott does go to Jakarta next week and convince President  Yudhoyono to actually side with him in some way in accepting this policy, which may still  happen, will you accept that you're misreading the Indonesians here?

BOWEN: Well, there's a lot of supposition in that. We were of course told that Tony

Abbott would go to Indonesia in his first week as Prime Minister. That hasn't happened.  We were told boats would always be turned around when it's a safe to do so. That hasn't  happened, from what we can gather, from what we can glean from boats that have  arrived, although we haven't been told officially. There have been no turnarounds  attempts. It would appear the new Government has decided that it's harder than they  had previously said. They either have done that because Indonesia is not cooperating or  because military personnel have decided it's not safe.

So it's up to them to explain. It's up to them now, as the Government, to explain how  they'll implement this and to explain what they will say to the Indonesian Government.  I'm not going to pre-empt those discussions, but I think Indonesia has made it crystal  clear - I cannot think of a way that Minister Natalegawa could have made his position  clearer and he would be speaking on behalf of the entire Indonesian Government. This is  not some throwaway comment. This was a considered and measured step. The issue of a  former release by the Indonesian Foreign Minister would've been through Indonesian  Government processes. Minister Natalegawa would have been speaking on behalf of the  entire government of Indonesia. And all we're seeing from the Australian Government is  silence and obfuscation.

JONES: Okay, let's put the spotlight back on Labor's leadership for a moment. Your  former leader, Mark Latham, bought into this in a column today. Did you read it?

BOWEN: I did glance at it, yes.

JONES: You read it, in other words.

BOWEN: Yes.

JONES: Okay, as I said, he's a former leader. He's long been an advocate for  democratising the party. His understanding of Labor culture, I think you might agree, is  profound, as evidenced from his own diaries. Does that give weight to his analysis?

BOWEN: No, look, I don't agree obviously with his analysis. I'm not endorsing either  candidate as interim leader in this new process, but I think both candidates bring a lot to  the process and...

JONES: Does Mark Latham - to finish the point - Mark Latham's argument is ‘Anything  But Albo’. He argues he's got everything wrong in the past decade - and that's Anthony  Albanese of course - but that the key thing is that his links to the former NSW minister  Ian Macdonald link him to that poisonous heritage of NSW Labor.

BOWEN: No, I think that's a particularly invalid point to make. I mean, Anthony was  called as a witness to explain the party processes. There has been no suggestion - and I  think making that link is very unfortunate on Mr Latham's behalf. As I say, I'm a strong  supporter of the Labor Party membership having a vote on the Labor Party leadership. I  suggested it in a book I wrote earlier in the year and I'm very glad it's been taken up  and it's working in the way that we envisaged: two candidates going around the country,  putting their case to the party membership, winning the confidence of the party.

And whoever emerges as the victor out of this process will have more legitimacy than  any political leader in Australian history. Having been elected by 40,000 people, by  40,000 people, not 85 people sitting around in the party room, but 40,000 people across  the country, and they will have the legitimacy to take the party forward to the next  election in a way no Labor or Liberal leader has had in the past.

JONES: Alright. Two of your factional colleagues in NSW have already declared their  support for Bill Shorten. Will you be casting your vote on factional lines?



BOWEN: No, I'll be casting my vote for the candidate I believe to be the best candidate.  I'm aware of right-wingers who are voting for Anthony Albanese; I'm aware of left-wingers who are voting for Bill Shorten, both in the caucus and across the party. These  decisions should be made on the basis of who is the best candidate and that's the basis  I'll be casting my vote.

JONES: Isn't there a bit of a smell of old Labor when Bill Shorten comes out and says,  ‘I've got the votes in the caucus pretty much secured’?

BOWEN: Well, you'll see speculation all over the shop.

JONES: But to come from him, that sounds like old Labor. That sounds like, ‘I am a  factional warlord from one side and I've got the numbers, it's all done’.

BOWEN: No, I don't accept that. Bill is going round the country arguing strongly for his  case with the party membership. Obviously he's spoken to caucus members and sought  their support, but he's also putting the case to party membership. And that's exactly the  way the process is meant to work. We designed this process so that the caucus, which  consists of people who've gone out and got themselves elected and understand their  electorates and work with the people who are the candidates get an important say, but  so too does the broader party.

JONES: That's a big question though, isn't it: what happens when - as may happen, a  leader has the support of the caucus, but not the support of the public or vice versa? I  mean, is there a problem if someone wins with a broad ALP base, a grassroots support  that doesn't have support of his caucus colleagues when he goes back to Parliament?

BOWEN: No, I don't think that's a problem at all because I think what we've shown  through this process is that we are mature enough and big enough to have this  broadening of the franchise to invite all supporters of Labor and members of Labor into  the tent to choose our alternative prime minister. And when you do that, yes, it's a new  thing.

Other parties around the world have been doing this for a long time. We saw Ed Miliband  win the Labour Party leadership, not with the support of his party room. The Labour  Party's been ahead in Britain in the opinion polls for most of the time since that. And  when you do this process, it means the new leader, regardless of how they won, has a  clear mandate on behalf of the entire party to make tough decisions, to take risks, to go  out there and do the things necessary to put the case for Labor and to put Labor at the  best footing possible at the next election.

JONES: We're nearly out of time. Finally, it seems to be a big open secret that Senator  Bob Carr is about to retire from politics, that a seat will then become vacant in the  Senate in NSW. Do you expect him to retire?

BOWEN: That's entirely a matter for Bob. I've seen him since the election, but I've not  discussed that matter with him.

JONES: That's a pretty big thing not to discuss with him, isn't it? I mean, ‘Are you  staying or are you going, Bob?’, would be quite an important question.

BOWEN: It's a fact because I see this sort of speculation. Bob's been a great servant to  the Labor Party. He's entitled to make his own decision and his own announcement. And  it's entirely a matter for him what that decision is and when that announcement is made,  if there is a decision.

JONES: Do you want him to stay? He's a pretty experienced warrior in politics.

BOWEN: I think he'd be very welcome. I think he'd be a great addition. He sort of led  the Labor Party from opposition in NSW over a long period of time, so his counsel will  always be very welcome, obviously, in the Parliament or outside the Parliament. It's  entirely a matter for him. Any decision he made would be understandable.

JONES: Chris Bowen, we'll have to leave you there. We thank you very much for coming  in to talk to us tonight.

BOWEN: Pleasure, Tony.



