

Transcript of Doorstop

Australian Chamber of Commerce Luncheon

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

26 July 2013

Journalist: (inaudible) change the importance of Hong Kong in the China-Australia  relationship?

Minister: It's made it more important. It's a very significant advance. It was a good  symbol of the closer Australia-China relationship and of course it's going to be very  important for Hong Kong given the concentration of finance sector activity here.

Journalist: Mr Carr, if Australians do choose Rudd in the upcoming election what  policies will you and his Government pursue to further improve the Australia-China  relationship?

Minister: Well it's a very high priority of both my Prime Minister and me as Foreign  Minister. It's clear that the Australia-China relationship is about far more than the  activities that came out of the resources boom. The Australian firms represented  here have got a big stake in the relationship; more and more services, activities that  aren't related to the commodities cycle. It's a relationship being taken to a different  level. As China reforms its economy -I'm sure that will happen - and as Australia  implements a productivity improvement program that the Prime Minister has  committed us to, there will be countless opportunities to build on this relationship.

Journalist: Some local scholars propose to have the Occupy Central to fight for the  universal suffrage. Do you think that will affect the economy of Hong Kong and affect  the business between Australia and Hong Kong?

Minister: I wouldn't comment on internal politics.

Journalist: What are you planning to talk about, any topics, with the Chief Executive  in Hong Kong?

Minister: I will be talking about the strength of the Australian presence here - the  strength of the relationship between Australia and Hong Kong. I will be seeking

advice on how we can build that; make it even more robust. I will be explaining the  strategies, the strategic thinking behind the Australia in the Asian Century White  Paper.

Journalist: Is democracy a topic on the agenda?

Minister: I would be interested in being advised on political developments in political  institutions here in Hong Kong. Australia of course supports self-government and  democracy in every context and we follow political developments in Hong Kong very  carefully.

Journalist: Senator, there are 80,000 Australian voters here in Hong Kong; just  wondering if you have got any insight about when they might have to vote?

Minister: Oh yes, I'm going to announce the election date here in Hong Kong. That's  a matter for the Prime Minister and our systems of government, announcing an  election date is a prerogative of the Prime Ministers. I would simply be saying to the  Australians who live here; to the Australians who live in Hong Kong; who do you  want to be representing Australia abroad: Kevin Rudd or Tony Abbott, given the  recklessness and the erratic nature of the Abbott approach, the hallmark Abbott  approach. And I think that's a question that answers itself.

Journalist: If Hong Kong is in some ways an extension of Australia, Australia in  some sense an extension of Hong Kong, wouldn't it then follow that if the people of  Hong Kong had the ability to choose their own government freely in a truly  democratic fashion, would it not enhance that two way traffic?

Minister: Australia promotes and defends democracy everywhere and Hong Kong is  no exception. But when it comes to how this is implemented in practice, of course we  can't design an electoral system for this jurisdiction. That's a matter that must  emerge between the people of Hong Kong and their official leadership.

Journalist: The FTA talks between Australia and China have been going on for  years and years. Some people say it has been stalling. Can we expect to see any  breakthrough in that?

Minister: My Prime Minister has discussed the FTA with the President of China. I  think it is fair to say that both of them want the negotiations that have gone on for a  very long time now to be given a remodulation and the Australian Trade Minister, my  colleague Richard Marles is, I understand in China as we speak. I think the approach  my Prime Minister is taking is that if there is anything that can be agreed to be set  aside by both of us so that we can get on with the main game, the main challenge,  then we should do that.

Journalist: Foreign Minister, on asylum seekers - are there any nations other than  PNG that are close to agreement on becoming part of the solution package? Also,  what is your reaction to UN criticism?

Minister: No, there are no nations on the point of signing up but we think as the  arrangement, the regional resettlement arrangements are implemented with Papua  New Guinea, you will find other nations in the Pacific that are prepared to do it. But I  think once the people smugglers and their customers see asylum seekers not being  processed or resettled in Australia but in Papua New Guinea, you will quickly see a  contraction in their numbers. It will not happen overnight. There will be potholes  along the way as the Prime Minister has said, but you've got to break this model of  people smuggling otherwise it will occupy more and more of the immigration intake  to Australia. We can't privatise our immigration program to people smugglers. We  can't allow that to happen. The UN has made some observations I understand but  we believe as a proud party to the convention on refugees that we cannot allow  people smuggling to figure more and more, to become stronger and stronger.

Journalist: Foreign Minister, three threats that you mentioned in your speech. The  first one, the ethno-religious tension. Since you are making a trip to China, what sort  of message are you going to send to your Chinese counterpart on the issue of  Xinjian and also Tibet, especially going to Chengdu, the gateway city to Tibet, a lot of  self-immolation by the Buddhist monks and the tension in Xinjiang, between the  Uyghur and the Han Chinese?

Minister: We recognise Chinese sovereignty in Tibet, that's the starting point, Tibet  is part of China. But we believe there is an opportunity for pursuing autonomy and  that autonomy negotiated between China and the Tibetan community is the way of  seeing an end to the levels of protest that you refer to. We would like our  Ambassador to be able to travel in Tibet, to talk to people and to inspect Australian  aid projects. That's the Australian position and we have got a fruitful dialogue with  China about human rights matters and that includes human rights matters that grow  out of the tensions in Tibet and Tibetan regions.

Journalist: Does that community include the Dalai Lama?

Minister: Well, that's a matter for China to determine but China has said things that  encourage us to think that the talks could be given a new lease of life.

Journalist: The talk can be fruitful, but do you see any progress in human rights in  China?

Minister: Well there is a debate in the international community about this. Is the  glass half full or is it half empty. Certainly hundreds of millions of Chinese have had  their ordinary conditions improved, their conditions of life, their economic  circumstances and in addition to that, there are Chinese who are hearing different  views, divergent views expressed in a way that wasn't conceivable even 15 years  ago as a result of the growth of social media in China. In addition to that, we see that  Chinese people are able to register protest of local and provincial government about  matters to do with land use planning in a way that wasn't conceivable years ago. On  the other hand there are examples that disturb us - of human rights not being

respected and that's why we have got an annual human rights dialogue with the  Chinese in which we can raise these in a systemic fashion.

Unidentified: Minister, I think we have time for one more question

Minister: Mr Carr, another of the threats you mentioned are the maritime disputes in  the region and the Asian Century White Paper was criticised for containing an  implicit criticism of China in that urging peaceful resolution according to international  law and that China's not -

Minister: But that's not an implicit criticism of China.

Journalist: - well some criticise it as being that way. And I wondered if the Chinese  leadership has mentioned that with you?

Minister: No you see, that came out before our April visit to China and we spoke -  the then Prime Minister and I - spoke to the Chinese leadership about the  importance of that White Paper, summing up a strategic direction for Australia. But  we have not taken any side in any of the territorial disputes. We have urged a  settlement with reference to all of international law, and that's comparable to the  approach taken by non-disputed nations in South East Asia and it would not surprise  the Chinese that we continue to re-state that position.

Unidentified: Thank you everyone.

Media enquiries

Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



