

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC INSIDERS   SUNDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: The Coalition’s Direct Action con, Coalition’s failed turn back the  boats policy, Australia’s damaged relationship with Indonesia, savage cuts  to jobs and services, Coalition split over foreign investment, entitlements,  parliament.

Barrie Cassidy: Bill Shorten, welcome.

Bill Shorten: Good morning, Barrie.

Barrie Cassidy: Well Tony Abbott seems delighted to be able to line you up as a  carbon copy of two previous sacked Labor leaders?

Bill Shorten: Well, Tony Abbott's keen to talk about me but that's clear that he  doesn't want to talk about his own lack of action on climate change and indeed that  they're in fact a different government to the way they conducted themselves in  Opposition more generally.

Barrie Cassidy: Is he right when he says you were never keen on the policy  anyway?

Bill Shorten: I believe climate change is real. I and Labor fundamentally believe  that carbon pollution contributes to climate change. We all know, Australians know  that the extreme weather we're seeing more and more of, we all know that carbon

pollution plays a role in it. What Labor said before the election, which is the policy  which we're still applying now is that we would scrap the carbon tax so long as there  was real and effective policies to tackle climate change. But if the Liberals have their  way, and they've got this silly policy of Direct Action which is just paying big  polluters to pollute, we're not going to have a bar of that.

Barrie Cassidy: But it does seems that at one point, and certainly now it does  seem like there are pragmatists within the party who would prefer to get rid of the  issue all together, and at one point it seems you were one of those?

Bill Shorten: No, I've always believed and Labor always believes that the science is  right. We are not a party who is going to tell future generations of our kids and our  grandkids that just because of political calculation in November of 2013 that we  would give up acting on the real issues for the future of this country. That’s not the  way Labor’s cut.

Barrie Cassidy: You want to move to an ETS but that’s just carbon tax by another  name isn't it?

Bill Shorten: Not at all, what we want to do is make sure we have a price on  carbon pollution. We want to see the big polluters in this country pay for some of  the costs that they do to future generations and our kids and our grandkids future.



Barrie Cassidy: But if they do, why is that not a tax? It's still a penalty imposed  upon the polluters.

Bill Shorten: We are not going for a carbon tax. My background is as a negotiator;  we look for the middle way. What we have said to Tony Abbot and the Coalition is  we will scrap the carbon tax on the basis that we move towards effective policies to  deal with carbon pollution and that’s what we are doing. That's what we will  propose, that was our policy before the election and we are consistent now with  what we said before the election. But by contrast the Abbott Government's offering  up this, what they euphemistically call Direct Action, that’s just what climate sceptics  call their policies when in fact they don’t want to be called climate sceptics. It won’t  work and it’s expensive.

Barrie Cassidy: The Greens want an inquiry into Direct Action, are you going to  support that?

Bill Shorten: Well Labor doesn’t believe that Direct Action will work. I mean think  about it, what we have in Australia is…

Barrie Cassidy: So you will support the inquiry?

Bill Shorten: Well let's just explain what we think about Direct Action which is the  purpose about the debate about the inquiry. What is the sense in paying large  companies money when they are polluting our environment now? That doesn't make  sense. Instead what we want to do is effectively tackle climate change. We know  that Direct Action is a lemon. We know that there is not a serious economist, not a  serious scientist in the world who thinks Direct Action policies will work. So why on  earth should the taxpayer foot the bill so that the Coalition can have a fig leaf to  pretend they care about climate change when in fact they don't.

Barrie Cassidy: So you will support the inquiry?

Bill Shorten: We believe that there should be a study done of the Direct Action and  an exposure of the flaws in the Liberal policy. For us, what guides Labor isn't what  the opinion polls say next week. What guides us is will we be able to look at our kids  and grandkids and say that when we're in Parliament we actually took decisions  which helped the long-term future of this country. The Coalition, they don’t even  believe in climate change. It’s been interesting, John Howard said in London, which  seems to be the favourite sort of place for conservative politicians to talk about  Australia, what he said is that their policy on climate change was just a political fig  leaf back in 2007 because they know that Australians wanted action on climate  change. And dial forward to 2013, the Coalition's just proposing anything to get  them off the hook about acting on climate change.



Barrie Cassidy: Will you facilitate a vote before Christmas?

Bill Shorten: First of all we've got to see if the Coalition will go with our  amendments which are in the process of drafting. We are most interested and we  are most committed to having something real on climate change. We don't want to  be known as the Parliament of Australia who turned its back on climate change and  tackling pollution.

Barrie Cassidy: Does that mean a vote before Christmas?

Bill Shorten: Well we’ll have to see how the Libs go; there’s a lot of moving parts  in this.

Barrie Cassidy: Well they would be very anxious to have a vote before Christmas.

Bill Shorten: Well what we are most anxious to do is to have a real policy on  climate change. The timing of these matters is to do with the Coalition; they have  the numbers in the House of Representatives. In terms of the Senate there's the

Greens, there’s Labor, there’s the Liberals. Labor doesn't have the numbers in the  Senate to force or not force some of these issues. But what I can promise  Australians is that when you see Labor, you will see a party who will always try and  find the negotiated outcome, the compromise, but we'll do it from our principles,  which is we’re not going to mortgage the future of Australia just because the  Coalition don’t believe in the science of climate change.

Barrie Cassidy: On asylum seekers, did the Government eventually do the right  thing by taking the asylum seekers back to Christmas Island?

Bill Shorten: Wow, aren’t the Coalition in trouble on their boats policy. They said  before the election they would turn back the boats. Now we are seeing that not only  are they not turning back the boats, but they are hiding behind Australia’s military  when they do press conferences, they’re not answering questions about what is  really happening. As one of your panellists said, we are finding out more about what  the Australian Government's doing in the Jakarta Post than we're finding out from  the Government ministers. So there's no doubt in my mind that the Coalition's boat  person policy is absolutely not working and this pattern of secrecy where they won't  even tell the Australian population what they're doing shows that in opposition they

were happy to be all things to all people but in government you’ve now got to send  out a search party to find them.

Barrie Cassidy: You say that their policy is in trouble, before this particular boat  arrived at Christmas Island, it's on its way to Christmas Island, there have been no  arrivals in two weeks, when's the last time that happened?

Bill Shorten: First of all I think that we need to give some acknowledgement that  Labor’s PNG solution, regional solution, was working. It was discouraging the people  smugglers. I don't think anyone who has watched Australian politics over the last  two or three weeks think that the Coalition Government's got its boat persons policy  right. What we see them doing is we see them saying they'll turn back the boats.  Somehow in the course of the last eight weeks the new Australian Coalition  Government has managed to damage our relationship with Indonesia, that’s got to  be a land speed record for getting things wrong, they promised the Australian  people before the election they'd turn back the boats, now they are taking them to  Christmas Island, contrary to what they promised they'd do.

What the Coalition needs to do is instead of playing politics, instead of relying on  slogans, they should work with the Opposition, they should work with the  Indonesian Government. Complex problems require complex thinking and answers,  they don’t require simple slogans. The Coalition is finding that being in Government  is a little harder than being in Opposition.

Barrie Cassidy: What Tony Abbott wants is when parliament resumes on Tuesday,  is he wants a calmer, more civilised environment. Now surely that's precisely what  the public want as well?

Bill Shorten: There's no doubt that Australia wants to see a constructive  Parliament. But what I also know is that the Australian people want to see the  Government held to account. They want to see that what they said before they got  elected is what they do when they get elected. I mean, I think the Coalition  Government assume that Australians have got short-term memory. Before the  election they said there was a debt crisis. Now they're seeking to almost double  government debt. Before the election they said they'd turn back the boats, now  they're taking the boats and they’re not turning them back. Before the election they  said there was a budget emergency and now they're doing very little to try and deal  with the budget. And before the election they said there wouldn't be ruthless cuts  and now they're getting rid of a quarter of Australia's scientists at the CSIRO.

Barrie Cassidy: So what are you saying, you want a calm Parliament but you won't  get one?

Bill Shorten: We want a constructive Parliament. The best way to have a calm  Parliament is for Tony Abbott and his Government to run an open and transparent  government. They won't answer the media's questions, at least in Parliament for  Question Time they can't run away and they will have to answer questions from the  Opposition.



Barrie Cassidy: What style of Opposition Leader will you be in the Parliament? Are  you going to be aggressive as Tony Abbott was? It was effective, it worked, he’s  now Prime Minister.

Bill Shorten: Well no, I'm certainly not going to model myself on Tony Abbott’s  aggression and negativity. What I know Australians want, is they want to see a  debate in the Parliament about the future of this country. They want to make sure  also the government of the day keeps its word. What we have seen already, be it  from debt which they want to double, be it from not turning back the boats which  they promised to do, from them promising not to have swinging cuts into making  decisions which see people lose their jobs, people want to see consistency from a  government, they want the Government to keep the promises it made in Opposition  and we’ll hold them to account.

Barrie Cassidy: And the GrainCorp decision on whether the Americans are allowed  to buy in, that seems to be something that’s dividing the Coalition, but it is in the  end a matter for Joe Hockey on his own, but what's Labor's view?

Bill Shorten: Well, my view is that foreign investment is an important part of this  nation's infrastructure and investment. Foreign investment shouldn't be treated with  suspicion. On the other hand we've got to make sure that the foreign investment  meets Australia's national interest test. I'll be interested to see, and this will be a  real test for the Coalition, will Joe Hockey be able to be consistent to his city-based,  liberal, free market views or will he listen to his National and country Liberal  colleagues. This is a test for the Government. I believe that the Coalition will  probably just support the decision for GrainCorp to be sold off. I think they will try to  put some conditions around it to make it look like they haven’t simply acquiesced to  that free market philosophy. This is a challenge for the Government. I’ll also be  interested to see though if Joe Hockey can face down the National Party and show  the National Party that in fact it's the city Liberals who run the Coalition. So there's a  few tests for the Coalition in this.

Barrie Cassidy: Do you think Barnaby Joyce would walk over something like this?

Bill Shorten: I don't know. Barnaby Joyce had a lot to say in Opposition. Let's see  in Government if he's true to the person he was in Opposition. Again though, this is  the big trend. In opposition these people were all things to all people. In  Government where you’ve got to make hard decisions and you may not please  everyone, let's just see how they go and so far I think that most reasonable people,  even as they look forward to the end of the year and perhaps less political rancour, I  think there would be some questions over the way this Government's making  decisions and the way they're not being transparent about their processes.

Barrie Cassidy: On MPs' entitlements have they gone far enough?

Bill Shorten: I don't know. The jury's out for me on this and indeed for Labor.

Barrie Cassidy: Why don't you know?

Bill Shorten: Because we don't know if these new minimalist changes that the  Government have made will in fact work. I think that there's a lot of reference to  what's the pub test.

Barrie Cassidy: But you talk about a lack of leadership in this country, this is an  issue where I think the public is calling out for leadership.

Bill Shorten: Yes I think you're right.

Barrie Cassidy: It seems as if all MPs are united on this?

Bill Shorten: No, it's up to the Government to decide if they have an issue. I think  it’s true and fair minded people would say the Government has been dragged kicking  and screaming, this entitlements issue has been swirling around for the last four to  six weeks. I get the impression that the Government has not wanted to do anything.  The fact that they can sort of…

Barrie Cassidy: That’s the impression I get from you as well.

Bill Shorten: The difference though is we are the Opposition, Barrie. Maybe I wish  it wasn't so but we are. It is up to the Government, and what we've said is we will  work constructively with the Government, so we’ll look at these proposals that Tony  Abbott has announced yesterday. We will see if these changes will work and we  have said all along we're up for sensible changes. The question though, I think, is  which is emerging in the last 24 hours from a lot of people, is are these changes  merely designed to placate community outrage or are they genuine long-term  changes which will be in the best interests of building confidence, and at this stage  we don't know if the Government's proposals will work.

Barrie Cassidy: And just finally, Bronwyn Bishop's name will be put up for Speaker  on Tuesday. Are you comfortable with that?

Bill Shorten: Well, the Government's got the numbers to enforce whoever they  want. The challenge, I think, will be for a new conservative Coalition speaker to not  be partisan and I think that's the challenge because it's important that the Speaker  upholds the dignity of the Parliament and is able to administer order in the House in  a way which doesn't favour the Coalition Government, so that will be another test  for the Government and the new Speaker.

Barrie Cassidy: Thanks for your time this morning.

Bill Shorten: Thanks very much, Barrie.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: 02 6277 4053

