

THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH KIERAN GILBERT  TUESDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: Maurice Newman speech, asylum seekers and Indonesian  relationship and debt ceiling.

KIERAN GILBERT: The Shadow Minister for Employment and Workplace  Relations Brendan O’Connor joins me.

Mr O’Connor, Maurice Newman the Chairman of the Prime Minister’s Business  Advisory Council says that wages are too high, the IR system is too rigid, he’s  been critical of the costs of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, of school  funding as well.

Christopher Pyne, the Leader of the House has already responded this morning  and rejected some of the points made by the business advisor, especially the  notion that wages are too high.

Mr O’Connor, a swift response from the Government?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: I think he’s articulating what the Prime Minister and  other members of the Abbott Government are thinking in talking about how they  can reduce the wages of ordinary workers.

Clearly Maurice Newman’s views were not unknown prior to him being appointed  as chief advisor of the Business Advisory Group by the Prime Minister.

This articulation of the view that wages are too high and we have to do more  about cutting wages and cutting penalty rates is very much consistent with  Liberal Party behaviour when in government.

GILBERT: What proof do you have that this is consistent with Prime Minister  Abbott’s thinking?

O’CONNOR: Let’s remember recent history, they were the architects of  WorkChoices…

GILBERT: …which they say is dead and buried…

O’CONNOR: …now let’s look at what they’ve done. They’ve set up an advisory  body, headed by Mr Maurice Newman, who has views that are quite anti-worker,  anti-decent wages, and that’s been clearly articulated by him last night…

GILBERT: …and rejected immediately by Mr Pyne.

O’CONNOR: Well Mr Pyne said he didn’t agree with everything Mr Newman has  said, but let’s see how that unfolds.

This man is now the advisor to the Prime Minister on such matters, if he didn’t  want to have such views articulated with the imprimatur of being an advisor,  why did the Prime Minister appoint him?

GILBERT: Don’t you want business people to give frank advice? It doesn’t mean  Government has to take it.

O’CONNOR: Of course you do and there’ll be times you’ll disagree. But on all  the matters Mr Newman referred to - he talked about the need to cut areas of  health and disability, he said those areas of expenditure were too large, he said  global warming was some sort of myth.

He believes ordinary working people get too much money. Coming from a  wealthy man that might be seen as pretty unreasonable by many Australians.

But he was speaking last night as much as anything, as a chief advisor for the  Prime Minister.

GILBERT: They were his own views, not the government’s views?

O’CONNOR: Sure, but it does set the pattern for the sort of advisors that are  inside the tent in this government.

GILBERT: You’re a former Immigration Minister, on the issue of asylum seeker  boats, you would agree with Tony Abbott that when asylum seekers are rescued  in a particular country’s search and rescue zone that it is that country’s  responsibility to take those people? That’s what he said yesterday.



O’CONNOR: We have search and rescue zones, we have obligations at sea…

GILBERT: …and Indonesia should abide by that?

O’CONNOR: Maritime law is a bit more complex than that. For example a  commercial or government vessel of any nation responding to a safety of life at  sea is responsible to respond and take that boat usually to the closest port.

But I don’t know the details of any of this Kieran, because none of the matters  have been given to you - the media - or myself - the Opposition - so it’s very  hard to predicate some of the comments you want me to make on no  information.

We have a government that shut down information.

GILBERT: But this boat load of asylum seekers that were rescued last week  were in the Indonesian search and rescue zone and they refused to take the  group back. You’d agree with Tony Abbott…

O’CONNOR: …I wouldn’t agree with Tony Abbott…

GILBERT: …that it’s the country’s responsibility where the search and rescue  zone…

O’CONNOR: ...it’s more complex than that. Having been the Home Affairs  Minister for two and a half years and the Immigration Minister after I can assure  you these matters are more complex.

There are search and rescue zones for countries. The facts are there is often a  collaboration of countries that might involve themselves in a SOLAS - safety of  life at sea - situation.

It might involve commercial vessels, it might involve government vessels. But  how are we to really seriously debate these matters when we have no  information.

It seems to me that they’ll give us no information, then if they get into trouble -  as they seem to be doing each and every day - they release only some  information that might give them an advantage by the perspective they’re  portraying.

But they don’t provide the full information for us to consider this properly.

GILBERT: An advisor to the Indonesian Vice-President has said that Indonesia  and Australia are in talks for a people swap arrangement, similar to the former  government’s Malaysia deal, you would welcome that wouldn’t you?

O’CONNOR: We welcome any genuine engagement, bilateral and multilateral,  to deal with the very difficult issue of reducing the flow of vessels which  endanger lives.

We’ve always been wanting to do that, it actually has been this government,  when in opposition, that refused to contribute or to support the then  government, in looking to do those things.

But let’s be honest, the reduction in the vessels though in recent times is as  much the result of the PNG settlement arrangement between our two countries  than anything else.

What we have now though is a diplomatic problem between one of our most  important friends and neighbours, Indonesia, and it must be fixed and the Prime  Minister must fix this mess that he is making by allowing his Immigration  Minister, to say for example, the Indonesians have “no rhyme nor reason” when  it comes to these matters.

Now that is a highly offensive thing to say when you’re a Minister.

What Mr Morrison does not understand is he is no longer a Shadow Minister; he’s  a Minister of the Crown…

GILBERT: … it might be offensive to some but isn’t it true?

O’CONNOR: Well again it’s very hard for me to make to draw any conclusion  about some of these individual instances because we don’t receive all of the  information like you once received Kieran when we were in government.

GILBERT: I want to move onto the debt ceiling. Isn’t it irresponsible for Labor  to not allow the Government to increase the debt ceiling in the quantum that Joe  Hockey wants, to give a bit of a bit of a guarantee to the business community  that we’re not going to go down the same track as the debacle in Washington?

O’CONNOR: Well what happened to the crisis? What happened to the budget  crisis? What happened to paying off the debt?

GILBERT: … is this just grandstanding from Labor?

O’CONNOR: … Mr Hockey has gone from paying off the debt, as a commitment  before the election, so too Prime Minister Abbott, to doubling the debt, to now  wanting to increase the debt deficit by 67 per cent without any proper  explanation to the Parliament or to the people of Australia.

GILBERT: … well he’s basically said that it’s for insurance in the face of what is  going to be ongoing uncertainty in the national…

O’CONNOR: … well let me say this, every time there was an incremental  increase when Mr Swan was Treasurer, there was an assault by the Opposition  on the need to do that and that was when the increase was incremental and  there was an explanation.

What you have here is a massive hike in the debt ceiling, as proposed by the  Government, without any proper explanation.

I mean why would we need a 67 per cent increase?

Now if Mr Hockey believes he truly needs this he can explain it to the Parliament  and he can explain it to the people.

GILBERT: He’s explained it in the sense that he said he does not want to  replicate the debacle in Washington. Why don’t you agree with that?

O’CONNOR: Where is the argument?

GILBERT: … well he doesn’t want to have to come back to have another debate  about the debt ceiling…

O’CONNOR: … well let’s be clear, we are not in a political deadlock the way in  which we see in Washington.

We’re not in the same instance economically as, the same situation economically,  as other countries.

We’ve left the economy with strong fundamentals but this act by the  Government to hike up the debt deficit, in an unprecedented manner without  explanation, reeks of arrogance and quite frankly, economic irresponsibility.

GILBERT: Mr O’Connor, thanks for your time

O’CONNOR: Thanks Kieran.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: GLEN ATWELL 0403 949 599

