Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

Sky News

Australian Agenda

Christine Milne

16 June 2013



Interview with Christine Milne

Australian Agenda program, 16 June 2013



Peter van Onselen:  To discuss the Labor leadership issues no doubt as well as hopefully much wider issues  in the political mix as well, we're joined now out of Hobart by Greens leader Senator  Christine Milne. Senator, welcome to the program.

Christine Milne:  Thank you.

Peter van Onselen:  Just on the leadership if I can start here, do the Greens or yourself personally have a  view on this discussion about whether it should be Julia Gillard leading Labor to the  next election or a return to Kevin Rudd?

Christine Milne:  Well, Julia Gillard is the Prime Minister until the Labor Party choose otherwise. Certainly  there's been a lot of speculation and talk, and from our point of view it's extremely  disappointing that this is taking up all of the media time and space when we've got  hundreds of bills before the parliament to try and get through in the next two weeks,  and I would have preferred the discussion to be about what sort of country we want to  live in, what policies we want to get through, you know, what our place in the world is,  rather than this focus. But there's no doubt, as they said in 'The Castle', it's the vibe  and the vibe is certainly there and even people in the Labor Party are saying it's being  seriously discussed. So who knows what will happen.

Peter van Onselen:  But in terms of beyond what will happen, what about whether that vibe puts any view  on you as a Senator or, indeed, on the Greens more generally. Do you have a view  about which way Labor should go?

Christine Milne:

Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

Well, that's entirely up to the Labor Party. They will make that determination. But I  wish they'd get on with it because I think the country would like to actually debate  some issues leading into the election rather than having what has become virtually a  soap opera. I want to see a serious policy discussion about where we go in this country  and that's why we want them to sort it out as quickly as possible.

Paul Kelly:  Senator, to what extent do you think it's correct to say, given where the polls are, that  the Labor/Green side of politics would poll better at the next election if Kevin Rudd was  Prime Minister rather than Julia Gillard? I mean, do you think that's a fair judgment or  not?

Christine Milne:  Very difficult to see how long it would go on for. I think what Kevin Rudd almost  certainly would have to do is call an immediate election because his first condition, that  he won't lead a divided and broken Labor Party, can't be met because it doesn't matter,  the party is divided and broken I would suggest under anybody's leadership at the  moment, but especially if he were to come back, that would be the case. Which means  how long the honeymoon would be and then you can't say that the Coalition wouldn't  have in the can already endless ads of what other Ministers and things have said about  Kevin Rudd and also going back to his cave-in to the mining industry, his abandonment  of carbon pricing and a range of things. So it would depend on the length of the  honeymoon and it would depend how the campaign went but obviously a lift in Labor's  primary vote would mean there's a better chance of saving the parliament from the  excesses of an Abbott Government that then tried to get both Houses. So we want to  stop Tony Abbott getting both Houses of Parliament.

Peter van Onselen:  That's a pretty significant consideration, isn't it, Senator, because building off that  question from the Greens' perspective, a return to Kevin Rudd if it does improve  Labor's position in the polls, that has a commensurate impact on the Greens and on the  policies that you're passionate about. A Labor Party that does poorly in the Senate  under Julia Gillard is more likely to see the Greens marginalised in the aftermath of the  election under a Tony Abbott leadership as Prime Minister.

Christine Milne:  Well, the Greens are running our own race absolutely in the election campaign and I  made that very clear at the Press Club earlier this year. Labor had made its decision to  support the mining industry against the best interests of the country, and certainly  contrary to our agreement with them. And so we've said very clearly that the main  focus at this election needs to be on saving the Senate from Abbott control, or, in fact,  making sure we retain a strong voice in the Senate, and that will be the strength of the  Greens' campaign at this election...

Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

Peter van Onselen:  But that has to see the Greens want to support a Kevin Rudd leadership in the Labor  Party, doesn't it, because as an extension of that, if your aim is to try to prevent Tony  Abbott having too much control, then you need Labor to lift in the polls, and it looks  like the only way it can do that is by returning to Kevin Rudd.

Christine Milne:  And as I indicated a moment ago, that would depend entirely on the length of the  honeymoon because Rudd was not without significant difficulties during his period as  Prime Minister. So I don't think we would be running a strategy whereby we were  depending on whether or not he was able to maintain a short lift in the polls. So from  our point of view we're out there to convince the Australian people that regardless of  who they vote for in terms of the House of Representatives to form Government, they  need to support the Greens in the Senate so that we maintain the balance of power  and we stop a Government in the future rolling back any of the main features of the  carbon pricing package, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation or rolling back the  education reforms, for example.

John Lehman:  As a female political leader, Senator, what was your view on the Prime Minister's  diversion into gender politics last week?

Christine Milne:  Well, I was disappointed because mixing up gender with policy is a bad idea. And I am  absolutely supportive of women in politics and I condemn the appalling behaviour  that's gone on this week, the sexist and misogynist remarks. But the way - when you  try and roll these things together as in that speech earlier this week, what you get is  the notional view that you can't criticise a policy of a female leader without that being  some sort of criticism of gender, and that's not the case. I am a very strong critic of the  Prime Minister's decision to slash support for single parents for example. That doesn't  mean to say I don't support women in leadership.

Paul Kelly:  Senator, do you think that abortion should be an issue at the campaign, and do you  think that if the Coalition wins the election that abortion policy will, in fact, be on the  table?

Christine Milne:  Well, I don't think it was a wise idea to put it front and centre in the campaign but I do  think it could well be an issue, and this goes back to the importance of keeping the  Greens in the Senate because John Madigan, DLP from Victoria has said clearly that he  wants to be the Brian Harradine of the Parliament. He admires him tremendously and  of course everyone remembers that Brian Harradine did a deal with John Howard that  saw Australia's overseas aid programs abandon support for women's reproductive

Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

health rights around the world, and that went on for very many years. And that is  clearly a focus for John Madigan and if Tony Abbott was to get control of both Houses  of Parliament with conservatives like John Madigan there's no doubt there would be  trade-offs and that's where the real danger lies. And so I think that's why the  community needs to recognise having the Greens strongly there in the House to stop  that occurring is important.

Peter van Onselen:  Senator, can I ask, you don't seriously think though that in any trade-offs that Tony  Abbott would adjust laws in relation to abortion though, do you? He's made it patently  clear that he doesn't want to go there and there's enough liberals within the Liberal  Party that have echoed those sentiments that are extremely moderate. You don't think  that's something that would be on the table for a trade-off, surely?

Christine Milne:  Well, I don't know that. He's certainly said he won't initiate it but he hasn't talked about  what deals might be done with conservative Independents.

Paul Kelly:  Senator, Julia Gillard also said at the start of last week that if there was an Abbott  Coalition Government that female voices would be banished from the political system.  Is that your assessment?

Christine Milne:  Well no, it's not the case, although it's absolutely clear that there are very few women  on the proposed cabinet front bench under an Abbott Government. So certainly around  the cabinet table there would be fewer women. But again the issue here is: is it  women's voices or is it a feminist perspective? And that's where you get into a lot of  women in the Liberal Party who are far more conservative than I would argue the men  in the Greens are. So you would see, you need to make sure that you're not only  getting women represented in parliament because we've got a right to be there and we  should be there, but just because you've got women in parliament doesn't necessarily  mean those women are going to support feminist causes and women's rights. And  that's the key thing. You need to go to the policy platform because you'll see all around  Australia there are plenty of women in state and federal parliament who are actually  acting against the best interests of women, including all those women in the Labor  Party who supported slashing support for single parents for example.

John Lehman:  Well, with 257 pieces of legislation before the House and two weeks to go, what things  should we be discussing and which bills do you think need to be focussed on over the  next eight days?

Christine Milne:

Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

Well, I'm really keen to see the legislation that stops the Federal Government from  devolving environmental powers to the states comes in. And we're going to be debating  that first up and I'm looking forward to that because we want to see that water trigger  for coal seam gas and we want to see that amendment which says don't hand back  those environmental powers to the states dealt with. It's very clear that state  governments are really destroying national parks, attacking the environment left, right  and centre. Look what's happening on the Great Barrier Reef for example and we need  to say our national parks need to be protected and it's very clear that we need to get  into that debate and get that sorted to protect our environment from rapacious state  governments and from an Abbott Government for example. The second thing we need  to get through is the education funding. This is so long overdue. It should have been  dealt with years ago. But nevertheless we still have an opportunity to get these reforms  in for a fairer funding model and more money going into state schools. We are  desperate to get that through and I'm aware that there are - this week on Thursday we  also have the Greens legislation to recognise same sex marriages that have been  entered into overseas. We want to see that debated. But there are also a whole raft of  other really important policies like the culture policy for example. I'm a big supporter of  getting these changes to the Australia Council get through and there are a number of  workplace issues which need to come through too, more - the ability to argue for more  flexible leave entitlements and that sort of thing. Number of really important policy  issues we need to get bedded down and make sure that when we go to the election if  the Greens are in balance of power in the Senate then we won't see them repealed.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask you about one of those, senator. You mentioned education bedding down the  Gonski reforms essentially. There's been some suggestion that if Kevin Rudd comes  back to lead the Labor Party that he may look to ditch Gonski. How do you respond to  that?

Christine Milne:  Well, that would be a disaster. You know, when Labor came to power in 2007 when he  was the Prime Minister and Julia Gillard was the Education Minister, they had the  opportunity right then in 2007 to get this fairer funding model through and they knew it  was a problem then after years under Howard, and all stats show we've been going  backwards ever since. So it would be a disaster if he ditched that. But it would be  consistent with what he did on carbon pricing and it would leave people - it would  actually undermine Labor so badly because it would reinforce the view that they don't  stand for anything. And it depends what level of pressure is brought to bear and they'll  abandon it. Just like Kevin Rudd abandoned carbon pricing, he abandoned the super  profits tax when the pressure came on, and if he were to abandon Gonski then I  suggest the primary vote under Labor would collapse.

John Lehman:

Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

Where's the Greens' standing at the moment in relation to the 457 visas and the  proposed crackdown on the use of those visas? There were several questions raised in  the weekend press about where the Greens stand on that issue.

Christine Milne:  There are a number of loopholes that seem to still be there in those 457 visas and  Adam Bandt has a number of amendments to that legislation to try and make sure that  there is a serious effort to offer those jobs in the workplace here first. And that's  something that we will be pursuing. It's clear that there are a number of exemptions  and we think that they are probably too generous.

Paul Kelly:  Senator, there's been a lot of bad blood in the past between the Greens and Kevin  Rudd and listening to your answers today about Kevin Rudd, the impression one gets  listening to you is that you think that the return of Kevin Rudd would have a lot of  policy negatives for the country. Is that where you are?

Christine Milne:  Well, I certainly think - you know, it's been put to me that he would abandon Gonski. I  don't know that that is the case. I'm simply saying that if it was the case it would be a  very bad thing, and I'm also just saying that the whole leadership in the Labor Party  debate has become so personalised, it's like celebrity or rock star status and all you get  on the media is a person in a shopping centre being mobbed or a person on a radio  station being sabotaged, and in an appalling way as Julia Gillard was. But where is the  policy debate on what the differences are? Do they have policy differences? Let's  actually see what we're about here. This is not a competition of personalities. This  should be a competition about competence to lead. And that's really an issue that the  Labor Party has to sort out. But I know that everywhere I've been in the last few days  people are just fed up with it absolutely, want it sorted out so that we can actually talk  about what's important to the people of Australia in this election.

Peter van Onselen:  Senator, in terms of that policy debate when you talk about Rudd's abandonment of  carbon pricing or the ETS as it was at that time, as well as the mining tax and so on, is  your view that Julia Gillard's, I guess, policy script more closely matches with what the  Greens are looking for in a Labor leader than what Kevin Rudd's would?

Christine Milne:  Well it depends on the time you're talking about it because if you remember at the time  that Kevin Rudd abandoned carbon pricing it was because the gang of four, including  Julia Gillard, absolutely went on the attack to force him to dump that particular policy...

Peter van Onselen:

Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

But in the here and now, Senator, what's your view? I mean, do you think that Julia  Gillard's policy script more closely matches with the Greens than Kevin Rudd's?

Christine Milne:  Well, it doesn't match with the Greens on so many issues. For example the future of  the country in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and coal. We have all these  reports saying two-thirds of the fossil fuel resources in Australia have to stay in the  ground. Now we have a fundamental difference of opinion with the Government and  with the Coalition in terms of trying to get to 100% renewable energy, trying to stop  those fossil fuels being burnt. We have a fundamental difference on asylum seekers for  example. Whether it's Kevin Rudd or Julia Gillard they both have appalling policies in  terms of extending and upholding international law and compassion and appropriate  treatment of people seeking asylum in our country.

Paul Kelly:  On the question of climate change, Senator, Tony Abbott has made it clear that if he  can't get his repeal legislation through a new parliament, if he wins the election, that  he would be prepared to go to a double dissolution election. What is the Green view  about that? Do you have anything to fear from a double dissolution election? Or would  you welcome it and would you be quite prepared to fight a double dissolution election  on the issue of climate change?

Christine Milne:  Well, first I just don't think Tony Abbott will do it but if he did I'd be absolutely  prepared to fight a double dissolution election on the issue of climate change because it  is the overwhelming issue of our time. It hasn't got that level of prominence in the  Australian debate at the moment but it is coming. The world is moving towards trying  to negotiate a global treaty in 2015. There is a lot of discussion about how that will be  achieved. China is moving. And Tony Abbott is looking increasingly isolated in the  whole discussion of how to appropriately address global warming. Emissions trading is  clearly there, and the business community is saying to the Coalition behind the scenes  that they're very worried about what the Coalition is proposing because they're  proposing to tear down a system that works and put in place a white paper process  and everybody knows it's just a fig leaf. There is a vacuum of policy on climate from  the Coalition and that worries business. So I think that the Australian business  community will take on Tony Abbott, if not before the election then certainly after,  because Direct Action is a joke.

Peter van Onselen:  Senator Milne, I just wanted to ask you one final question before we let you go. Just  going back to the debate about women in politics and the Prime Minister's remarks that  if Tony Abbott is elected women would be banished from the centre of political life.  From your earlier comments it sounds to me - I just want to see if this is correct - it  sounds to me like your view is that there are legitimate debates and issues to have a

Australian Agenda 16 June 2013 Christine Milne

discussion about here, including the lack of women on Tony Abbott's front bench. But  the Prime Minister sort of over-eggs it a little bit by the way that she ramps up the  rhetoric, is that a fair interpretation of your view?

Christine Milne:  Well, my point is there will be women elected in all political parties and the Greens are  really proud of the fact that six of our 10 federal MPs are women. And there are  women across all political parties. The question is how prominent those women are and  how outspoken they are in support of women's rights, and that's where you're  conflating this issue of the number of women with the strength of the policy position on  women's rights. But it's certainly true to say there will be far less women on a Coalition  front bench than there would be on a front bench if the Labor Party was to win the  election. But regardless, the Greens have more than a majority of women in the  parliament and we're really proud of that and we will be running a lot of women around  the country in our campaign. And we've got fantastic women candidates with Janet  Rice and Cate Faehrmann, as well as of course Sarah Hanson-Young standing in the  Senate team.

Peter van Onselen:  Senator Milne, thanks very much for joining us on Australian Agenda. Thanks for your  company.

Christine Milne:  Thank you.

