THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR SKILLS AND TRAINING

THE HON KATE LUNDY  MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

MEDIA RELEASE

Friday, 5 July, 2013

APPLICATIONS OPEN FOR MIGRANT EMPLOYMENT PROGRAM

Applications are now open to create innovative, sustainable employment projects for  underemployed migrant and refugee job seekers through the Migrant Communities  Employment Fund (MCEF).

Minister for Employment Brendan O’Connor and Minister for Multicultural Affairs Kate  Lundy today announced applications are now open for the $6.6 million fund.

Migrant community organisations, other community organisations, employment  services providers, government agencies and employers can apply for funding of up to  $200,000.

“All Australians deserve a chance for a better life and this program will help new  Australians who can work, get the opportunity to benefit from having a job,” Minister  O’Connor said.

“It is in Australia’s interest to ensure we’re utilising the productive capacity of each and  every individual, including recent migrants and refugees.

“Not only will these projects provide better engagement with employers they will work  to improve perceptions of employers about migrant and refugee job seekers and  workers.”

Minister Lundy said the Federal Labor Government was committed to ensuring migrants  and refugees benefit from the dignity, security and independence that a job can bring.

“We want to do everything we can to help migrants and refugees to find and keep a job  so they can provide for their family and contribute fully to our society,” Minister Lundy  said.

“The Migrant Communities Employment Fund will fund projects to address migrant and  refugee employment issues at the local grass-root level.

“I encourage migrant community organisations, other community organisations,  employment services providers, government agencies and employers to get involved.”

Applications for the first round projects will close on 19 July 2013 and there will be  further funding rounds over the next two years.

To view the MCEF guidelines and to apply visit the website at www.deewr.gov.au/mcef



O’Connor contact: Kylie Skotnicki 0408 823 604

Lundy contact: Emma Smith 0434 664 605

DEEWR Media: media@deewr.gov.au



