

The Hon. Tony Burke  Transcript

INTERVIEW WITH SABRA LANE  ABC AM PROGRAM  MONDAY, 22 JULY 2013





TONY EASTLEY: Immigration Minister Tony Burke says he can't put a cost on the  scheme, but says PNG's capacity to take asylum seekers will be increased to  whatever is required. Already the government is looking for other PNG sites -  other than Manus Island - to establish asylum seeker accommodation.

Mr Burke has been speaking to chief political correspondent, Sabra Lane.

SABRA LANE: Tony Burke, good morning, welcome to AM.

TONY BURKE: Good to be with you.

SABRA LANE: How long will it be before your policy has an impact on stopping the  flow of boats?

TONY BURKE: The thing that we can guarantee is what will happen to anyone  who arrives, which is that they won't be settled in Australia.

I think it's irresponsible for anyone to pretend that they're in control of illegal  operations going out of people smugglers in Indonesia, but certainly, be in no  doubt: the product that people smugglers are selling is no longer available.

If they are selling permanent residence in Australia, that’s gone.

SABRA LANE: But you can't say when this policy will have an effect and you can't  tell us how much it's going to cost.

TONY BURKE: Hang on, in terms of having an effect, it's already having an effect.  We've seen the reports on the ground, both from people smugglers - ABC's run  interviews with people smugglers, we've heard reports from people who've been

considering getting on boats -

SABRA LANE: But we've had arrivals over the weekend.

TONY BURKE: The arrivals over the weekend had left prior to the announcement.  Does this unilaterally mean we can give a date on when boats stop? No.

SABRA LANE: Well, can you give us an estimate as to how much this policy is  going to cost?

TONY BURKE: Well, over time, there's no doubt this saves money. Now I've got to  say, in terms of motivation -

SABRA LANE: In the short term?

TONY BURKE: In terms of motivation, there are more powerful motivations for  this than the fact that it saves money over time. In the short term, it depends  entirely on how quickly it has an impact on the number of people who are risking  their lives on the high seas.

SABRA LANE: But what's the 'guestimate'? Surely you must have an idea as to  how much it's going to cost to build a facility on Papua New Guinea to house  3,000 people; the cost of processing them, sending people offshore, indeed,  maybe the policy of keeping them in Papua New Guinea?

TONY BURKE: Well let's not forget, the cost of processing is a cost which is  already borne when people arrive, whether they're processed onshore or  processed offshore.

The additional cost is the settlement cost, which is some time down the track  when people who continue to arrive, if they get sent to Manus Island or to a  different part of Papua New Guinea, then find themselves being settled. That's  the part where you get to the additional cost. But all of this will be dealt with in  the normal way in which budgets are updated.

The Prime Minister gave a guarantee about it being budget neutral, so in terms of  what impact does this have overall on the bottom line of the budget, the answer  is it won't have a negative impact.

SABRA LANE: When will construction start on the facility to house 3,000 people

on Papua New Guinea?

TONY BURKE: Well, the facility on Manus Island - the work there had already  commenced because there was already a processing centre being put there. Now  what we're doing at the moment is going through a process of increasing its  capacity.

Manus Island's not the only site where we're doing that; we're currently looking  at a number of other sites.

SABRA LANE: Where else?

TONY BURKE: We're looking at a number of sites; they're not yet confirmed. But  at the moment, we're in a situation where we will make sure the capacity that is  required is there.

SABRA LANE: But the capacity at the moment -  I mean, women and children are  being flown off Manus Island because it's in such a poor state of disrepair.

TONY BURKE: That's right, and I've made those decisions. And I made this clear  on the day of announcement; eventually, anyone who comes by boat will end up  being processed and settled in a place other than Australia.

Now, that will end up happening. I need to make sure that it's done in a way that  the welfare of people who are sent there is being looked after and there are  different obligations, higher obligations, when children are involved.

But the answer isn't that because children have been taken off, therefore they  won't go back. It’s no, the standards weren't where I need them to be; therefore  the standards will be improved.

And think of the alternative; the alternative to that would be to create an  incentive to fill boats with women and children. I'm absolutely not going to  countenance that path.

SABRA LANE: What happens to people who are sent to Papua New Guinea and  not found to have a valid claim? Where will they be settled if a third country can't  be found? Will they just stay forever in Papua New Guinea?



TONY BURKE: Well let's not forget; if you don't have a valid claim, you're not a

refugee. You don't have a well-founded fear of persecution from your country of  origin…

SABRA LANE: But if you can't find a third country…

TONY BURKE: You don't need a third country.

SABRA LANE: And you can't send them home.

TONY BURKE: You have your country of origin, and it's referred to in the  agreement. If you go to what's been signed, the arrangement that been signed  between the two prime ministers, it countenances three options if people are not  refugees: one, they remain in detention; two, they return to their home country;  three, they get settled in another country where they have a right of residence.  Now they don't have a right of residence in Australia, but any of those three  options are open.

SABRA LANE: What about with Iranians, because recently Foreign Minister Bob  Carr has said that 100 per cent of them are coming here as economic migrants.

The country won't accept involuntary returns. What's going to happen to those  people?

TONY BURKE: Then they remain in detention or they go to another country where  they have a right of residence or they voluntarily return.

SABRA LANE: Possibly, they remain in detention for an indefinite period; Australia  continues to pay the bill for them staying in that place.

TONY BURKE: Potentially, but I've got to say, it would be an odd choice if you  don't have a well-founded fear of persecution; if you're not someone who is  being persecuted in Iran and you then choose "Well, I would rather remain in  detention in Papua New Guinea than return to my country.” That would be a very  strange choice for someone to make, and I've got to say, it's really pushing the  grounds of credibility to think people would be making that decision.

SABRA LANE: But possibly, what you've just admitted to is that this could have a  bill that will go for decades.

TONY BURKE: Oh, as we currently have a bill not only in financial terms but in

terms of human life with what we're seeing in the Indian Ocean. I don't resile  from the fact that there are costs involved with this.

But on any definition, in terms of the humanitarian outcome, in terms of the  outcome for people's lives, or in terms of the fiscal outcome, each of the costs  under this are lower than the alternative we've been seeing.

TONY EASTLEY: The Immigration Minister Tony Burke speaking to chief political  correspondent Sabra Lane.



