THE HON. JASON CLARE MP   MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE

TRANSCRIPT

INTEVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS  SKY NEWS

03 July 2013

Topics: Customs reform; asylum seekers; reshuffle

DAVID SPEERS:     Welcome back to PM Agenda. Thanks for your company.  Securing our borders has once again become a very hot  election year issue. Yes. The influx of asylum seeker boats  was always going to be a big issue. But securing our borders  really is about a lot more than just boats. We're talking here  about drugs, about weapons, about crime syndicates, and  indeed about terrorism as well.



And when you look at the figures, this risk - this threat of all  of this sort of stuff is potentially going to grow, because the  estimates are that the amount of air cargo in the coming  years, coming into Australia, will grow by more than 200 per  cent. The number of international travellers coming to  Australia will also grow by more than 20 per cent.

Now, it's all against the backdrop of course of some  problems that we've seen in the Customs and Border  Protection Agency, most notably in recent months for  Customs officers being charged over alleged drug traffic and  corrupt behaviour at Sydney Airport. Today, the Customs  and Border Protection Agency has released a blueprint for  reform of how it does its job.

This is a five year plan. It's been 18 months in the works. It is  about more than just tackling corruption. But on that front a  number of steps are being taken: putting AFP officers  embedded in the customs agency. Also putting restrictions  on how long people can hold a particular job so they don't  become too cosy working on the waterfront, or whatever it is,

and leading to potential corruption. The CEO of Customs  and Border Protection, Mike Pezzullo, explained it this way:

MIKE PEZZULLO:   You break up those little clicks where the local corrupt  leaders indoctrinate the new people who come in and then  they manage their careers, if you like, as part of their  criminal enterprise. And as in New South Wales and as in  our service, we need to break up those clicks.



DAVID SPEERS:     But there is a whole lot more in this blueprint for reform  unveiled today. To make the Customs and Border Protection  Agency a more professional organisation, and move a lot  more into the space of intelligence as well. I spoke to the  Minister for Home Affairs and Justice, Jason Clare, just a  short time ago.



DAVID SPEERS:     Minister, thanks for your time. This blueprint is about a lot  more than just tackling corruption. But let's start there.  You've already taken some steps for the cases identified  earlier in the year. This plan would also see Australian  Federal Police officers embedded at Customs, or working as  liaison officers at Customs. Explain to me what they would  do, and would they be working undercover?



JASON CLARE:       Thanks David. This is more than just about reforms to tackle  corruption. I said in December that customs needed major  and comprehensive reform. That involves changes to the  structures and the systems, new training, and new  equipment, and most importantly a change in culture.

What you've pointed to there is changing the way that we do  our investigations of illicit goods coming into the country. At  the moment the Federal Police do investigations of tier 1  goods; things like narcotics.

Customs do a lot of investigations of other illicit goods; tier 2  goods. Now, criminals,  major organised criminals who try  and import things into the country don't just try and import  one type of illicit good.  One day it's drugs, the next day it might be illegal tobacco or  precursors. This change, a strategic partnership with the  AFP and with Customs is saying that working together, they  will triage all investigations. We will also get an AFP  commander to work in coordinating all of these  investigations inside Customs. So the two organisations

work more closely together. We're going to trial it. We think it  will be more effective.

DAVID SPEERS:     Reading through the blueprint - moving on to some of the  other things this blueprint tries to do. One of the key areas in  reform is in the approach to intelligence. Now, it says you'll  develop processes for the collection, management,  exploitation, storage, use and sharing of information and  intelligence. Who will be collecting and exploiting this  intelligence, and what sort of intelligence are we talking  about?



JASON CLARE:       We're talking about criminal intelligence, the sort of  information that law enforcement agencies collect. Whether  it's State Police, Federal Police, or information that we get  from international law enforcement agencies like the DEA  and the FBI, all of this information is critical to stopping drugs  and other things getting into the country.



DAVID SPEERS:     [Interrupts] Do we have the ability to broadly, track  international travel data and that sort of thing for all  passengers?



JASON CLARE:       We already do that. Before people get on a plane and come  to Australia we've already got a lot of information about the  people that are getting on that plane. Sharing information is  the key here. The more information that we share between  law enforcement agencies, the more effective we will be, the  more drugs we'll seize, the more people we'll arrest.



About 85 per cent of the drugs that we seize at the border  are based on criminal intelligence - information that police  get from crooks before the shipment arrives in Australia. If  you get more information, you get more arrests. That's the  logic behind this new $30 million National Border Targeting  Centre.

That will help us to fuse together in the one room, in the one  facility, the information from Federal Police, the Crime  Commission, ASIO, DAFF, the old quarantine service; as  well as the passport office inside DFAT and transport  security.

DAVID SPEERS:     [Interrupt] This is about more than just stopping drugs and  guns, isn't it? It's still about the terrorist issue as well. When  you talk about cooperating with partners like the United

States in sharing this intelligence, are you able to say  whether any of the controversial prison data from the United  States will be used here?

JASON CLARE:       No. I can't, David. But what I can point you to is this. Last  year I met with Janet Napolitano, the Homeland Security  secretary in the United States. And I said, look, it doesn't  make sense that the United States, Australia, the UK, New  Zealand, and China, and Canada don't get together and  meet as Homeland Security Ministers every year. We do it in  Defence. We do it at an Attorney-General's level. Let's make  sure that Homeland Security Ministers meet on a regular  basis.



She agreed and in two weeks time I will head to the US for  the first of those Five-Eyes Homeland Security Minsters  meetings. One of the things on the agenda will be what  happened in Boston, what happened in London, what we  can learn from that. But another thing on the agenda will be  the exchange of criminal history information. We do that now  with New Zealand. There are opportunities to do that with  other Five-Eyes countries as well.

There is an important reason to do it, David. If you ask our  law enforcement agencies or the same ages in America, the  UK, or Canada, who are your top 20 criminal organisations  you're targeting, you will find we're all targeting the same  organisations. Crime has become multi-national.

DAVID SPEERS:     [Interrupts] As you know, there's been a lot of controversy  around how this data is collected in the United States - this  prism system that Edward Snowden's revealed. Just to be  clear, have you said - what you're saying here is that it may  be the sort of stuff that Australia uses in cooperation with the  United States, or not?



JASON CLARE:       This is very separate to the type of information that's shared  between our law enforcement agencies as opposed to our  security agencies. I'm not going to go down that path and  provide that detail. What I'm talking about here is criminal  history information and the sort of criminal intelligence that  our law enforcement agencies use to catch criminals and  stop crime.



DAVID SPEERS:     But are you ruling out the use of this other intelligence -  national security intelligence?



JASON CLARE:       No. What I'm saying is that's a separate matter. Those are  discussions that happen between our security agencies. I  don't have responsibility for those. I don't think it's  appropriate on Sky to be talking about the sharing of  information between those agencies which are outside my  portfolio responsibility.



DAVID SPEERS:     Do you have any concern about the potential for using that  sort of information?

JASON CLARE:       I'm always concerned about making sure that we do  whatever's necessary in national security to keep our  citizens safe, and to keep the people who work to keep  Australians safe. Now, that's the bottom line. That's why the  sharing of criminal intelligence is so important.



The same criminals that are trying to import drugs into  America are trying to import drugs into Australia as well. If  we don't work together, we won't be as successful. So,  learning from experience overseas will make us better at our  job. I've been to the US, seen the type of systems that work  there, and now I'm implementing them here in Australia.

DAVID SPEERS:     Can I turn to the asylum seeker challenge, which is making  up much of the workload facing Customs and Border  Protection at the moment. Would you like to see greater  cooperation with Indonesia in tackling this challenge?



JASON CLARE:       The key to success here is cooperation across the region.  That's Indonesia, that's Malaysia, that's Thailand. That's all  of the countries where asylum seekers make their way  through and it goes all the way back to the UAE. A lot of  people that are coming from Iran and Iraq and Afghanistan  go through the UAE first before they get to Malaysia or  Indonesia.



Remember, David, almost 40 years ago when Saigon fell  and Vietnamese refugees fled Saigon, that it was the UN  working with countries like Malaysia, and we talk about  Malaysia a lot. It was critical back then as well as the  Philippines and Thailand that set up refugee camps, helped  to solve that problem, and ended up winning a Nobel Peace  Prize for the work they did.

If we're going to fix this, we need two things. First, we need  the poisonous politics that exist on this issue in Australia to  move aside, and for there to be a general agreement that the  government; whether it's Labor, Liberal, or Callithumpian,  should be given the powers it needs to fix this problem.  Secondly we need to work together with the countries of the  region to work together to fix this issue.

DAVID SPEERS:     Well, it may sound simplistic, but I guess one of the obvious  ways of fixing this would be intercepting boats as they leave  Indonesia. Is there any way in your view to encourage  Indonesia to do that - to intercept boats - asylum seeker  boats that are leaving its shores?



JASON CLARE:       Well, the short answer, David, is we already do it. The work  that the Federal Police do with the SATGAS, which is the  Indonesian Police, has led to the arrest, of over 100  organisers and facilitators of boats, as well as the  interception and interruption of over 400 boats.  But, I think I've said this to you before. All of the work that  the police do, that law enforcement does in Indonesia is like  putting your thumb on the end of a hose. If we're going to be  effective here, you need to turn the tap off, removing the  incentive to get on a boat in the first place. That means flying  people back home. It's worked in Sri Lanka - flying people  back to Malaysia will help. A regional solution; working with  countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, as well as the  UAE.



DAVID SPEERS:     But clearly there are many, many boats. You know, one or  two each day, it seems, that are getting through - that are  leading Indonesia without being stopped. So, is there more  that can be done on that front? You talk about putting the  thumb on the hose. Is there more that can be done to stop  those boats leaving?



JASON CLARE:       Well let me repeat that point, David. You can put your thumb  on the end of the hose. It's not the solution in and of itself.  You've got to turn the tap off.  Otherwise, for every boat you  intercept there will be another that gets through. For every  person you arrest, there will be somebody else that stands  up to try and set up another people smuggling business to  pedal more misery and put people to their deaths. If you  want to stop it, stop people wanting to get onto a boat.



The way to do that, I say - the Government says - is flying  people back. The risk of death hasn't stopped people getting  onto a boat. Flying people to Nauru or Manus Island hasn't  stopped people from wanting to get on a boat. But I tell you  what has worked: flying people back home in a week. We've  had a big drop in the number of people coming here from Sri  Lanka, because when they get here they get flown home  very quickly. We want to fly people back to Iran, but Iran  refuses to take people unless they voluntarily go back. So  the next best thing is fly them half way back - fly them back  to Malaysia.

DAVID SPEERS:     What about flying them back to Indonesia?

JASON CLARE:       This is all part of the solution. You need to tackle it at a  regional level. You need to work with all of those countries of  the region. That's what the Bali process is all about.



DAVID SPEERS:     You would like to see an agreement to fly people back to  Indonesia?

JASON CLARE:       Well, we've got one with Malaysia. The only problem is the  Liberal party and the Greens.

DAVID SPEERS:     [Indistinct] from Indonesia.

JASON CLARE:       Well, and also travelling through Malaysia. It's all part of one  pipeline: Indonesia, Malaysia, sometimes Thailand, the UAE.  You need to tackle it as a group. You need to work with all of  these countries of the region if we're going to be successful.



DAVID SPEERS:     But is there something that should between the two leaders  during this week's visit flying asylum seekers back to  Indonesia?



JASON CLARE:       David, I'm not going to pre-empt the discussions that the  Prime Minister will have with the President of Indonesia. It  will be a broad ranging discussion, tackling this issue, as  important as it is. But also looking at how we can build our  economic relationship which must be described as one of  our most important relationships in the world.



Indonesia is our next door neighbour, a big trading partner, a  very big population: 250 million people. We've got a very  good relationship with Indonesia at the moment. And this is  another great opportunity to build on that.

DAVID SPEERS:     Just finally, Jason Clare, you were dropped from cabinet in  this week's reshuffle. You appear to have taken that on the  chin. I just want to ask a question to clarify here. Did Kevin  Rudd call you personally to talk about it?



JASON CLARE:       He did. And I said to Kevin, Kevin, I want to stay in Home  Affairs. I want to stay in Justice. This announcement I've  made today is the reason why. I've been working on these  reforms for 18 months. Today I've announced them. The  next job I've got is to deliver them - make sure that they're  fully implemented, and I said to the Prime Minister, I don't  want to change portfolios at the moment and leave this half  done. I want to make sure that this is fully implemented. I've  got a lot of other things on my plate that need to be done as  well. Let me see the job done. And I'm very grateful that the  Prime Minister agreed.



DAVID SPEERS:     Did he offer you something else to stay in cabinet?

JASON CLARE:       I won't go into the discussions that I had with the Prime  Minister, other than to say I made it really clear that I wanted  to stay in Home Affairs, and I'm grateful that he agreed.



DAVID SPEERS:     All right. Home Affairs Minister, Jason Clare. Appreciate your  time this afternoon

