

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE  TELEVISION INTERVIEW TRANSCRIPT  LATELINE WITH EMMA ALBERICI  WEDNESDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2013

Subject: Indonesia.

EMMA ALBERICI, PRESENTER: To discuss Indonesia's freeze on people  smuggling cooperation, I'm joined live from our Parliament House studio by the  Opposition's Immigration spokesman, Richard Marles.

Thanks so much for being there.

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER SECURITY,  RICHARD MARLES: Good evening, Emma.

ALBERICI: So what impact do you expect the suspension of military  cooperation from Indonesia to have specifically on the people smuggling issue?

MARLES: Well, it's difficult to go into the specifics of that, but what you can say  is this: the cooperation between Australia and Indonesia in relation to asylum  seekers over the years has been deep and very deep at every level. Customs  working together, our navies working together, our respective departments of  immigration working together and indeed intelligence cooperation. So, there has  been a very intricate relationship which has been fundamental to having  progress in relation to the asylum seeker issue and I think it's just plain common  sense that going forward - and it's something that I've said before - if we are to  have progress on the asylum seeker issue, we need to have a cooperative and  productive relationship with Indonesia. They are our neighbour, they are the

country from which the boats are coming. So, how it plays out specifically, we'll  have to watch, but there is no doubt that we have a deep interest and a lot at  stake in terms of our relationship with Indonesia when it comes to this issue.

ALBERICI: Will it really change that much, given Indonesia doesn't consider  people smuggling an offence?

MARLES: Look, the answer to that question goes to the extent of the  cooperation which has been existing up until now and there is deep cooperation.  I cannot overstate the significance of that. Now, let's see how it plays out in  terms of the degree to which that cooperation continues or not, but we are - this  is a problem that we are having to deal with together and we have a completely  shared interest and we have been working very closely together as two countries  and two governments and it is important in terms of getting progress on this  issue.

ALBERICI: Do you accept now that Australia wouldn't have a boats problem  with Indonesia if you hadn't dismantled the Howard-era policies?

MARLES: Oh, I don't accept that at all. We can have a whole discussion about  the effects of decisions that were made in 2008, but one thing is clear: this is an  issue which has evolved over time. The prescription that the Howard  Government had in place from 2001 through 2007, had the Howard Government  continued in office, would not be resolving the issue of asylum seekers through  until now.

ALBERICI: Well you can't know that for sure.

MARLES: No, what we can say is this: that there are obviously more people on  the move, but the tactics of people smugglers has absolutely changed from  where it was in 2006-2007. That is something that we can quite definitely say.  And so what this problem needs now is a contemporary solution to the problem  as it exists in 2013 and that's what the PNG arrangement is. And so the PNG  arrangement is the game changer, it is the solution to the modern-day  expression of this problem and obviously that was put in place by the then Rudd  Government.

ALBERICI: Do you agree with your leader Bill Shorten on the spying issue, who  said in the Parliament that Barack Obama's response to Angela Merkel provides  the opportunity for us to consider the same course of action in Australia?

MARLES: Well, of course I agree with Bill and I think the point that Bill was  making was that this is an issue which has been brought upon the relationship  between Indonesia and Australia by Edward Snowden and I do agree with many

of the comments that Alexander Downer has just made about the effect of  Edward Snowden's behaviour. Now, this - his behaviour is rippling across the  world and the first cab off the rank was the relationship between the US and  Germany. They have successfully trodden a path in terms of repairing that  relationship and getting through what is obviously a very difficult moment in that  relationship. Now, I don't think Bill was saying and we are not saying that every  step that was taken by President Obama represents the script for what we ought  to be doing now, but it is something of a guide. I think - and that was the point  that was being made. But the other point that was made tonight, very clearly, is  that we are supporting the Government in everything that they are doing now;  as Bill Shorten said tonight, this is a team Australia moment and it needs to be.  And we acknowledge that the Government are the ones in the chair, they're the  ones who have all the information from the cables and the communications that  have occurred till now. They know what diplomatic activity is going on behind  the scenes and we're not going to second guess what steps they take and we  will support them in doing it. We simply offer the fact that there has been two  other countries that have had to walk this path. Who knows what will happen in  the future? And there are some lessons to learn from that.

ALBERICI: So should Tony Abbott get on the phone?

MARLES: Well, again, it's a question that you ask in a context where both  Angela Merkel and Barack Obama were on the phone pretty quickly, but that's  ultimately a matter for the Government and they need to make that judgment  based on what information they have at hand. I think one area where I would  disagree with what Alexander Downer said is that it's not - I don't think we're in  a situation where it's just a matter of waiting and seeing this out, and I don't for  a second suggest that that's actually what the Abbott Government is doing. I  think that in this circumstance it's very important that there is active diplomacy,  and again, I have absolutely no doubt that that's what's going on with the  Government and the fact that the Prime Minister has made a number of  statements to this point in time indicates that they are obviously working hard to  resolve this issue. So I think it is important that judgments continue to be made  and we will support the Government in what they do.

ALBERICI: I guess ultimately it's a matter of do you follow the US example,  which Bill Shorten seemed to endorse, which is to have a public expression of  remorse, or do you do it more privately, which seems to be the Alexander  Downer-favoured approach?

MARLES: Well, again, every relationship is different. The relationship between  two countries is as different from each other as the relationship between two  human beings. And so, the precise road map that America and Germany walk  down is going to be different from what Australia and Indonesia do. But that

said, in looking at how they reacted to it, I'm sure there are lessons to be learnt.  And Bill Shorten was not saying at any point that it represents a prescriptive road  map for how Australia and Indonesia should go about this. But there is - there  are two other countries, there is another relationship out there which has had to  traverse this terrain and it was simply an observation to say that we can look at  that as a starting point for a guide. Now, it's not going to be exactly the same,  but it is worth looking at what happened there.

ALBERICI: Richard Marles, we have to leave it there. Thanks so much.

MARLES: Thanks, Emma.

ALBERICI: And we did request an interview with Immigration Minister Scott  Morrison, but he was unavailable.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524



