Senator the Hon. Michael Ronaldson

Shadow Minister for Veterans’ Affairs

Transcripts & Speeches

Transcript - Interview with ABC Western Plains, Dubbo RSL



4 April 2013

Subject: Parkes veterans’ forum, Fair Indexation, election commitments

E&OE

Presenter: Senator, we’re here as part of a get together today for veterans to talk to yourself and the Member for

Parkes, Mark Coulton - the idea behind this, what is it?

Ronaldson: I’m here at Mark’s invitation to speak to local veterans and friends and family of veterans to ascertain

what their issues are. I’ve been doing this all over the country -70-plus forums I have now done from both the

capital cities to areas like Dubbo, and Ballarat where I’m from. This is about me finding out from veterans what

their issues are and then responding accordingly.

Presenter: There are a couple of things which are definitely on the agenda and you’ve just signed, you and Mark

Coulton have just signed, a fair indexation agreement, essentially. Explain what that’s about.

Ronaldson: The DFRDB which is for men and women who have served more than 20 years under the scheme,

that scheme has now closed, they’re not getting fair indexation and the indexation they’re getting on their pension

is actually far less than those such as aged pensioners. We think this is grossly unfair and we intend doing

something about that. Mark and I have signed the pledge, Tony Abbott is fully committed to ensuring that in the

first Budget of an Abbott Government that it would be part of the Budget with implementation from 1 July next

year if we’re given the great honour of being elected. It’s long overdue and this nation deserves to look after

those who have served this nation.

Presenter: What sort of difference is there in the indexation, just in basic terms?

Ronaldson: It is very, very substantial. One was 0.1 and one was 0.9 which gives you an indication of the

differential in the last indexation increase. These men and women who have served this nation are falling further

and further behind. We’re going to address that - $100 million over four years. This nation can, and should,

afford to make sure we look after these men and women.

Presenter: Some people might say, well, the Coalition’s had the opportunity in previous years before the Labor

Government took control. Why hasn’t it been done previously?

Ronaldson: I’ve been quite clear that we should have done it when we were last in Government. We didn’t do it

but we are going to do it this time around. This is an iron-clad agreement from Tony Abbott, myself and Mark

Coulton.

Presenter: The veterans that you’re talking to around the country, are there many things that people want - is

indexation one of their main issues?

Ronaldson: Indexation seems to be that defining issue, even for those veterans who aren’t on that scheme they

see it as grossly unfair and that it needs to be addressed. The other issue is advocacy and welfare funding,

known as BEST funding. These are advocacy and welfare services across the country where veterans, and

people supporting veterans, are looking after veterans. That funding was cut, $1 million per year was cut two

Budgets’ ago - it’s caused a dramatic impact on advocacy and welfare services. That issue is raised. The other

issue is mental health issues arising from the return of our young men and women, particularly from theatres

such as Afghanistan and the nation’s obligation to look after them.

Presenter: I was going to ask you about that. Ongoing, financially, there will be another pool, won’t there, as

veterans come home from theatres like Iraq and Afghanistan.

Ronaldson: The nation served has an obligation to look after those who have served the nation. Anyone who

thinks these young men and women aren’t going to have significant problems is quite delusional. This nation has

got to be prepared to do whatever is required to ensure that we support them and look after them, particularly

when some of these mental health issues, there may be no indication of them for five, 10, 15 or even 20 years.

But, when it does occur we’ve got to move and move quickly and not put a bureaucracy in front of those young

men and women who deserve this nation’s complete support.

Presenter: It does get hard though, doesn’t it - you’re obviously the opposition spokesperson for veterans’ affairs

- if a ministerial appointment comes along, you’ll be one of a number of people banging on the Budget door,

won’t you?

Ronaldson: We have already said, and Tony Abbott is committed to addressing the indexation issue. This is not a

matter of a promise before the election and then being told there is no money. It is going to be delivered and

delivered in full. What we will find after the election in other contexts is regrettably going to determine what else

we do in the veterans’ area. But, come what may, this nation has a responsibility to look after those who have

served the nation, irrespective of what the budgetary situation is. I mean that in the context of those young men

and women who are returning now and who will need the long term support of the community.

Presenter: So, you’re guaranteeing the indexation will definitely happen and then you’ll have to look at the books

for other things?

Ronaldson: There are a whole range of issues which will be discussed today. The indexation issue is an

absolute, iron clad commitment from Tony Abbott, myself and Mark Coulton and that will be delivered. We are

going to look at other issues such as advocacy and welfare funding, other issues such as the indexation of

disability pensions at a cost of between $650 and $800 million over four years. We have a Gold Card issue with

widows whose husbands didn’t die of war related injuries, about $3,500 million cost. There are massive issues

we will have to confront and that’s why Mark Coulton and I are furious at the level of debt that this Government

has run us in to which comes at a cost of between $7,000 and $8,000 million per annum.

When you look at that in the context of what needs to be done in the veterans’ affairs portfolio, alone, this

Government stands utterly condemned for the debt that they have ratcheted up and their economic

irresponsibility.

Presenter: There would be other people that would say that the money is in debt because of ensuring that other

people have jobs, but for veterans’ affairs that is a whole different discussion…

Ronaldson: …it’s actually not about people’s jobs. It’s about a$6,500 million blow out in border security. Under

the Howard government there were zero boats arriving - in the last three years of the Howard government. We

are now seeing a massive blow out in that budget because of a policy change which was the direct result of the

Labor Government making a decision to open up our borders. It’s about pink batt expenditure, it’s about school

hall expenditure, it’s about GroceryWatch and FuelWatch and a litany of wasted money which has put us in this

situation where every man, woman and child is paying $7,000 or $8,000 in interest on the debt that has been

ratcheted up by this Government.

Presenter: Surely you’re not suggesting that there’s a magic solution to fix all those problems that you’ve listed

before if a Coalition government gets in to power.

Ronaldson: There’s a solution which is a clear solution to stop the waste and stop the mismanagement. If you

stop the waste and stop the mismanagement then we can stop the bleeding. How we pay that debt off is a

massive challenge for this community and this will involve, regrettably, our children and grandchildren being

given the responsibility of paying back this debt. What the Abbott Government will do is stop the waste, stop the

mismanagement and stop this economic bleeding.

Presenter: In your travels you’re meeting a lot of veterans and, essentially, this is a bit of electioneering - you’re

letting them know your policies for the future. Do you feel that you and the Coalition have support from veterans?

Ronaldson: If this was my first forum, five months out from an election, then that would be a reasonable

comment. I’ve actually been doing this now for two and a half years and I’ve been doing it deliberately - to

ascertain what the views of veterans are, not just those with easy access to the shadow minister, but those who

are living in rural and regional areas of Australia whose view is just as important, quite frankly, as those in the

major metropolitan areas. A lot of these forums have been conducted in rural and regional areas. I am from rural

and regional Australia myself, from Ballarat - I know what it means when you’re living outside those metropolitan

areas, I know what impediments there are to accessing services, to all range of things, that’s why I have directed

a lot of my inquiries outside of metropolitan Australia.

Presenter: A fairly important day coming up in a few weeks’ time, Anzac Day, always one when we can see

veterans get together and share thoughts.

Ronaldson: it’s a very, very special day for this country. I know that the veteran community, as I do, look at the

dramatically increasing number of young men and women who are attending Anzac Day services. This, I think, is

a great sign for the future - it means that young Australians, young Australian families, appreciate the sacrifices

that others have made.

I have said publicly before that this is a direct result of the Australia Remembers programme in 1995 that a Labor

veterans’ affairs minister, Con Sciacca, was responsible for. He, in my view, can take full credit for what we are

seeing today at both Dawn Services, marches, 11 o’clock services and that means we have a unique opportunity,

again, with the Centenary of Anzac coming up, to again teach the next generation of young Australians how,

when, where and why as Con Sciacca did with Australia Remembers. It is a unique opportunity and one which

we must not let slip through our fingers because we do, as I said before, have an obligation to teach the next

generation about the sacrifices that others have made for this country.

Presenter: Appreciate your time, thank you.



