THE BOLT REPORT

16 JUNE 2013

INTERVIEW WITH GEORGE BRANDIS.

ANDREW BOLT, PRESENTER: More than 1,000 boat people have been lured to  their deaths since Labor weakened our border laws. Two more boats are thought to  have sunk in just the last fortnight. But more than 100 people a day do now make it  here. And doctors and police this week warned the Government Afghan boat people  in Melbourne lacked support and were turning to crime, gangs and violence. George  Brandis is the Shadow Attorney-General. Thanks for joining me. Is it fair on  Australians to bring in boat people who aren't allowed to work when they get here,  and who, perhaps not surprisingly, are in a number of cases turning to crime?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Well, I think the important point you make, Andrew, is that  there is a very direct link between the security of our borders and the safety of our  streets. Now, since the Rudd Government weakened John Howard's successful border  protection policies, we've had more than 43,000 people come to this country and those  included, as we now know, terrorists like Latif, who was kept behind a pool fence in  the Adelaide Hills for eight months before the Government decided to do anything  about it. So the Coalition is concerned about the link between illegal immigration and  crime, and we propose to do something about it by laun- by releasing today our policy  to protect Australians from foreign criminals. We propose to tighten up these  circumstances in which appeal rights exist, if people are - who are not Australian  citizens are convicted of crimes, and we propose to tighten up the deportation regime.

ANDREW BOLT: Well, there was the notorious case of the detainees who caused  millions of dollars of damage in riots in Villawood on Christmas Island in 2011. A  number of them were actually given permanent protection visas, rather than thrown  out. What would you have done?

GEORGE BRANDIS: We would have rescinded the visas. We would have rescinded  the visas and deported those people. If you are - if you have come to Australia, you're  not a citizen, you're looking to the generosity of the Australian people to protect you  from what you say is persecution overseas. Then you shouldn't, in the Coalition's  view, then be in a position to commit serious crimes and expect to be given permanent  visas.

ANDREW BOLT: What's a serious crime under your plan?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Under our plan, a serious crime is a crime punishable by more  than a year imprisonment. So, we're not talking about driving offences or regulatory  offences, we're talking about real crimes. It's the same standard, by the way, as a  person would forfeit their seat in Parliament if they were committed - convicted of a  crime.

ANDREW BOLT: Would this plan apply also to refugees who don't have Australian  citizenship and commit a crime?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Yes.

ANDREW BOLT: What - how would you then send them back? What if they - if  they’re refugees, we have accepted them as refugees, presumably because they're in  danger back in their homeland - would you send them back into that danger?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Where - where it is feas- where it is possible to do so. Of  course, it is not always possible to return people to - to deport people to certain  countries, because of the domestic circumstances of those countries. But wherever it  can be done, it will be done.

ANDREW BOLT: And if there is a presumption of danger in the country that they've  come from, that's why presumably we've given them refugee status in the first place?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Well, we've given them refugee status. But under the  Coalition, of course, the visa would be a temporary protection visa. That visa is a  privilege, not a right. And in the Coalition's view, it ought to be able to be rescinded if  these people present a danger to Australian citizens. You see, under the Refugee  Convention, Andrew, a person isn't eligible to be classified as a refugee in the first  place if they present a danger to the recipient country. If they're initially classified as a  refugee but then show themselves to be dangerous to the Australian public, then the  same principle, in our view, should apply.

ANDREW BOLT: And can I - I just want to be specific about that - even if there's a  presumption of danger that they face back in their home country, you would still send  them back?

GEORGE BRANDIS: We would rescind the visa.

ANDREW BOLT: Alright. Um, I'm just wondering too - you mentioned the UN  Refugee Convention. That obliges us to accept refugees who get here, even if they  come by boat. Shouldn't you actually pull us out of that Convention and say, “We  won't take any boat person, and the only refugees we will take must come from  refugee camps?” Why not do that?

GEORGE BRANDIS: Well, it's not necessary for Australia to withdraw from the  Refugee Convention in order to achieve that outcome. And we don't propose that. In  order to achieve that outcome, what we've got to do is stop the boats, not change the  law, not withdraw from the Refugee Convention. And, of course, as the Coalition  have been saying all along, ever since Mr Rudd weakened John Howard's successful  policies, what we want to do is to restore those policies so that the flow of boats will  stop.

ANDREW BOLT: George Brandis, thank you so much for joining us.

GEORGE BRANDIS: Pleasure, Andrew.

ANDREW BOLT: Coming up - is Julia Gillard a victim of sexism or will she be a  victim of Kevin Rudd?

