

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  WEDNESDAY 13 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: Climate change; Unexplained raising of the debt-cap;  Coalition’s confused boat policy.

KELLY: Bill Shorten, good morning, welcome to Breakfast.

SHORTEN: Good morning Fran.

KELLY: What’s your response to the position of the new government? We’ve  been there talking to the Environment Minister about the 5 per cent emissions  reduction target, not going beyond that, until other countries make binding  commitments. Do you think their position has changed?

SHORTEN: Yes, I believe that this is a government who doesn’t really want to  do anything fundamentally about climate change. We, at the last election said  that we would scrap the carbon price, but on the basis that we would move to  an effective solution on climate change. We’re not seeing any signs from the  Government that they are sharing the communities concern about climate  change and about extreme whether events. So I am concerned that this  government is putting off for the future generations action that we should take  now.

KELLY: Of course, some of Australia’s business groups are concerned that  you’re putting off the future action that we want to see right now, and that is of  course the repeal of the carbon tax. It will be the first order of business today at  9am, and you want that vote on that repeal of the carbon tax deferred until  March next year. Why wait? Why wait in particular when the Parliament Senate  changes in July, Tony Abbott will almost certainly get that repeal?

SHORTEN: I think there’s a few assumptions in what you said Fran, just going  to this discussion about what business want. A lot of business, especially  business which are plugged in overseas when the rest of the world is moving to  act on climate change, it’s almost like we have to relitigate the case that climate  change is real and that our efforts, man-made activities do contribute to it. I  don’t think business wants Australia to stick its head in the sand.

KELLY: The Australian Industry Group overnight, the Australian Chamber of  Commerce and Industry, the Business Council of Australia and the Minerals  Council saying the removal of the tax until a new Senate sits will do nothing for  the environment, while, quote ‘adding substantially to the burdens facing  businesses and households’.

SHORTEN: I don’t agree with the analysis of the trade union leaders of the  business community. What I believe is that climate change is real and I don’t  think that we can put off to future generations acting on climate change. Don’t  we in this place, in this nation, in this parliament have an obligation to stand up  for our kids and our grandkids and the sort of world we pass on to them? I had  the opportunity to meet with a board of directors of a large energy company,  international directors, people who have got business interests all around the  world. They know that other countries are moving towards changing their energy  mix and the way that they tackle climate change and I think that they see  Australia’s refusal for instance to attend the Warsaw talks as a retrograde step.  Australia can’t bury its head in the sand and pretend that there’s not real issues  to deal with.

KELLY: Can I ask you about another issue that’s definitely going to be on the  table, if not today then tomorrow, and that’s the move by the Government to lift  the debt ceiling by $200 billion from $300 billion where it currently stands, to  $500 [billion]. You want to block that increase, you want to limit it to $100  billion, this morning, Tony Abbott said, that’s not on.

ABBOTT: This Government, uh, this Opposition, having critised us as being  relentlessly negative is now bunging on a Tea Party style situation, a Washington  Tea-Party style situation here in Canberra.

KELLY: A Washington Tea Party situation, you being the Tea Party?

SHORTEN: Goodness me, Tony Abbott trying to accuse Labor of being more  right-wing than Tony Abbott, I don’t think a crocodile would swallow that. What  I’d like to do Fran is give you another Tony Abbott quote on debt ceilings. When

Labor wanted to increase the debt ceiling by $50 billion, not by $200 billion, but  by $50 billion, which was positively modest in retrospect when you look at the  Liberals ambitions.

Tony Abbott said this, “The Government should be forced to specifically justify  this not to just sweep it under the carpet”, he went on to say, “The Government  has to justify this. Our money, our future, is too important to be mortgaged like  this without the Government giving us the strongest possible arguments for it,  because every dollar that they borrow has got to be repaid.” Tony Abbott to Alan  Jones.

When they’re in Opposition, they resisted Labor, increasing the debt cap to a far  more modest level than they’re trying to do now. Everyone in Australia knows  that the Coalition want to increase the debt cap in one hit so that they don’t  have to justify it in future years to the Parliament. They want a blank cheque to  increase the nations credit card.

KELLY: Ok, you don’t want to give them a blank cheque, you want them to  justify it, just as Tony Abbott in that quote you read there to Alan Jones was  urging you to justify it. In the end you got your debt ceiling raised, what if Joe  Hockey comes in justifies it to you, would you then allow it to be raised $200  billion rather than limiting it to $100 billion?

SHORTEN: I’m a middle of the road sort of person. I actually believe in working  constructively in the nation’s interests. Tony Abbott never offered to compromise  on the number we nominated and come to a half-way point. We will, we are and  we will do that. We will offer a reasonable working compromise. What sort of  Opposition would we be if we just said every time Mr Abbott said I want to  practically double the nation’s debt and we just said sure, please go ahead.  We’re reasonable, but we’re not patsies, we’ll stand up for Australian tax-payers  to the Abbott Government when they just want to blow the nation’s credit card.

KELLY: The Government said they want to lift it by $200 billion because the  advice from Treasury is that by 2016 the debt will be over $14 billion. Joe  Hockey also says this is your debt blow-out, quote, “Labor’s own  mismanagement, the current $300 billion cap was never going to be sufficient to  carry the deficits it’s created” and he wants to lift it now because he reckons it’s  the debt you left him?

SHORTEN: I love this Coalition. They say one thing before an election and then  they totally do the opposite thing when they get into government. This Coalition

Government is not the government people voted for on September 7. They said  repeatedly that increasing debt is not the way to solve a debt problem. They said  before the election there was a debt crisis. So what do these guys do when  there’s debt crisis? They want to double the debt crisis. These people, when the  house is on fire want to set fire to the street.

KELLY: So just using Tony Abbott’s Tea-Party analogy again and Joe Hockey  writing this morning that you’re holding a gun to Parliament’s head and the  recent experience in the US shows that playing politics when the clock is ticking  is irresponsible, did you consider the overseas experience before you decided to  say no to a $500 billion limit?

SHORTEN: We considered the overseas experience in all of this for the  compromise of $400 billion. We are a party of compromise and negotiation, the  sort of Opposition I want to lead over the next 3 years, is to be a constructive  Opposition. But that does not mean a rubber cheque. We will not be a branch of  the Liberal Party. We are the Labor Party. We understand that the nation, that  they need to increase the debt cap, but they’ve made no case in their Mid-Year  Economic Outlook, they won’t explain to us why they think they need it to go to  $500 billion before next year. So we are willing to compromise in the best  interest of the nation. But what we won’t do is just because Joe Hockey, having  got into government realises that what he said in Opposition wasn’t true, we are  just not going to let them off the hook and just increase the nations credit card  and just put extra debt on future generations of Australians.

KELLY: Bill Shorten, just finally on asylum seekers. There’s a little confusion  about this suggestion that the Government is working on a people-swap  arrangement with Indonesia. A senior Indonesian official has said a deal has  been discussed and there has been something faxed through. Tony Abbott and  Scott Morrison it’s not, but if it does come to fruition as an idea you’d be  supporting it, wouldn’t you? This is very close to what you were proposing with

Malaysia?

SHORTEN: We’ve all given the Government a period of grace, they’ve had a  couple of months to find out where their ministerial offices are, to get briefed by  their departments. But these guys were the masters on turning back the boats  before the election, now we’ve got reports of boats sailing into Darwin Harbour.  The Indonesian Government have said that they’ve been faxed some sort of  offer. How is it that if we need to find out what’s going on in Australia with this  Government we have to ask the Indonesian press? It is time for Scott Morrison  and Tony Abbott to today present to the Parliament what on earth is going on  with their boats policy? Who’s right? Who’s wrong? What do the Indonesians  know? Have we annoyed them? Are we jeopardising what Labor put in place -  the PNG solution? And what on earth is going on with Scott Morrison?



KELLY: Bill Shorten, thank you very much for joining us and you’ll be sitting on  the other side of the Parliament for a change today.

SHORTEN: I will, thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION’S MEDIA UNIT 02 6277  4053



