

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





3AW with Nick McCallum, Steve Murphy and John-Michael Howson

30 June 2013

Subjects: Border protection policy, Australia-Indonesia relations, opinion polls, leader  debates, election date

E&OE…

JOURNALIST Good morning Julie. Thanks for your time.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning gentlemen.

JOURNALIST Let’s tackle firstly, not simply the ascension, the re-ascension (if that’s a  word), of Kevin Rudd to the Prime Ministership. It has obviously changed already the nature  of the debate that we’re having in the public domain, particularly around asylum seekers.  Let’s deal with that first and the Prime Minister’s claim on Friday that Tony Abbott’s  position in respect to stopping the boats or turning the boats around would lead to ‘conflict’,  quote unquote with Indonesia. Do you believe that was a gaffe or a ploy by Mr Rudd to try  and change the debate around asylum seekers?

JULIE BISHOP Whatever it was it was a grossly irresponsible and reckless statement for the  Prime Minister of Australia to make. He invoked images of a military conflict with Indonesia,  he was talking about Field Marshals, he mentioned Konfrontasi which was an Indonesian  conflict in the 1960s in which Australian soldiers died and he talked about this ‘conflict’ with  Australia.

What utter nonsense Kevin Rudd talks. But this is not just about Kevin Rudd’s ridiculous,  absurd comments. He is responsible for one of the greatest policy failures of this  Government, indeed one of the greatest policy failures of a generation where we’ve seen  more than 45,000 people come to Australia by boat, hundreds and hundreds of people  drowning at sea, dying at sea, as a result of his policies and billions and billions spent, a  blowout, as the Government struggles with the influx of people coming by boat.

JOURNALIST So what should he be putting to President Yudhoyono when he meets with the  Indonesian leader in the next week?

JULIE BISHOP He should be assuring President Yudhoyono that the laws will change in  Australia, back to the laws that work. While ever Labor is in Government boats will continue  to come because it’s the policies in Australia that are attracting them and so you have to  change the laws in Australia to deter the people smugglers.

It took a change in Australia’s laws under John Howard to stop the boats, it took a change in  Australia’s laws under Kevin Rudd to start the boats again. We can change the laws to  policies that work once more and dismantle the people smuggling trade. That’s what Kevin  Rudd should be offering to President Yudhoyono, not trying to invoke images of a conflict  with Indonesia.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop, without over buying the rhetoric too much it will, if the Coalition  starts turning back the boats, it will create a conflict with Indonesia, won’t it?

JULIE BISHOP We cannot make that assumption.

JOURNALIST Well Indonesia’s statements have been pretty clear so far.

JULIE BISHOP We will work cooperatively with Indonesia as we have done in the past and  we will do again. It’s galling for Kevin Rudd to be saying the Coalition will trigger a conflict  with Indonesia. This was Kevin Rudd’s policy in 2007, Coalition policy was Kevin Rudd’s  policy, he embraced it. When in Government he unravelled the Howard Government laws  and opened the floodgates to the people smuggling trade again. So while ever Labor is in  Government the boats will come.

The Coalition will stop the boats. We’ve done it before and we’ll do it again. We work  cooperatively with Indonesia. We’re not going into all of the operational details but I am very  confident that we will be able to restore the policies that the Howard Government had in  place to dismantle the people smuggling trade and stop the boats.

JOURNALIST On turning around the boats in particular, Australian naval officers have made  it very clear they think it can be dangerous.

JULIE BISHOP Australian naval officers are doing this on a regular basis in the Gulf of  Aden where they are turning around drug smugglers and pirates.

JOURNALIST That’s a very different scenario there. Often they are armed people and they  are pirates.

JULIE BISHOP So it’s much more dangerous. The Australian navy has turned boats back  before and they’ll do it again if they are directed to do so by the Government of the day. They  are very professional, they’ve done it before and they’ll do it again.

JOURNALIST But if they advise you though, as a government, that we think it is dangerous.  Are you obliged to listen to that or will you just tell them - ‘go do your job’?

JULIE BISHOP We of course take the best advice available and we will turn back the boats  when it’s safe to do so. Of course we take advice. If it was safe to do so under the Howard  Government, boats were turned back and that’s when the boats stopped. The people  smugglers saw that boats would be turned back, it didn’t take many. The boats were turned  back and the people smugglers stopped trading in lives.

JOURNALIST How frank are the discussions with the Indonesian Government? Because the  boats come from Indonesia, they’re often Indonesian owned, the people smugglers for the  most part are Indonesian. I mean this is an Indonesian operation and we pay the price for it  and yet when we ask for cooperation we get the Indonesian Ambassador laughing it off.

JULIE BISHOP It is an inescapable fact that these are Indonesian boats, with Indonesian  crews, registered and flagged in Indonesia and we will send them back to Indonesian ports.  Now it’s an inescapable fact. Can you imagine if the situation were reversed? If they were  Australian boats, Australian flags, Australian registered, Australian crews and they were  heading off to Indonesia. Of course Indonesia would be perfectly entitled to say go back to  your home port. That’s what we’re saying.

JOURNALIST Can I just ask you, Ms Bishop, on another issue - the opinion polls have  shown a fairly big bounce for Mr Rudd. Were you expecting that?

JULIE BISHOP Yes we have been expecting a change to Kevin Rudd because Labor has a  history of dumping the unpopular leader, even if it’s the Prime Minister of the country, just  prior to elections hoping to trick people into thinking that Labor has changed. We saw it in  New South Wales at a State level, we saw Labor do it just before the 2010 election when they  swapped Kevin Rudd for Julia Gillard but nothing really ever changes because Labor is still a  bitterly divided rabble.

There are many Labor members who still believe that Kevin Rudd is unfit for high office. A  third of the Cabinet are refusing to serve with him and we know what Labor already think of  Kevin Rudd so whatever happens at the next election, Kevin Rudd won’t be the leader.

JOURNALIST But the question was though, were you surprised by how big the bounce was  in the opinion polls?

JULIE BISHOP No, we always expected the polls to tighten. Even under Julia Gillard the  polls would tighten the closer you get to an election. That’s the nature of Federal elections.  You don’t see the massive swings that you do at State level because it’s across the country,  because there are different circumstances State by State. We were expecting the polls to  tighten. We’ve never said that this election would be easy.

We have to work very hard to win the trust and respect of the Australian people but they can  have confidence that the Coalition will use taxpayers money wisely, we will live within our

means, we will begin the process of repaying Labor’s debt, we will regain control of our  borders, we will regain the respect of our neighbours and we’ll return stable, competent and  experienced government to Australia.

JOURNALIST Certainly you always need to be cautious about interpreting national polls and  it’s really what’s being found in marginal seat polling that will ultimately tell the ‘tale of the  tape’ as they say.

But on the issue of economics, the Prime Minister has laid down the gauntlet to your leader  and challenged him to a National Press Club debate, preferably in this coming week. Is the  leader expected to accept that invitation?

JULIE BISHOP We want to know when this election will be. The National Press Club  debates always take place in the campaign, between the leaders, between the ministers and  shadow ministers. So Kevin Rudd just has to name the date for the election. Everybody’s got  the 14th of September circled on their calendar, so we now have even more uncertainty and  instability because no one knows when the election will be. Let’s get Kevin Rudd on the spot  to tell us when the election is and the National Press Club debate can begin.

JOURNALIST Why not have two? What not have as many as they can?

JULIE BISHOP There are always more than one debate, they have the town hall debate, they  have the Press Club debate. But I think the Australian people deserve to know when the  election will be. They’ve had it in their calendars, the 14th of September since January this  year. Kevin Rudd ignores that and says ‘oh no forget that, it doesn’t matter that everybody’s  lives have been changed and rearranged around the 14th of September’…

JOURNALIST Sure but does Mr Abbott run the risk of looking as if he is running scared if  he refuses to take up the challenge?

JULIE BISHOP Tony Abbott has seen off Kevin Rudd before. He’s seen off Julia Gillard and  he’ll see off Kevin Rudd again. Honestly, this idea because Tony Abbott doesn’t immediately  jump on the first day that Kevin Rudd becomes Prime Minister and say ‘oh yes Kevin,  whatever you want, we’ll have the debate tomorrow’! Come on let’s be serious.

Kevin Rudd should name the election date. There will be plenty of opportunities for him to  debate Tony Abbott and for Tony Abbott to expose him on the debt, the deficit, the fact that  Kevin Rudd’s had no plan other than to win the job back and stab Julia Gillard in the back,  get his job back off her and he’s now got no plans.

JOURNALIST When do you think the election will be, Ms Bishop? What does your gut tell  you?

JULIE BISHOP I have no idea. Kevin Rudd could do anything. I know that he sees himself  as an international statesman and I think he’ll not be able to resist travelling overseas to the  G20 Summit, going to the UN Security Council. He’ll indulge himself in as much overseas  travel as possible so I don’t know when it will be. It will have to be before November I  understand, so anywhere between now and November.

JOURNALIST I’m hard to shock, but I must say I was shocked that not one Labor woman  resigned when Julia Gillard was replaced after all we heard about female solidarity and  misogyny and whatever, they all stayed firmly planted to their seats.

JULIE BISHOP Indeed but it does expose the fraudulent nature of this so-called gender war  when the Labor women had the opportunity to stand next to Australia’s first female Prime  Minister they fell in behind the man in the blue tie.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop we appreciate your time this morning. Thanks a lot.

JULIE BISHOP My pleasure.

- Ends -



