CHRIS BOWEN MP  Treasurer



Transcript  Interview with Neil Mitchell, 3AW Mornings  www.treasurer.gov.au  15 July 2013

SUBJECTS: Emissions trading, the Budget, cost of living, opinion polls,  superannuation, asylum seekers, Hearts & Minds

NEIL MITCHELL:  Now, Chris Bowen is Federal Treasurer. He's just released a book, Hearts  and Minds: A Blueprint for Modern Labor, but he's right in the middle of various other issues  developing at the moment. He's on the line now.

The Treasurer, Mr Bowen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you, Neil. How are you?

MITCHELL: I'm well, thank you. Before we get to that, the - we've got word today that all  work on NBN in Ballarat has stopped because of contractors haven't been paid. You heard  anything about that?

BOWEN: Look, your program mentioned it to my press secretary just before. We passed  that on to Minister Albanese's office. I'm not aware of it. I know obviously there's been some  issues around asbestos, but I'm not aware of that particular issue and Minister Albanese's  office is looking into it. I'm sure they can give you an update later in the day.

MITCHELL: Yeah. It's nothing to do with asbestos and I'm told…

BOWEN: No, I understand…

MITCHELL: …Western Australia and South Australia have got money problems as well, but I  assume the Government's provided the money to pass on to the contractors, hasn't it?

BOWEN: Well, look, I would assume so, but I'm just not aware of the issue. It was raised  with me a few minutes ago. We passed it on to Minister Albanese's office and they said  they'd have a look into it.

MITCHELL: Alright. Appreciate that. We'll get on to his office, thank you very much.

BOWEN: No worries.

MITCHELL: Carbon tax. The change to the carbon tax, as previewed by the Prime Minister,  is that an election promise or will you recall Parliament to debate it?

BOWEN: Well, the timing will depend, obviously, on a whole lot of variables and the Prime  Minister said he'll decide an election date and then have a talk to the Governor General and

then announce that, which is the normal way these things are done - but clearly we've taken  a decision to move to a floating price. Prime Minister and I said that yesterday. More details  out in the next day or so. We've been working through it. We want to make sure it's done in  a fiscally responsible way. That means making some changes elsewhere. We're not going to  change the household assistance package, but we are going to make other changes which  we'll announce in the next day or so.

We think this is a sensible move for the times. You look at the floating price, we think there  does need to be a floating price to better reflect the world prices. We think there should be a  price on carbon, but this is a sensible move for the times.

MITCHELL: So I take that as an election promise.

BOWEN: Well, look, as I said, timing is down to the Prime Minister's call. I mean, he wants  to call an election, but we'll certainly, one way or another, either through the Parliament or  through the election, be seeking a mandate to do this.

MITCHELL: Okay. Four billion dollar black hole, right?

BOWEN: No. I've said it's a significant cost with several billion dollars. I've seen all sorts of  figures out there - $15 billion from Mr Hockey, et cetera - that's not right. But I'll be  providing further updates. It is a significant cost.

MITCHELL: But it's in the billions.

BOWEN: Yes.

MITCHELL: So how do you fix that? You either increase taxes or cut spending.

BOWEN: Well, yep, we've had to make some decisions, which the Expenditure Review  Committee has been working through, and I'll be announcing those when we announce the  full package in the next day or so. It does mean a tough decision. You do have to make sure  that you stick to your budget strategy, and that means offsetting savings elsewhere.

MITCHELL: Okay. So does that mean that there will not be an increase in tax elsewhere, it  will be a reduction in spending?

BOWEN: I'll be making those announcements, Neil. It'll be a range of measures which we’ll  be making with the Prime Minister.

MITCHELL: Could a - well, a range of measures, that means a mixture of tax increases and  cutting spending.

BOWEN: I'm not going to go into it today, Neil. With respect, that's an announcement for  another day. We have said we'll offset it. That will mean some changes elsewhere. That's the  responsible thing to do. It does mean some difficult decisions, but the underlying decision to  go to a floating price I think is a sensible one because we're seeing the mining boom come to  an end and we need to spur more investment in manufacturing and in services. The carbon  price is low in Europe, it makes sense to match our price to theirs earlier.

MITCHELL: But I have got it clear, there'll be a range of measures to make up these several  billion dollars.

BOWEN: Yep, that's right. That's 100 per cent right.

MITCHELL: Okay. I'm a - and this will consumers, this change? This will make life easier for  people at home?

BOWEN: Yes, it will. I think so. I wouldn't overstate it as, you know, the be all and end all of  cost of living. We've said that electricity prices are going up for a range of reasons, which  the carbon price is only one and by far not the biggest, and that remains the case. It'll make  a difference.

So if you look at, for example, a single income couple, so, you know, one of the parents is at  work and they've got two children, say, three and eight, and where the wage earner earns  around $75,000 a year, it'll mean an improvement to their cost of living in the year coming  up of about $380 over the year. That, I'm sure, would be welcome. It's, as I say, not the be all  and end all, but it's one step.

MITCHELL: But what puzzles me for the past couple of years, the Government's been telling  us it doesn't actually hurt consumers.

BOWEN: Well, we've said that it's only a small impact on electricity prices compared to all  the other impacts…

MITCHELL: No, no, no. It's been - I've had a fight - debate with Greg Combet several times. It  was all a Tony Abbott scare tactic that it was hurting consumers, and now your own side is  saying hang on, we'll change it to help consumers. I mean, you can't have it both ways.

BOWEN: Well, there's no doubt there has been a scare campaign on. No doubt about that.

MITCHELL: Well, was it hurting consumers or not, the carbon tax?

BOWEN: Well, no, I think in fairness, Neil, we have said that it does have an impact on  electricity prices, but nowhere near what Mr Abbott has claimed. Nowhere near the scare  campaign. We've said it has an impact around 10 per cent. That's, you know, about right.  This change which we're making will make an improvement. Again, I'm not saying it's the be  all and end all, but it will make an improvement in terms of helping people manage their  cost of living pressures and help industry and business, which is a pretty important reason  for us doing it now, as well.

MITCHELL: Okay, the polls. Now, I don't know if you want to resort to the line that some of  your colleagues have used in the past, but the polls today show very much a Labor back in  the game, Prime Minister ahead of Tony Abbott in several areas. Do you feel that's the  mood?

BOWEN: Look, I certainly feel that we're very competitive, yes. I think the Australian people  wanted a real contest in this election and I think we're giving Tony Abbott a real contest.  We've got a long way to go yet. We're obviously focused on a whole range of policies and  reforms that we're working through the Cabinet, but I do think we - this will be a

competitive election, it'll be tight, and we'll be fighting very hard, and I think Kevin Rudd  can win.

MITCHELL: You still the underdog?

BOWEN: Oh, look, if you look at the polls you'll see it's 50/50. That's tight. You know, as I  say, there's a long way to go. It'll be tough for us.

MITCHELL: Well, you're one of Kevin Rudd's key advisors. Has he told you when the  election is?

BOWEN: No. He'll tell the Governor General first, but he will seek our advice.

MITCHELL: Has he done that yet?

BOWEN: No, no. He's keeping, obviously, focused on the policy changes that we're making,  and then he'll weigh up his options and he'll go and have a chat to the Governor General.

MITCHELL: What's going to decide the election, do you reckon?

BOWEN: I think there'll be a range of issues. I think it'll be a contest, Neil, about plans for  the future. So we're running on not only our record, but we'll also be running on our  positive plan for the economy. We've been very upfront with people and said look, the  mining boom is coming to an end. This is a challenge. You're seeing Chinese growth come  off. You're seeing Europe in a continued deep recession. All this has an impact on Australia.

Terms of trade, or what the world is prepared to pay us for what we make, are falling and  that means careful economic management. Not cheap slogans, not negativity, not just a, you  know, ads which are pretty negative. It means a positive plan for the future. It means  working with industry and unions to lift our national competitiveness.

That's our program and I think that'll be the contest between frankly, from my point of  view, our positive plans and Mr Abbott's pretty cheap slogans and negativity.

MITCHELL: Not that you're being negative in accusing him of cheap slogans, are you?

BOWEN: Oh, no.

MITCHELL: No, no, no.

BOWEN: I know - now Neil...

MITCHELL: No, it's really positive.

BOWEN: … I think most people would recognise that he's a pretty good politician, but if you  look for a substantial plan, you'll be looking a long way, looking for a long time before you  see one.

MITCHELL: What about these superannuation companies that are talking about putting on  extra fees to cope with your red tape?

BOWEN: Yeah look, I've seen that and there are other companies I've noticed Westpac,  particularly today, saying they're not doing that and they don't see any need to do that. The  reforms that have been introduced will save superannuants over the long run a lot of  money. So we've not only increased the superannuation guarantee from 9 to 12, but we've  put in a lot of efficiencies, a lot of changes, and measures to reduce the eating away of  superannuation over time by complex administration.

Now, I've seen some firms say that they're going to pass some of the administrative costs on  to their customers or their members. I think that's, you know, that's a matter for them. It's  unfortunate. Their members can have a look at what other firms are willing to do because  I've seen Westpac out there saying they won't do it, industry funds saying they won't do it,  so that's a matter for their members to look at and check and make sure that they're getting  a good enough deal.

MITCHELL: But this increase in the superannuation contribution, who do you expect to pay  it?

BOWEN: Well, the superannuation contribution is paid for by the employer. Obviously  there's a big cost to Government, of course there's tax concessions as well, but you'll also  see it factored into wage negotiations, which means the contribution comes from a  combination of employers and employees over the years. That's what we found when we  introduced the superannuation guarantee in the first place. Paul Keating did that and that's,  I'm sure, what you'll see this time as well.

MITCHELL: Now, an area you know well, asylum seekers. What's it - do you know what I  costs us?

BOWEN: Well, in total, I mean, it's a very expensive thing. It does cost a lot, regardless of  how you do it. I mean, I hear these debates, people say we should abolish detention, it's a lot  cheaper. It doesn't matter how you do it, it's expensive, because you get people arriving on  our shores making asylum claims and then it's expensive to process those and there's  measures of support that need to be put in place.

That's why I've always argued, and I've had arguments with people who say it's hard-hearted or not compassionate, I've always argued you need to have a pretty robust border  protection system including offshore processing because that way you can actually take  more refugees, but you can do it in a much more orderly, more efficient, cheaper, and fairer  way.

MITCHELL: Just on your book Hearts and Minds: A Blueprint for Modern Labor, I'm assuming  we're not looking to best sellers with this are we?

BOWEN: I doubt it. I don't think it's the Da Vinci Code or anything like that Neil but it's my  contribution. When I was on the back bench I decided to pen a few things. It's not War and  Peace, it's a slim volume but it's my ideas not only about the Labor Party but about policy,  about Australia.

Some politicians shy away from writing books because things get used against you but I  think this whole picture's about ideas, it should be about a contest. Not everybody will agree

with everything in it, but I said some things about how I think the Labor Party should  change and modernise.

MITCHELL: In a broad sense you're talking about people's disenchantment with political  parties aren't you?

BOWEN: Yes, yes…

MITCHELL: Do you think that might be all about trust?

BOWEN: Partly. I also think it's about inclusiveness. I think it's about involving people in  your process.

MITCHELL: But have you ever seen politicians more on the nose than they are now?

BOWEN: I think - yeah I think - I remember, I grew up in the days of Whitlam and Fraser  and, you know, there's always been controversies and politicians have never been the most  popular people in the world. I think that is the case. But I do think that political parties need  to adjust and, you know, my political party can modernise and can involve people more and  we need to be inclusive, we need to welcome people, small business people, managers,  union, shop floor workers, students, retired people and give them a say and give them a say  who our leaders should be, invite more people to our conferences. Because these days you  can sit at home on Twitter or GetUp and you can have your say that way. It's not really  enticing to go to the local hall on a cold night and go to a Labor Party meeting, or a Liberal  Party meeting.

MITCHELL: But if you look at the knifing of Kevin Rudd and then the knifing of Julia Gillard,  if you look specifically at Labor, I don't think there's great trust across either party or either  the main parties. But if you look at the knifing of Rudd and then the knifing of Gillard, that is  exactly what's gone to undermine you, it seems a very nasty environment.

BOWEN: And that's one of the reasons why both Kevin Rudd and I have proposed a big  change to the way the leader's elected because…

MITCHELL: Well, yeah after engineering the disappearance of Julia Gillard. It's a bit late. It's  a bit like an armed robber objecting to armed robbery.

BOWEN: Well I've been arguing for this reform for some time and I've put it in the book and  Kevin Rudd's been in favour of it for some time and I do think it means - look, people out  there in the community did say to me very strongly that they thought Kevin Rudd should  return to the prime ministership. A very strong view and that they weren't very happy  about the events that had gone on previously. And this reform means that if you vote for  Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister, you'll know you'll get Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister. If you  vote for Tony Abbott as Prime Minister, you may get Tony Abbott, you may get Malcolm  Turnbull…

MITCHELL: [Laughs].

BOWEN: He says they're not changing their rules, okay. But it's actually more about the…

MITCHELL: But you see the strangeness of this, I mean, you know, Kevin Rudd and yourself  are both Gillard - are both Rudd people obviously, very - campaigning to change the system  that you exploited to get rid of her.

BOWEN: Well you deal with the rules in place at the time. That's the system and the rules  were in place to say this is how you change leaders and yes, I argued for a change of leader  and the majority of the Caucus voted for a change of leader.

MITCHELL: Do you feel any guilt about that?

BOWEN: No, politics is a rough and tumble business. In the end of the day you've got to put  your loyalty to the party and your…

MITCHELL: Oi, what about the people, what about the people of Australia?

BOWEN: Well you've got to do what - yeah, and I…

MITCHELL: Which comes first?

BOWEN: Well the people come first, the country comes first, absolutely, but when you  believe in the cause of Labor, you also believe it's in the best interest of Australia that we  have a stronger Labor Government and therefore you can make tough decisions; and I took  the view and the majority of Caucus took the view that Kevin Rudd was best placed to make  the case for Labor and best placed to be Prime Minister.

MITCHELL: Has he changed, really?

BOWEN: Yeah look a lot's been said about this. I worked with Kevin pretty close in his first  term as Prime Minister. I found him consultative and a good Prime Minister and a good  manager of the Cabinet. Others have expressed a different view I understand and accept  that. And in this term as Prime Minister he's been very consultative with his senior group,  he's run all the issues past us, got our advice, calibrated his view accordingly, worked very  well with the Ministry and the Cabinet, been talking to Caucus members. I think you'll find  that's a pretty common view across the Caucus.

MITCHELL: Are you a future leader?

BOWEN: I doubt it. I doubt it, Neil. I think Kevin Rudd will be there for a long time. I  certainly hope so, I believe he can win this election and I think he can lead the country for  quite a while to come.

MITCHELL: Thank you for your time.

BOWEN: Good on you, Neil.

ENDS

