MEET THE PRESS

17 February 2013

INTERVIEW WITH BRENDAN O'CONNOR.

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Hello, I'm Kath Robinson. Welcome to  Meet The Press. On today's show - nearly 100 asylum seekers died this week trying to  reach Australia. We talk to the Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor about the  Government's new plan to stifle people smugglers. Another tough week for Julia  Gillard - our pollsters will crunch the numbers. And in the shadow of his father - an  exclusive interview with the once-promising young jockey, Mitchell Beadman, on his  downward spiral into drugs. Joining me on the panel today is Network Ten's National  Affairs Editor Paul Bongiorno, and Stefanie Balogh, Canberra Bureau Chief for ‘The  Australian’ newspaper. Good morning to you both. Well, the Government is set to  launch its latest tool to stop the people smuggling trade today - an ad campaign in six  languages urging ethnic communities in Australia to tell their relatives abroad not to  risk their lives in leaky boats. It features Sri Lankan cricketer Muttiah Muralitharan -  take a look. The Minister behind this campaign is Brendan O'Connor, who joins us  now from Melbourne. Good morning, Minister. Thank you for your time this  morning.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Morning, Kath.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Now, you have essentially listed two high-profile  cricketers in your war against people smugglers. Some would say an ask. Is this really  enough to tackle the problem, when lives continue to be lost at sea?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, this is part of a combination of reforms required to  prevent people getting on those unseaworthy vessels. But this is a very important  element. This is actually communicating directly to the diaspora communities, and  through them, of course, sending the message to relatives and friends in other  countries - that not only is it too dangerous to take these perilous journeys, but also to  communicate to them that we have new laws, since August 13 last year, that will give  them no advantage in terms of seeking asylum. Of course, also that there are more  places under the humanitarian program. So there is a better, safer way if they are  genuine refugees. These messages can be sent, of course, throughout those countries.  One of the ways we can successfully send the message to contradict the lies pedalled  by people smugglers is to do it through the communities. This campaign, targeting  those particular ethnicities, is a very important part of the campaign and it was  recommended to us by the expert panel.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: One of the other recommendations, Minister, on the  Houston Panel, was to sort the Malaysia Solution out, in essence. Have you started  dealing with the Malaysian Government on getting this sorted?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, the Malaysian arrangement to which you refer is a  very important element. Of course, the expert panel fundamentally supported in  principle the arrangement. There should be further work, and the agencies of both  countries have been engaging on those issues. Can I say - it's important, therefore, that

we get some steer from the Opposition. What this is about now, is to see whether  there is a bi-partisan approach.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Indeed, the head of your own department said that they have  discussed with the Malaysians, and that the Malaysians don't want to change the  arrangement that the Houston Panel found unsatisfactory.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The agency has spoken to the agency of Malaysia. The  fundamentals are in place. What we have here is a fundamental agreement. What we  need, of course, is the Opposition to change its position in not supporting three  eminent Australians who have come together, from different perspectives - we're  talking about the, you know, the former Chief of the Australian Defence Force,  appointed by the Howard Government-

PAUL BONGIORNO: Yes, but the Malaysians won’t-

STEFANIE BALOGH: Minister...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, let me just finish - well, let me just finish. Three  eminent Australians have recommended these things. What I've just said to you, Paul,  and to Kath, is that we need, of course... There's a threshold question to be determined  here. Whether I have discussions to finalise these matters with Malaysia is one thing.  If this is going to be stymied in the Parliament by the Opposition, by Tony Abbott and  the Greens, then of course it is harder for us to finalise these matters with Malaysia.

PAUL BONGIORNO: But Minister, didn't Houston want more protections from the  Malaysians, and they're not prepared to give them?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: What I've said to you is, Paul, I’ve said to you that we -  unlike the situation which the Opposition is putting in terms of turning back the boats,  that nobody supports. The actual expert panel has said that the approach with  Malaysia is the right way to go. But there are things to finalise. Now, you can  understand some of the reticence with the Malaysian Government, when they know  that the Opposition and the Greens will refuse to support this matter, irrespective of  those discussions. Now that-

STEFANIE BALOGH: Minister, when you put the Malaysian Solution to one side,  the Houston Panel also, in its core, recommended long-term regional talks. This was a  regional problem. Have you been talking to Indonesia? Do you think Indonesia is  doing enough to stop people smuggling?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, Indonesia has played a very important role. When I  was the Minister for Home Affairs, I visited Indonesia on several occasions. They, of  course, have, for example, task forces to disrupt launches across Indonesia. The  Australian Federal Police and the Indonesian national police have worked tirelessly to  disrupt these services. And I have to say, these launches. And I have to say, of course,  Indonesia and Australia co-chair the Bali Process. There will be a further meeting to  be held early April this year, where we will discuss with countries of origin, countries  of transit, and indeed countries of destination, what more we can do. Let's not pretend  this is a problem confronting Australia alone. It confronts every first world nation.



PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, Minister, just a-

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And we need to work with all countries in the region, Paul,  if we’re going to have a comprehensive response. What we do not need is more  slogans and more supposed fixes which no experts support.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, Minister, during the week Tony Abbott said that within  months of coming to power he would stop the boats. He has rowed back - if I can use  that term - a bit from that. Are you just saying, then, that nobody can stop the boats?  That you won't be able to stop the boats?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, what I’ve said is the only way that we can  comprehensively deal with this, is through a compact with countries within the region.

PAUL BONGIORNO: But is ‘stop the boats’ a promise that can't be made, is silly,  and shouldn't be made?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: You referred to that. You referred to that. Well of course  it's absurd to say what Tony Abbott said, which is the boats will be stopped if he were  to be elected, within months. He knows that's a lie. He knows that that is not going to  happen. In fact, he doctored his transcript to try to pretend he did not say that. What  we have had now for some years is the Opposition Leader, sloganeer, pretend he can  fix it. Let's take one point in relation to his supposed fix. He said he'll turn back the  boats. The Australian Defence Force have said that is not possible, it's not safe. It will  enrage Indonesia...

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well the American Coast Guard turned back the boats. The  American Coast Guard turned back the boats. Why can’t we do what they do?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, Paul, if he is so confident of being able to reach a  compact with Indonesia, why is it that when the Leader of the Opposition met with  the President of Indonesia, he didn't even raise the turn back the boats approach. He  didn't raise it, Paul, because he knows it is built on a lie. It will not happen. And  indeed to say so is pedalling more untruths, and the Australian community deserve  better than that. They deserve better than being told lies by the Opposition Leader.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Minister, in January we had 500 people reach our shores  illegally. So it's still clearly a problem. The election has been called. There are now  calls that people are rushing to get to us before September, where it's likely the  Coalition will come into Government with stricter border security controls. What are  you doing to actually stop the smugglers at the origin? Because, when Julia Gillard  made her first big policy speech in 2010, it was about the East Timor solution, it was  all about stopping them at the origin, the boats at their origin, and attacking the people  smugglers.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, what we've done, Kath, is to ensure that, firstly, we  work very much with the countries of origin. For example, what we managed to do  late last year was to return almost 1,000 people back to Sri Lanka. That sent a very  powerful message that we will not accept people coming here if they are not genuine

asylum seekers. Of course, we continue to work with Indonesia and countries within  the region. Let's be really up-front here and say this is a complex issue. There are first  world nations that are dealing with much greater problems in this area than we are.  But we do have an issue. It can only be dealt with comprehensively. Now, the expert  panel have outlined 22 recommendations. I think it’s only - I think it’s quite bizarre  that the Opposition Leader chooses not to listen to the experts yet again. Doesn’t  listen to them on carbon pricing or carbon emissions, doesn’t listen to them on the  economy, voted against the responses to the global financial crisis, and again here  chooses not to listen to the experts in relation to dealing with this complex issue. We  need to listen to them, and implement step-by-step these initiatives. That is the only  way we will see a reduction and ultimately a cessation of these vessels.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Ok Minister, we need to take a break here. There’s plenty  more to talk about, so please stay with us on Meet The Press. We’ll have more with  Brendan O’Connor after the break.

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Welcome back, you’re watching Meet The  Press. You can join the conversation anytime via our Facebook and Twitter pages,  and feel free to send me a tweet directly as well. Well back now to our guest,  Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor. Minister, on Friday there was quite an  extraordinary Galaxy Poll that was released in Queensland, that was giving the ALP a  14% boost there in that State, if Kevin Rudd was reinstated as Leader. With numbers  like that, how long will you resist returning to Kevin Rudd when the polls look like  this?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The overwhelming support that the current Prime Minister  has, is because we know, as Prime Minister, she will take on the hard issues and also  represent those people that are - that do really need good public policy. If you look at  the NDIS, and you look at what has to be done in Education through the Gonski  review, it is this Prime Minister, Prime Minister Gillard, that will see this through.  She's tough as nails, and that's why, regardless of what commentators may say, the  Caucus overwhelming supports her and wants to see these reforms done on behalf of  all Australians.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: You say overwhelming support. All of the media suggests  that it's not overwhelming, that it's on the edge. The next two weeks is critical for her.  And you just mentioned NDIS and Gonski, and she’s come under huge criticism for -  where’s the funding coming from for these massive projects?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well we'll just - we’ll just see how we go here. But let me  just make it very clear - people said we weren't going to price carbon and bring in a  very important market-based approach to reducing carbon emissions. It was done.  And indeed, in relation to Education and indeed providing support for families that  have children, and others with disabilities across the nation, people might think this  may not be done. There’ll be always naysayers in this country, and there's plenty in  the media. But the media do not determine the Prime Minister. The Caucus of the  Government Party determine the Prime Minister.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well just on the-

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: And the Caucus emphatically supported her in February.  And I can assure you, Paul, and others on the panel, she has the overwhelming  support, irrespective of what might be said-

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, Minister, we saw what happened-

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: -because she is fair dinkum about bringing about the  changes needed for all Australians.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, we saw what happened with the Nielsen poll - it set the  hares running and it certainly had the nervous nellies talking. Now there's a Newspoll  coming out this week. If it's anywhere near as bad as the Nielsen poll, that will further  undermine Julia Gillard, surely?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think you underestimate the resolve of the Caucus in  supporting a Prime Minister that's tough as nails and wants to bring about important  reforms for this nation. Now, I think it's clear that there's some very important things  that need to be done in Education and need to be done in areas of disability. You think  Tony Abbott would do them? I don't think so.

STEFANIE BALOGH: Minister... Minister... Minister, on those reforms...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think the Australian people know that, and I think you'll  find, for that reason, the Prime Minister will be supported by the Caucus.

STEFANIE BALOGH: Minister, on those reforms - NDIS, Gonski - obviously the  May Budget will be critical to Labor, it’s critical to Julia Gillard. Wayne Swan’s had  wobbles - he has had some recent wobbles. Is he the right person to be selling Labor's  message?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Of course. Wayne Swan was the steward through the  global financial crisis. We were confronted with the biggest economic recession since  the Great Depression. And, which country came through that global financial crisis  better than any other developed nation? And who was Treasurer? It's not for any - it’s  for that -

STEFANIE BALOGH: Is he not also the steward of the Mining Tax? I mean, that  recently raised chicken feed over the last six months. And you’ve had a-

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Now you might think hundreds of millions of dollars are  chicken feed - I’m not sure everyone does, but...

STEFANIE BALOGH: $126 million compared to, you know, to billions. I mean, do  you think Labor's lost its economic credibility?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, I do not. No, not in the least. Let's be clear on this.  Tony Abbott didn't just vote against the reforms we needed to confront the global  financial crisis - he literally slept through them. He didn't turn up even to vote. Now,  that's the res- that’s the sort of economic record of Tony Abbott. Indeed, Peter  Costello thinks Tony Abbott’s economic credentials are a joke. The fact is, the

Opposition made the wrong decisions during that period. This Government made the  right ones. That's why we have 5.4% unemployment, that’s why we have the best  economic growth since the global financial crisis of any first world nation, and that’s  why we have the lowest debt as a proportion to our GDP. We have the mean average  debt of one tenth the developed world - that’s because we made the right decisions,  and indeed Wayne Swan was of course there at the time. And that, I think - the  Australian people know that. Now whatever some - whatever concerns they may  have, people know that whatever problems we have, we are in a better shape - we’re  in better shape than every other developed nation.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Minister, we don't have much time left, so I will have to  leave it on this question to you. What is Kevin Rudd to you and your party? Is he an  asset? Is he a liability? Or is he a human shield?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: It's entirely up to Kevin. I've got a high regard for Kevin  Rudd. I think he certainly can play a very positive role. And I also - and I've always  acknowledged the things he did well when Prime Minister. And I just say this - if we  have a unity of purpose, if we are together, we can win the next election. Because we  have the set of policies that most Australians need. And, indeed, are crying out for. I  don't think that can be said of Tony Abbott, who has no policies and is hoping to get  to the election without actually declaring anything - on industrial relations, on his  policies on health, on his policies on education. He wants to get - he wants to sort of  get through without any scrutiny. Well, if we are unified, there will be more focus on  the alternative Prime Minister. And I think if that’s the case, we can win the next  election.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Minister, we’re going to have to leave it there. Thank you  very much for you and your time this morning - Immigration Minister, Brendan  O'Connor. Well, after the break, a look at the polls - just how much longer does Julia  Gillard have in the top job? Stay with us, you're watching Meet The Press.

