SHADOW IMMIGRATION MINISTER SCOTT MORRISON

Transcript - Doorstop interview

Tuesday 16th July 2013

Print Version

Subjects: Comments of Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa, Coalition  policy to turn back boats where it is safe to do so, Kevin Rudd’s carbon tax con

E&OE

Morrison: I have some comments about the events of the last 24 hours. The first  one is that the Coalition certainly welcomes the statement made by Dr Natalegawa  that obviously discussions and dialogue would obviously continue if the Coalition  government was elected in Australia. Of course, the Indonesian government would  always deal with the government of the day in Australia, and I think that’s a positive  thing. I also note that Dr Natalegawa has completely rejected the suggestion made  by the Prime Minister that the Coalition’s policies could lead to some sort of  Konfrontasi situation - they were reckless and desperate statements by the Prime  Minister and hopefully that puts that rather embarrassing situation for the Prime  Minister to an end. The real issue here is what is the purpose of the discussions  between Australia and Indonesia if a Coalition government were elected. It has  always been our view that those discussions are about no surprises - they are about  having a proper and respectful relationship, one with the other. It is about the things  we can do together, and the importance of regional deterrence and cooperation on  regional deterrence measures, which has always been our view, which is why we  have the Bali process. But having regional cooperation is not an excuse for not  having strong national policies of your own and those national policies will always be  under the decision of the Australian government because that is our sovereign right,  as it is the right of Indonesia to have complete carriage over decisions that deal with  things on their side of the border. I think if we continue to respect those issues, then  of course there would be a very positive relationship that we can work on in the  future.

The Coalition’s policies are designed to take the sugar off the table that Kevin Rudd  put on the table when he abolished the measures that worked under John Howard -  it is that decision that has created the problem for the region. I mean our region has  a Rudd problem when it comes to people smuggling because it was Kevin Rudd who  started all this process in the first place, therefore it is not surprisingly now that he’s  returned to the prime ministership that he looks like he’s going to eclipse Julia

Gillard’s record for arrivals by boat in his first month back in office, which is  concerning. That is the situation that Kevin Rudd has put us in, but Coalition will  always take decisions in our national interest - about our national policies and about  what we think is the best way to deal with the problems that Kevin Rudd has created  on our borders.

So the concerning part here, as well, is that the Prime Minister is now seriously  suggesting, as a result of all his discussions and communique in Indonesia, that  Australia must seek a right of accession from Indonesia for our own national policies.  Kevin Rudd has handed a right of veto to Indonesia over our border policies and that  is not something any self-respecting government would ever hand over. Kevin Rudd  needs to be very clear about what he signed up to in Indonesia when he was  recently there because the Coalition government will respect our regional  frameworks and the cooperation that takes place there but we will always take the  decisions on our own borders that matter to Australians - that’s the mandate we  respect and that’s the position we’re putting to the Australian people at the next  election.

Our policy of turning boats back where it is safe to do so has been validated very  recently by none less than Vice Admiral Ritchie, Major General Molan, and of  course, Brigadier Hogan. This is a further endorsement of the ability for these  policies to be implemented. Of course, the situation is difficult and that’s why you  have good procedures in place, and you follow the chain of command and you have  the rules of engagement, and all of these things to manage these matters. But that is  a task I know our Border Protection Command is up to, and they will be able to  implement the policies of the government of the day. Those policies will be  determined in Australia. Of course we have a Jakarta not Geneva-focus to our  foreign policy, but when it comes to our domestic policy, then obviously the focus of  that decision making must be in Canberra.

Q: Dr Natalegawa also said there are real difficulties with this sort of unilateral action  though. Does that not create a problem for the Coalition?

Morrison: Well, he’s entitled to his view, and they’re the things you’d discuss in any  dialogue you would have. But equally I’m sure there are some issues that Australia  has with some decisions the Indonesian government takes, not least the one that  Senator Carr has highlighted, which is the decision of the Indonesian government to  provide visa on arrival to Iranians who are finding themselves on boats in quick  succession. But that’s a decision for the Indonesian government, they have every  right to make that decision within their own borders and determine their border  policy. That’s the sort of thing that should be the subject of discussion, but just as

they make that decision, we would make our decisions, if we’re elected, on what  happens on our side of the line. And that’s what a self-respecting government does.  It just doesn’t go to Jakarta for a photo-op and hand over decisions about Australia’s  borders to another country, to create the impression that you’re doing something.

Q: Mr Morrison, Bob Carr is suggesting that the Indonesian foreign minister has  ruled out supporting towing back the boats, what he said on Channel Ten last night.  Is that correct?

Morrison: Well, it’s not for him to rule it in or rule it out because that is a domestic  policy for Australia. The Coalition is not seeking the agreement of Indonesia. We  never sought it last time. There was no agreement. In fact John Howard never even  discussed the matter with the Indonesian President on the last occasion. So this is a  false test that the government has put up, in terms of the Coalition’s turn-back policy.  Of course, Indonesia would express views that you’d have in the course of your  normal relationship, as Australia would, but at the end of the day Australia has to  decide its policies on its borders. That’s what I think the Australian would respect and  expect of its government.

Q: But wouldn’t it be easier to get Indonesia’s permission for this? I mean  Natalegawa last night said he is not ecstatic about the idea, he doesn’t support it but  wouldn’t it be easier to stop the boats if you did get Indonesia’s permission?

Morrison: These are obviously matters that he’s obviously interested in continuing  to discuss, and let’s not forget that that was also what he said last night, that he  would continue to discuss these matters with the Coalition if we were in government.  That’s what you would expect. But at the end of the day, you need to be very clear  about what your position is, and I think the Coalition has been extremely clear. So  what is the government’s position?  What is the government’s policy? There is no  policy. They talked this morning about a policy being in the pipeline - well the only  thing that’s in a pipeline is more boats coming to Australia because Kevin Rudd is a  soft touch on our borders. And that will continue - it’s too late, almost 6 years after  being first elected to say you’re going to have a policy. They don’t have one, that’s  the whole problem. Going to conferences is not a substitute for actually having a  policy. Photo-ops, flying around on planes and having lots of talk is not a substitute  for dealing with your own policies on your own borders with your own decisions.

Q: Are you intending to meet with Dr Natalegawa while he’s here in Australia?

Morrison: I have met with Dr Natalegawa in the past…

Q: When was the last time?

Morrison: When I was in Indonesia. That was last year.

Q: Do you intend to talk to him again?

Morrison: Well, that’s a matter more for Julie Bishop. He’s come here to do some  private businesses, as I understand with his honorary doctorate at Macquarie  University - I commend him for that, and wish him all the best. But oppositions and  governments have different opportunities to speak to other governments. We’ve  obviously had many meetings with the Indonesians. I was just up in Indonesia  recently having a series of operational meetings on these matters, which I found very  useful, and I found the Indonesian government very open and happy to have that  dialogue and I found it very informative.

Q: You mentioned that Australia didn’t need Indonesia’s cooperation under John  Howard to turn back asylum seeker boats. Hasn’t the issue dramatically changed  since then? We have had 15,000 people arrive by boat this year. Wouldn’t we be  looking at turning back a lot more boats in the future, rather than the 4 or 5 boats that  were turned back under John Howard?

Morrison: Well, I refer you back to what Vice Admiral Ritchie said on this. He  basically said that the circumstances weren’t that different when he was talking  about what he was confronted with last time, and the practical challenges of turning  back boats where it is safe to do so still present the same challenges then as they do  now. That’s why I have confidence in the navy through their protocols, their chain of  command and their rules of engagement to manage these issues well. I mean Vice  Admiral Ritchie made the point very well, the boats stopped because they stopped  coming, because of the policies we put in place. That’s the outcome we need here in  the region. I mean the outcome the region is looking for is a cessation of people  coming and transiting through their countries to try to get to Australia. And the  reason they’re coming to Australia is this government - they are the sugar on the  table, and that is something the Australian people can deal with at the next election.

Q: Mr Morrison, on the operational side of this particular policy, from whom are you  actually getting advice?

Morrison: Well that is for me to understand, and no, I’m not going to compromise  the individuals who have been very generous with their time, experience and  expertise in assisting us to deal with the multitude of scenarios that can present, but I  can give the Australian people this guarantee: we have thought about this in very

precise detail and we’ve been working through that with people who know what  they’re talking about. That’s what you’d expect from an Opposition to ensure that it  was able to hit the ground running if we’re elected because this problem, as you’ve  said, is a very serious one. It continues to escalate - we’re getting almost a thousand  people a week turning up under this government. Kevin Rudd is going to smash Julia  Gillard’s record when it comes to people coming on boats in his first month of office.

Q: Broadly speaking is it fair to say they are retired military officers?

Morrison: If I said I was going to tell you who it was, then I would’ve told you who it  was. And I don’t plan to do that.

Q: Are there any serving…

Morrison: Again, I don’t plan to go into those details.

Q: Indonesia has announced a date, a rough date for this emergency summit on  asylum seekers in August. Given that would be fairly close to the election, would you  be wanting to head along as a potential future immigration minister?

Morrison: Well I think we’ll wait and see what the actual date is and when there are  some firm arrangements in place. As yet there aren’t any form arrangements in  place. There’s mooting of a date around 20th or 21st of August, and we’ll see  whether that lands as a date, and we’ll deal with that once those details are known.  But at this stage, it strikes me that Kevin Rudd’s only policy is to get on a plane and  head to a conference and talk at a meeting we’re not sure yet when it’s actually  going to be held.

Q:  The Indonesian foreign minister today said there’s been little detail provided to  them about the turn back the boats policy. How does this sit with Coalition reports  that it has raised these issues in detail with the Indonesian foreign ministry?

Morrison: I have raised those details in discussions I’ve had and…

Q: He says there hasn’t been detail provided.

Morrison: I’ve not going to provide a running commentary on the private discussions  with the minister for foreign affairs from Indonesia - I think that’s the way these  matters should be dealt with. I don’t plan to undertake those discussions through the  media.

Q: … [Inaudible] Is this a change in tactic? Is there some friction between the two  countries on this policy area?

Morrison: No, I don’t think so. I think this is a detailed and complicated issue but  one where Australia can take clear actions that the Coalition is prepared to  undertake and those things we need to do on our side of the line and that will assist  the region. They’re the sort of issues that we’ll obviously get into if we are elected  and you can have the sort of discussions with Indonesia that aren’t available to you  at the same level in Opposition, but could be in Government. So Dr Natalegawa has  made it very clear that those discussions would take place and continue as they  have over a long period of time. I mean Julie Bishop has had continuous  engagement with Indonesia, particularly through their ambassador here, but also up  in the region as well where she constantly is.

Q: Mr Morrison, what is your reaction to the government’s decision to move to an  ETS?

Morrison: I’ll leave that to others to comment on, that falls within their portfolio area.  But all I know is after the election, there’ll still be a carbon tax by another name.  When Australians look at their power bills, there’ll still be a price. As Tony Abbott  said, the Prime Minister just doesn’t get it. There should be no price on the other side  of the election. And if people vote for the Coalition, that’s what they’ll get.

Q: Well, the government is saying that under the Labor plan, average families will be  about $380 better off whereas under the Coalition plan they will be $1,200 worse off.  Is that just a lie?

Morrison: Well if you want to believe the government about what they say about  carbon taxes, well you go right ahead. The Australian people took Julia Gillard at her  word before the last election on carbon taxes and look what they got. The  government’s form here is what the issue is. Whether it’s on the carbon tax, or  whether it’s on the budget deficit, whether it’s on debt or whether it’s on border  protection or pink batts - any of these things, Kevin Rudd has to be judged on his  form. Any punter, if they’re going to make a decision at a track, is going to look at the  form guide. They’re not going to look at how pretty the horse looks on the day -  they’re going to look on the form. And the form of Kevin Rudd as being a Prime  Minister is there for everyone to see. He can fly around and talk all he likes, but he  can’t fly away from his record, and his record is a shocker. And as each day passes,  I think Australians are being reminded every day of the Kevin Rudd they knew back  then and they’re becoming reacquainted with. Thanks.

Ends







