

THE HON. JASON CLARE MP   MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR JUSTICE

TRANSCRIPT

Sydney  17 July 2013





JASON CLARE: I'm joined here by Admiral David Johnston, the Head of  Border Protection Command. We can now give you a briefing on the latest  information from the rescue overnight. Overnight, our officers have rescued  144 people from the sea and recovered the bodies of four other people: two  women in their late 20s, early 30s, one man in his 20s and one man in his  30s. All of this happened in very rough conditions, sea state 4, so waves of  around about two metres, 67 nautical miles north of Christmas Island.

I will now take you through the chronology of events and all of the times I will  give you are Australian Eastern Standard Time.

At approximately 3.30pm on Monday, an RAAF maritime patrol vessel  detected a vessel approximately 136 nautical miles north north-east of  Christmas Island during a routine surveillance flight. The vessel was reported  to be heading in a southerly direction at approximately three knots towards  Christmas Island. At approximately 9.45pm on Monday night, HMAS Albany  was asked to track the vessel as it went towards Christmas Island.

At approximately 12.40am on Tuesday morning, Albany located the vessel  and commenced monitoring it. The vessel was still heading in a southerly  direction and Albany reported it showed no signs of distress.

At approximately 2.45am, the Rescue Coordination Centre requested assets  to assist after they received a phone call from people on the vessel that it was  reportedly stopped in the water with the engines not working. The Rescue  Coordination Centre also issued a distress message at that time to shipping in  the area to respond. At approximately 3.30am on Tuesday morning, the  vessel that Albany was monitoring was confirmed to be the same vessel that  had requested assistance. Albany continued to monitor and reported that the

vessel at that time showed no signs of distress. At 12 noon yesterday, Border  Protection Command tasked HMAS Warramunga to head north to assist  HMAS Albany, given the large number of people that were identified as being  on the boat.

At approximately 12.05, so shortly thereafter, the Rescue Coordination Centre  advised Border Protection Command that it had received a number of further  calls from people on the vessel stating that they were in need of assistance. At  that time, Rescue Coordination Centre requested Albany to close on the  vessel and provide assistance as required.

At approximately 1.10pm yesterday, HMAS Albany closed in to board the  vessel to determine the nature of assistance required. However, weather  conditions and the high sides of the vessel prevented the boarding party from  getting on board. Albany reported that the vessel appeared sea worthy. One  engine was working, one wasn't and the bilge pump was working. At  approximately 2pm, Warramunga arrived on the scene and at approximately  2.20pm, Albany commenced escorting the vessel.

At approximately 6pm, the vessel began to lean to one side and passengers  began jumping into the water. At approximately 6.40pm, Albany reported that  the vessel rolled and capsized. A total of six life rafts were deployed by Albany  and Warramunga, as well as a P3 Orion aircraft which was overhead. The  naval vessels also deployed their small boats to assist in rescuing the people  that were in the water. At approximately 9.20pm, Warramunga had rescued 76  persons and Albany had rescued 68. Four deceased people were also  recovered from the water. At 9.40pm last night, the Rescue Coordination  Centre suspended the search for survivors. The initial advice received was  there was something in the order of 180 people on the vessel. Information  from the crew of the vessel indicates now that there were 150 or  approximately 150 people on the vessel.

That's the latest information that we have. Let me use this opportunity to thank  the men and women of Border Protection Command for the work they do. This  is tough, hard, difficult, dangerous work that they do and I want to thank them  and the agencies that have assisted them in the work they have done over the  course of the last 48 hours.

The Admiral and I are very happy to take your questions.

QUESTION: What was the cause of the capsize, was it just rough seas or do  you think sabotage may have played a role in this?

DAVID JOHNSTON: We don't know the answer to that question at the  moment. It appeared to have occurred quite quickly in terms of from when the  people were jumping in the water to when the vessel eventually fully capsized

was in the order of 30-40 minutes. So what the circumstances were, whether it  was a combination of the weather or the vessel taking on water, we just don't  know. That, I expect, would be something that would become available after  the survivors are interviewed.

QUESTION: Question on the role of the Albany. Was monitoring the boat for  24 hours, about 24 hours prior to the capsize. Is that about right?

DAVID JOHNSTON: It arrived in the area during the evening and then  remained with that vessel during the course of the day. So it had certainly  been with it for a period in excess of 12 hours.

QUESTION: When the Minister said that the Albany was monitoring the boat,  what does that mean? Does that mean in its line of sight, how do you monitor  a boat. What I’m getting at Sir is why didn’t you intercept and try and board the  vessel as soon as possible?

DAVID JOHNSTON: So the Minister mentioned that Albany first detected the  vessel during the night. At that point, there was no request for assistance so it  was still some considerable distance, 80 miles from Christmas Island. We  found our experience has been that boarding vessel, we don't have a lawful  reason to board, particularly when there is no request for assistance at that  distance, but also we know that any boarding event that you conduct,  particularly at night, and in the weather conditions that were experienced, are  very dangerous.

So there was no need for the vessel to board. There had been no request for  assistance. That changed during the course of the day, but the weather  remained prevalent throughout that period so it was always a very difficult  environment. The Minister mentioned sea state 4, so that is weather in the  order of 2.5 metre swells. During the morning it had increased briefly to about  four-metre seas. Extremely difficult weather to conduct operations in, both to  launch a boat but also to try to get on board another vessel.

QUESTION: Is it fair to say the Albany made the call that it was safer to sort  and monitor on Christmas Island rather than disembark passengers  (inaudible)

DAVID JOHNSTON: So the Albany did make an attempt to board in the early  afternoon, so after the Rescue Coordination Centre had received further calls  from the vessel seeking assistance, they sought the assistance of Albany to  put a boarding party in. They attempted to do so, so they launched their boat  in the water, closed alongside the vessel but were unable to get the people on  board it. So that's when they made the judgment that, given the inability to get  on board the vessel, it was much safer and the ship at that point reported that  there were no apparent concerns. This vessel remained underway. It's a 30-

metre vessel, quite solid, looks like an interisland cargo vessel. Their  judgment was it was safer to try to extract their boarding party and remain in  close proximity to this vessel but escort it into Christmas Island.

QUESTION: How big was the vessel. Obviously it held quite a lot of people.  Was it overcrowded or was it (inaudible)?

DAVID JOHNSTON: It's about 30 metres long. There is certainly a lot of  people on it, but it doesn't look - they're not jam packed as we have seen in  other vessels that we have intercepted.

QUESTION: Sorry, the crew members, have they been taken into custody?

DAVID JOHNSTON: The crew members have been rescued, so they are part  of the group that we are now taking into Christmas Island.

QUESTION: Do we know who the crew members are and who the crew  members are and who the passengers are?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Yes.

QUESTION: What origins were the passengers from?

JASON CLARE: A number of different countries, from Afghanistan, Pakistan,  Iran as well as from Iraq.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: That's our expectation.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: I will commence and the Admiral might elaborate. We've  seen fluctuations over the last few months of smaller boats and then larger  boats. Certainly over the last week or two we have seen larger boats in terms  of larger numbers of passengers, not necessarily larger boats. There is no  doubt in my mind that people smugglers will try to put as many people on a  boat as they possibly can for this very simple reason that the more people you  get on a boat, the more money you make. If you can put 100 people on a  boat, you can make $1 million. If you can put 200 people on a boat, you can  make $2 million.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: I wouldn't be surprised if people smugglers tell prospective  passengers anything to get them on a boat. They will lie about elections

before an election and they'll lie afterwards to get people on to a boat in order  to make money. But this fluctuates - depending upon how many people they  can identify looking to get on to a boat.

QUESTION: Are they lying, is that what you are saying?

JASON CLARE: I don't have particular information on that at the moment,  Paul, but I would make the very basic point, these people are driven by  money. The more people they can get onto a boat, the more money they  make, and if the cost is that some people drowned on the way, they don't  care.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: Not in this case, but more generally people pay between  $5000 and $10,000 to get onto a boat. Sometimes they pay with their life, and  we've seen that again today.

QUESTION: Any children on board this time?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Yes.

QUESTION: Young children?

DAVID JOHNSTON: We believe there are a number of infants. We don't have  the complete count because not all the people have been transferred to  Christmas Island, but I understand there were infants involved, yes.

QUESTION: Roughly how many kids on the boat?

DAVID JOHNSTON: The initial number I've got is in the order of somewhere  up to potentially 19 of the 144, but that count is not at all clear yet.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: All of these circumstances are different. They depend upon  the information that we have to determine how quickly we can get there to  identify the vessel and, where necessary, rescue people from the sea. But in  all of these circumstances where people die, there is an internal review  conducted by Customs and Border Protection. I had that conversation last  night with the chief executive officer of Customs and Border Protection. That  review will occur, and the West Australian Coroner also has the option, if they  so desire, to conduct an independent review of this work, this search and  rescue, and so it's open to the Coroner to conduct that work as well.

QUESTION: Does Border Protection Command need more assets?



JASON CLARE: I act on advice from the operational experts, from the  Admiral, as well as from the men and women of Border Protection Command.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: Let me explain in broad terms those assets, something in the  order of 17, 18 vessels, be they Navy vessels or Customs vessels, as well as  something like 17 or 18 aircraft. They are AMSA aircraft as well as Customs  aircraft and Air Force aircraft. From time to time we will also lease commercial  aircraft to do that work, as well as satellite technology. So that's in broad terms  the kind of assets we bring to do this work, and it's hard work. It's very hard  work, and we have seen that hard work happen again over the last 24 hours.  Admiral?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Without question, our people are clearly working very  hard at the moment, and the operational tempo that we have experienced,  particularly over the last few weeks with some very significant arrivals, are  pushing people in order to make sure that we can continue to meet our  responsibilities. One of the tasks I have to continuously look at - where I need  to have ships and aircraft. That's a process that we do a few times every day.  So, we are continuously looking at the environment that we're dealing with and  adjusting where we position the capabilities that we need in order to meet our  role.

QUESTION: You have got 17 or 18 boats out there. As you say, it's a very  high operational [inaudible] getting two or three boats a day on some days is  not unusual. Do you need more boats?

DAVID JOHNSTON: If I need more vessels, than then I have the ability to  provide advice, particularly back through - I draw on both the Customs and  Defence capabilities and I can turn and ask that question.

QUESTION: Will you be asking that question?

DAVID JOHNSTON: We will keep it under review and if I need to do so, then I  will do so.

QUESTION: How sustainable is the current tempo [indistinct]?

DAVID JOHNSTON: The men and women, from their boats, are working very  hard. So we need to - the sustainable question is both about making sure  we've got the number of ships or aircraft to deal with it, but also that we are  looking after our people and making sure that as they're dealing with  circumstances as we have, involving fatalities - the conditions under which  they were performing rescues in the last 48 hours, they were very complex

conditions, they were working extremely hard. So I need to make sure that we  are looking after them as well and we have the measures in place to do so.

QUESTION: They must feel overwhelmed, [indistinct]?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Dealing with deaths is particularly difficult. It is difficult for  the circumstances that - physically difficult in terms of the environment in their  working, and emotionally very for all of us. It is a dreadful feeling in the  stomach when we hear that a vessel has capsized or that it's in some difficulty  and then we are responding to try to ensure we are bringing as many people  as we can to safety.

Recovering 144 people in the conditions that they did yesterday was  extraordinary work. It happened very quickly. There are measures that they  took in the combined - the co-operation between two ships and an aircraft  deploying life rafts, recovering people from the water, the way they sequenced  it to make sure they were recovering people, particularly out of the water, as  quickly as they could in rough weather conditions - my praise for them is  unlimited because of what they have achieved.

QUESTION: This policy has only seen arguing in Canberra [indistinct] …do  you feel let down in any way by the policy debate?

DAVID JOHNSTON: We have got a job to do and we do it to the best of our  abilities. The politics and the policies are not my issue. But my need is to  make sure I've got the people there and I'm helping our people do their job.

QUESTION: Minister, Deputy Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has confirmed  that the Government is working on changes to the asylum seeker policy.  When can we expect to have this policy revealed, will it be within the next  couple of days?

JASON CLARE:     I'm not going to pre-empt or foreshadow when those  policies will be announced. The Deputy Prime Minister this morning confirmed,  it's been confirmed in the past I think as well, that we are working on further  reforms in this area. That's the case, but I'm not going to announce today  when those reforms will be announced.

Just before we move on to the next question, I just wanted to reinforce the  point that the Admiral made. The question was asked about how difficult this is  for our men and women - it's a lot easier talking about it at a press conference  here in Sydney than it is being out there on the high seas when waves are  crashing against wooden boats that are lurching and then sinking in the  middle of the ocean. For a moment we've got to stop and think about the work  that those men and women are doing. They have plucked over 100 people out

of the water overnight, but they have also had to recover the bodies of people  that have died.

You have to think about the psychological impact that it has on our men and  women that do this work. They have done it before. They have had to do it  again overnight. When bodies are in the ocean for more than 24 hours, that  job gets much, much more difficult. And so an important part of the work that  we have to do after the rescue has been made, and after the bodies have  been recovered, is make sure that we've got the support services for our men  and women that have done this work. We always make sure that we have got  those services. It's a conversation that the Admiral and I have all the time, do  we have enough support for the men and women when they get back to  Christmas Island or when they get back to Darwin, to go through what they  have just experienced, and make sure that they are okay? Because this is  really, really hard work.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: Well, I won't get into the politics of this today. I don't think it's  appropriate for me to be talking politics on a day when four people have died.  This is a wretchedly difficult area and it's been poisoned by politics. We have  been fighting about this for more than ten years. And people of Australia are  sick and tired of politicians fighting about this. They don't want us screaming at  each other, they want us to work together. If we are going to fix this God-awful  problem, then we need to work together. That's the solution.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

JASON CLARE: I will make a general point, Paul. And that is that when you  have got a situation as serious as this where people are dying, the  Government of the day should be given the power it thinks it needs to stop  people dying at sea. That's a very simple principle. When people are dying,  the Government should be given the power that it thinks it needs to stop this  happening.

Now it's a sad fact that we have been denied that. We have been denied that  in the past by the Liberal Party and by the Greens. The principle which we  should all agree to, whether there is a Labor Government or a Liberal  Government or anything else, is that the Government of the day should be  given the power it needs to stop people dying at sea. If we can all agree to  that, then it will go a long way to stopping events like last night happening  again.

QUESTION: [Indistinct] …will they require co-operation of the Coalition?

JASON CLARE: Paul, you are asking me to now foreshadow work that the  Government is doing, I'm not going to do that. I've made the point that the  Government of the day should be given the power it thinks it needs to stop  people dying. If that happens, then we can stop a repeat of what happened  last night.

QUESTION: [Indistinct] …are we likely to see other measures in the area of  say regional co-operation?

JASON CLARE: I know you are digging away. Look, I would make this point,  Paul, and it's not a point that would surprise you. Two things are necessary if  you want to tackle this issue, this difficult issue. One is co-operation at home,  and the second is co-operation in our region. So we need all of the political  parties to work together on the principle that the Government be given the  power it thinks it needs to stop this happening. And we need to work together  as a region.

I’ve made the point before that after Saigon fell in 1975, that people fled in  boats to Malaysia, to the Philippines and to Thailand and it was the UN  working with those countries, and countries like Australia - Canada, France,  the US, that helped to tackle that issue then. Regional co-operation - working  together. To successfully tackle this issue, we need to work together at home,  stop the political fighting, and we need to work together with the countries of  our region.

QUESTION: [Indistinct] …what impact these new measures, whatever they  are, will have on boat trafficking?

JASON CLARE: I'm not going to go there. You are asking me to talk to you  about something which the Government hasn't announced yet. I just make the  general point, and the Prime Minister's made this, you need to continue to  adjust policies as circumstances change. We will continue to do that.

QUESTION: Just one more question on this point. This is your second of  these press conferences in a week. [Indistinct] …this is going to keep  happening until you guys toughen policy. I would suggest this is a major  priority. When are we likely to hear an announcement on these new border  security measures?

JASON CLARE: While ever people continue to get on to boats, boats that  aren't sea worthy, people will die. We have been seeing that. That's why it's so  important that all the political parties of Australia agree to the simple principle  that the Government should be given the power it thinks it needs to stop this  happening.

QUESTION: Was that boat unseaworthy, the boat [indistinct]?



JASON CLARE: In the chronology that I gave you, it indicated that when the  Albany was nearby, I think it was early on Tuesday night or early Tuesday  morning that indicated that the boat was sea worthy. When it did a closer  inspection it identified that one of the engines was working, one wasn't, but the  bilge pump was working. So in this circumstance the decision was made it  was safer to let the boat continue to motor on under escort.

But a lot of these boats are designed for inshore work. And when they hit the  high seas, when there's two metre waves, people die. That's why this issue is  so important. That's why it's important that we work together to solve it.

QUESTION: How many crew were on board? Have they been identified?

DAVID JOHNSTON: Three Indonesian crew.

QUESTION: Was the boat seen to be seaworthy.. with that many people on  board?

DAVID JOHNSTON: We don't know the answer to that question. Partly  because its configuration doesn't look like it's designed to carry people. It  carried cargo, but its capacity - the standards by which it would be built and  which we might judge it would be quite different.

QUESTION: It sounds like conditions out there are pretty rough at the  moment. [Indistinct] …other asylum boats in distress?

DAVID JOHNSTON: At the moment we continue to bring people in that we  have recovered from this incident yesterday, but we are not currently  attending or responding to any other particular vessels.

QUESTION: Were you approached to by the Prime Minister to be Immigration  Minister?

JASON CLARE: I think this might be the fifth time I've answered this question.  But I'll give you the same answer. I had a conversation with the Prime Minister  and I asked him to be Minister for Home Affairs, and Minister for Justice. The  reason for that - you remember, two weeks ago I announced far reaching  reforms to Customs and Border Protection to aggressively tackle and weed  out the corruption that has been identified in that organisation as well as  modernise it, make sure that it is ready to cope with the challenges of the next  two decades, big increases in cargo and big increases in passengers coming  through the airports.

I made the case to the Prime Minister I wanted to stay in that job to get that  job done. I had developed reforms over the last 18 months. Now the hard part

comes of implementing those reforms and I made that case to the Prime  Minister and am very grateful that he agreed. OK, thanks very much.

