

The Hon. Kevin Rudd MP

Transcript  Doorstop

Geelong

Friday,7 June 2013



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

KEVIN RUDD:  It’s great to be here in Geelong with these two great local members, these two  great Labor Members, Darren Cheeseman for Corangamite and, of course, Richard Marles for  Corio.  These guys have made a difference in this city.  And that’s what I’m here to do - to talk to  local people about the difference that they have made, backed by an Australian Labor  Government under Prime Minister Gillard.

What are the differences that have been made?  When you drive here, five years ago there was  no Geelong Bypass.  Five years later, there is.  Why?  These guys argued for a difference to be  made.  Five years ago, there was no regional Cancer Care Centre at Geelong Hospital.  Five years  later, there is a regional Cancer Care Centre.  Because these guys argued for a difference to be  made.  Five years ago there was no GP Superclinic at Belmont.  Five years later, there is one.  Because these guys have argued for a difference.

The same goes for libraries in so many of our local schools here, new multi-purpose facilities.  I’ve just visited one at the Geelong Christian College, which is a fantastic facility servicing  thousands of local kids, and also to see the investment we have made for local community  organisations, including [inaudible] out at the northern community hub.

My overall message is this: these local members, here in Geelong, have made a difference for  their communities.  If you roll the clock back five years and ask, “Were any of these things  here?”  They weren’t.  Five years later, they’ve helped change the community.

Anyone here a Geelong Cats supporter?  Anyone go to the first game the other day under the  lights?  Do you know why those lights were there?  Because these guys made a difference.   These things just don’t happen by magic, it’s because local representatives argue the case.  So  whether it’s in roads, whether it’s in schools, whether it’s in TAFE training centres, whether it’s

in university places - thousands of new university places are now being offered in Deakin  University - and on top of that, basic stuff like the lights down at the football oval here.

This all makes a difference because these guys have made a difference on the basis of the  strength of the Australian economy which has been underpinned by an Australian Labor  Government which decided to make a difference during the Global Financial Crisis.

So, therefore, my overall case is this: these individual Members deserve to be returned, and  they have a record of achievement which says that they are worthy of the people’s trust and  respect.  And on top of that, for the future, laying out high speed broadband is going to be  critical for this region’s future.  With these guys, by the time we get to an election in 2016,  you’re going to have broadband right across the Geelong region.  Under the other mob, you  won’t.

And I’ll finish on this.  That’s our record of achievement.  We have a plan for this region’s future.   The alternative is Mr Abbott who says he’s already got this election in the bag, who says he’s  already written the victory speech.  And his federal director said only two days ago in Canberra  that they have won this election already.  That’s arrogance, that’s absolute arrogance by Mr  Abbott.

We’re going to fight this election from this day through to Election Day because we believe in a  contest.  We believe our Members have a strong record.  We believe the Government under the  Prime Minister has a strong record.  And I’m here to lend a hand.

Over to you, folks.

QUESTION: These two men behind you are supporters of yours.  Are you here as a bit of a  favour to them?

KEVIN RUDD: I have been around the country campaigning for Members of the Government,  whether they have been supporters of mine in the past or whether they haven’t.  And if you  want to see an example of that, I’ve recently been in northern Tasmania, in the Federal Division  of Braddon and the Federal Division of Bass, campaigning for three days with those local  members.  And that, I think, is evidence of the point that I will campaign for anyone arguing the  Labor case across the nation, including these two guys.

QUESTION:  Are there any circumstances under which you would return to leading the Labor  Party?

KEVIN RUDD:  As I’ve said already on radio here this morning, what I said in March this year, and  what I said last night on ABC national television, referring to my comments in February last year,  I haven’t changed my position one bit.  So that is the case as of today.



QUESTION:  Bill Shorten has conceded today that Labor will lose in a landslide.  What do you  think of that defeatist kind of attitude?

KEVIN RUDD:  I have not seen Mr Shorten’s comments, so I won’t be commenting on them.

QUESTION:  Mr Rudd, when you say you haven’t changed your position, those of us who know it  realise that means when the Party gets really desperate and comes to you saying “We are going  to get wiped out, you are the only hope who’ll save us.”

KEVIN RUDD:  What I’m going to say to you, Mark Riley, is that I have said very plainly that I am  not a candidate for the leadership.  And I have said, equally plainly, that I don’t see any  circumstances under which I would return to the leadership.  My job is to argue the case for  Labor at a local level uphill, downhill, every state of Australia, Victoria, New South Wales,  Queensland, Tassie, you name it, I’ll be there, in order to get these guys across the line.  These  are good local men.  They have done good things for this community.  And, therefore, my job is  to support them all the way.

QUESTION:  In the last 24 hours you’ve been very pointed talking about Liberal lies, Mr Abbott’s  lies, talking about not running up the white flag as if Labor has given up the ghost, working on  alibis [inaudible].

KEVIN RUDD:  My bottom line is this.  Abbott arrogantly believes he has won this election  already.  He’s said that.  Secondly, I’m not in the business with my friends in the Labor Party of  hauling up the white flag.  We’re going to fight this fight through until Election Day, because we  have got a strong case to argue, and these members, and the Government, deserve to be  returned.

QUESTION:  But the Victorian Greens Senator Di Natale says that Labor has essentially given up,  it doesn’t stand for anything anymore.

KEVIN RUDD:  I seem to remember the Greens siding with the Conservatives in voting down the  Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme in the previous Parliament.  I don’t think the Greens speak  with any credibility on these matters.

QUESTION:  Can we hear from Mr Cheeseman in the most marginal seat in Australia.  Can you  give us a view of the battles you see - will you hold your seat being a Labor Member in the  current political circumstances?

DARREN CHEESEMAN:  Well, people said very clearly in 2007 that, “Darren Cheeseman, you  don’t have a chance of winning Corangamite.”  People said that again in 2010 that, “Darren  Cheeseman, you don’t have a chance of winning Corangamite.”  I got out there, I worked hard, I

door-knocked, I street-stalled, I engaged with the voters, I told the story of what Labor would  mean for that community, and we won.  People are saying the same thing again, and I’m going  to prove them wrong.

QUESTION: Darren Cheeseman also said in February last year that Julia Gillard should stand  down for the Labor Party.  What does he say today?

DARREN CHEESEMAN: Of course, the Party made its decision in February last year.  The Prime  Minister will lead us to the next election.  I look forward to campaigning with her.  I campaigned  with her last weekend.  I look forward to campaigning with all of my Labor colleagues including,  of course, Kevin, who’s down here today to here to lend a hand, to make sure that we, as Labor  MPs here in Geelong, can get our message out there, and that we can go on to win our seats.

KEVIN RUDD: Can I, in fairness and balance, turn to the member for Corio for a word or two? Off  you go, mate.

RICHARD MARLES:  Can I just say it is fantastic to have Kevin down here.  It is so important that  Labor wins this next election.  Where you are now, in Corio Village, is in the heart of a suburb  which is bearing the brunt of decisions like that which was made by Ford two weeks ago.  If you  look at what Tony Abbott would represent as a Government, he’s talking about cutting half a  billion dollars out of the car industry, that will kill it.  You kill the car industry, Australian  manufacturing is down for the count.  And so, this community, this city, needs Labor to be re-elected.

We had the Prime Minister down here on the weekend, which was fantastic.  We were able to  announce on Monday that the headquarters of DisabilityCare Australia will be here in Geelong.   That is fantastic.  And we’re really glad that we’ve got Kevin here today, to tell this message  again, so that people are utterly clear about what an Abbott Government would represent and  why there is so much at stake at this election, and why we need to win.

QUESTION:  Mr Rudd, earlier at the community centre in front of those people, refugees,  migrants mostly, you said that a decent Australia [inaudible]…  In the current debate about  asylum seekers, that language is not being used by either leader.  It’s a pretty aggressive debate  [inaudible]…

KEVIN RUDD:  I believe that Australia has always been decent in opening up its arms to people  from around the world, whether they come here as migrants or whether they come here as  refugees.  And the reason we have done that is to build our nation.  The reason we have done  that, also, is because we learned from the Holocaust in the Second World War that you don’t  say no to people who are fleeing persecution.  I believe that is also the position of our  government now under the Prime Minister’s leadership.

My overall message, though, is pretty basic. Australia is a decent country.  We are populated by  a decent people, who simply want to get on with the business of earning an income, making  sure they can educate their kids properly, providing for their retirement, and making sure their  communities grow.  We, as an Australian Labor Government, we’re in the business of building  things up, step-by-step.  What the other mob are committed to, regrettably, is to tear things  down.  And we just see too much evidence of that.

These guys here have a proud record of achievement.  There are two types of politicians in  Australia: those who talk big and deliver little; and those who do what they say.  The thing about  Darren Cheeseman and Richard Marles is that they have done what they’ve said they would do  in this community.  And it’s a great record of achievement.  As for Darren, they’ve carved his  name on a tombstone so many times that, frankly, they should put the tombstone in a  museum.  This bloke is a fighter from central casting and he’ll get over the line this time as well.

ENDS

Mr Rudd’s Office: Patrick Gorman - 0457 791 556

