



CHRIS BOWEN MP

MINISTER FOR TERTIARY EDUCATION, SKILLS,   SCIENCE AND RESEARCH  MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS

*TRANSCRIPT*

INTERVIEW WITH PETER VAN ONSELEN AND PAUL KELLY  SKY NEWS AUSTRALIAN AGENDA

SUNDAY, 3 MARCH 2013



SUBJECTS: Coalition demonising asylum seekers, 457 visas, higher education,  university funding, international education, Western Sydney, the Labor Party.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: As promised, we're joined now by Chris Bowen. Welcome to the  program.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning Peter, good morning Paul.

VAN ONSELEN: I wonder - I want to ask you about policy first up, but start with your  former portfolio of immigration, and what do you think of the remarks in a policy sense by  Scott Morrison? Some people on your side have been accused of verballing him in relation to  his remarks, but equally he did make comments that were fairly clear. What's your view?

BOWEN: Well it's what we've come to expect from Scott Morrison. He'll always go for the  cheap, and frankly, pretty grubby line when it comes to this sort of policy. The only  explanation of what the Liberal Party has said is that asylum seekers are more likely to be  criminals than other people in the community. That's just not right.

You can have a strong border protection policy, which I believe in strongly, but you should  never demonise one particular group, and I think that's what the Liberal Party is - has been  doing, and is doing on this particular issue. It's a very serious charge against one individual,  which should be dealt with through the law and the courts, but to try and make a broader  point about asylum seekers generally, I thought was very unfortunate.

I thought the Liberal Party got themselves in all sorts of bother trying to justify it. You see  Eric Abetz out there saying, 'Oh we should know where they are because they don't speak  English'. I mean, they've just got themselves in all sorts of bother, and they are really, really

going to the pretty base political tactic of demonising asylum seekers, which I don't think  has any place in the Australian political discourse.

PAUL KELLY: So is this the sort of process that we'll see during the course of this election  year? I mean, how concerned are you that we'll see this sort of politics being played?

BOWEN: Well let's hope not Paul, but we'll really have to see how the Liberal Party plays  this. As I say, I'm up for a debate, and I know Brendan O'Connor would be up for a debate  about border protection policies and about how the Liberal Party is engaging in what I see  as a two-card trick of trying to block the Government implementing its policies - most  particularly the Malaysia agreement - which every expert says is what would actually work,  and you'd see the Liberal Party come to office and really only have temporary protection  visas and turning back the boats, which will never work for all the reasons we've discussed.

So their tactic is to try and block the Government from implementing its policies and then  the second part of the two-card trick is to demonise asylum seekers and try and talk this up  as an issue. Let's hope that they don't do that, but their form is that they'll continue to do it.

KELLY: Well what about 457 visas? The government's announced a crackdown on this.  Were you heading in this direction yourself as minister?

BOWEN: Yeah, Brendan O'Connor said so when he announced this policy. He indicated that  this was something the Government had been working on for some time, which we have  been. This is about frankly a small number of rorts, a small number of employers who rort  the system of 457 visas and the Government's concerned, I was concerned, and Brendan  O'Connor was concerned when he took over the portfolio, to ensure that we had the suite of  measures available to crackdown on those rorts - 457s are very important for our economy.

It's very important that employers have access to them when there's genuine skills  shortages, but you do need to have measures in place to ensure that they are for genuine  skills shortages. We had begun the process - I'd begun the process of consulting with the  ministerial advisory council on skilled migration, which I'd established. We were working  through those measures when Brendan took over the portfolio. He inherited that work and  he's implementing it.

VAN ONSELEN: Minister, one of your new portfolio responsibilities is higher education.  There's a story on the front page of the Sun Herald newspaper today about the O'Farrell  Government in New South Wales looking to raise minimum standards for teachers by putting  a forced proposition there that, if you want to become a school teacher, you need to have a  certain minimum grade from your HSC; and if you don't, you'll be locked out of being able to  become a classroom teacher. What do you make of that?

BOWEN: Well look, the quality of teacher education is very, very important. It's a vital  policy area for all levels of government - for universities and for schools - and there has  been good work done on it, but this proposal by Mr O'Farrell is a very blunt instrument  which I wouldn't support.

What's important is the quality of the teachers coming out of the education system, out of  university. Universities should be able to work out the types of skills and attributes that they  want in their students. It's partly about ATARs; it's partly about passion and commitment  and a belief in education, and extracurricular activities, all sorts of things that universities  should be able to take into account. It's a very blunt instrument. Many people now go into

teaching not straight from school, without an ATAR, so I'm disappointed in this approach  from the New South Wales Government.

VAN ONSELEN: But it's hard to argue, isn't it, with a system that puts a base there, when  we all agree that there is a bit of a problem?

BOWEN: Well there is a base, and it's determined university by university, in terms of their  cut-offs for their own courses.

VAN ONSELEN: But the argument is it's too low at the moment.

BOWEN: Well I don't think Adrian Piccoli or me should be sitting in our offices in our  respective Parliament Houses telling universities where their cut-off should be. I think  universities should be trusted to do that. I think we should be working with universities to  improve the quality of teacher education. We've been doing that and we'll continue to do it.

I know the Prime Minister's very passionate and committed to it. Peter Garrett as Minister  for School Education is, myself as Minister for Tertiary Education is, and we've been working  away on it. But this is a, as I say, a poor approach I think from the New South Wales  Government.

We're happy to work with them, but dropping a story in the Sunday Telegraph, or the Sun  Herald - apologies - in terms of consultation is not the way to do it. You work together on  these things, and I think this has all the hallmarks of a bit of a stunt frankly, when this is  actually a serious policy area to be approached collaboratively.

KELLY: As minister, what's your response to the Universities Australia submission released  last week when it comes to funding vocational education - they want an extra 2.5 per cent a  year on the indexation formula. What's your answer to that?

BOWEN: Well Paul, this is Universities Australia's submission to the Federal Budget, and the  Federal Budget's handed down in May. That's when our response will be very clear, but let  me say this - as I said during the week at the Universities Australia conference - there's an  area of stark difference here.

I mean, we as a Government have increased funding per university student by 10 per cent  compared to what it would have been without the reforms we've introduced. There is now  200,000 Australians - more Australians getting access to university education because of our  reforms between 2007 and 2013 - 200,000.

So this has been an area of real reform and it's a stark difference. You've got the Liberal  approach during the Howard years of actually cutting university funding, not slowing the  growth but actually cutting funding to universities - alone amongst the OECD in doing that -  a really retrograde step. And in the absence of clear commitments from Tony Abbott not to  do that, I think the university sector is entitled to be very worried about the Liberal  approach.

KELLY: Are you calling - well, are you calling on Tony Abbott to give the university sector  an assurance it won't be cut?

BOWEN: Yes, and I've already done so, and I'll continue to do so, because the track record  is clear. Tony Abbott often refers to the Howard Government and says, 'Look we've done it

before, we can do it again'. Well he's right about university funding. Yes, they've cut  university funding before and they could do it again, and the best Tony Abbott could say to  the universities conference was: 'Well, the best you can hope for is for us not to cut you'.

He didn't even give a commitment not to cut funding, and he said that's the best they could  possibly hope for. I think that's a pretty poor message for Australia's university sector. Not  just for the vice chancellors and professors and lecturers, but for the students, for the  families of students and for those who are aspiring to go to university - for those in high  school wanting to better themselves and dreaming of a university education. I think that's a  very worrying message from Tony Abbott.

KELLY: Well just on a related issue, we had the Chaney report this week wanting a very  significant expansion in the number of foreign tertiary students in this country, an increase  of about 30 per cent over the next decade or so. What's your response to that? Is that  feasible?

BOWEN: Well look, I think that was a projection from the Chaney report, and it's a good  report. I've released it, and I've welcomed it. We'll respond in full detail when we've been  through all our government processes of course, but I wanted to put it out for public  discussion because it's a good and important report.

International education has been one of the areas again where we've introduced substantial  reforms. Chris Evans, when he held my portfolio - and myself, when I was Immigration  Minister - commissioned Michael Knight, the former Olympics minister, to review student  visa settings. It was a good report, which we've implemented in full, a couple of very strong  recommendations - two big recommendations: post-study work rights and streamlining,  which we've introduced and are having an impact, particularly in the university sector.

Strong international education is important for our economy, but I think even more  importantly than that, it's important for our long-term geopolitical strategic interests. We  want to be educating future leaders of our Asia-Pacific region here in Australia, and we also  want young Australians studying in Asia, which we will achieve through our AsiaBound  program, which we've recently announced.

So international education is very important for a range of reasons and we're very  committed to promoting it, working with the university, VET and higher education sectors to  do so.

VAN ONSELEN: Paul Kelly was positive about the Prime Minister's plan to go to Western  Sydney, but in being so was - I hope I'm not verballing you on this - was pointing out  though, equally, that in a sense the way that it's all been made public has been botched.  Now the fact that that's been botched has really damaged the whole point of her having this  five-day trip to Western Sydney, hasn't it?

BOWEN: Look, I agree with Paul to this degree - that I think a lot of the commentary has  been over the top over the last week. The Prime Minister's been a regular visitor to Western  Sydney, of course she has. The entire ministry is regularly through Western Sydney, as we  should be - it's a large and important region, important for our economy, more than a  million people live in Western Sydney. I happen to be one of them.

The Prime Minister's a regular visitor. She'd be criticised if she didn't come to Western  Sydney. There's some criticism for her coming to Western Sydney.



VAN ONSELEN: But be that as it may, the problem - and we just put a cartoon up a  moment ago - the problem is that it's now being portrayed as her visiting voters in their  natural habitat. She's being viewed as an outsider coming there, because of the way that  this story broke.

BOWEN: Well I just reject that completely. As I say, she's a regular visitor. She's from the  western suburbs of Melbourne, which has its similarities with the western suburbs of  Sydney. In my discussions with her she's certainly understood the importance of the issues  in Western Sydney. She gets those issues, as a regular visitor. We talk about Western  Sydney regularly. I, as I say, I live in Western Sydney. I'm a cabinet minister from Western  Sydney, and those issues are very important to the Government.

And I think, you know, some people would criticise the Prime Minister if she came to  Western Sydney, criticise her if she didn't come to Western Sydney, criticise her if she  stayed at Kirribilli House, criticise her if she didn't stay at Kirribilli House.

Sometimes, you know, that's just the nature of political debate in Australia. I understand  that. It's ever thus, will ever be thus; but you've got to call it as it is and say a visit of this  nature by the Prime Minister to Western Sydney is perfectly appropriate and welcome.

KELLY: But we've got these polls which show the situation in Western Sydney for Labor is  pretty dire. I mean very, very dire. Is it that bad? What's your assessment? Because you're  slap bang in the middle of it…

BOWEN: Well let's say this, Paul, there'll be plenty of polls between now and election day  about Western Sydney and elsewhere, but let's look at the issues. Firstly, you've got a group  of Western Sydney MPs, of which I'm one, who grew up in Western Sydney, still live in  Western Sydney, most of us raising our families in Western Sydney. I mean, this isn't some  political flavour of the month; this is our driving political passion - representing the people  we grew up with, representing our families, the families that we all go to school, take our  children to school with, etcetera.

Representing those families is very, very important to me, to Jason Clare, to Ed Husic, to  Michelle Rowland, to David Bradbury, to Laurie Ferguson, to Julie Owens, to the whole  group of Western Sydney MPs, and we're going to fight very hard. But what's …

KELLY: But what's gone wrong with Labor in Western Sydney, then? I mean, the poll  results are just appalling. What's gone wrong?

BOWEN: Well we're going to fight very hard on the issues, on the issues that count to  Western Sydney. Now what the difference between a Labor government's approach to  Western Sydney and a Liberal government's approach is not a hypothetical question, Paul;  there's a clear model here.

We, in Government, are delivering the National Broadband Network to Western Sydney:  48,000 homes have been connected, including in my electorate - very important for small  businesses, for kids studying. The Liberal Party just doesn't get that, and they'll cut it.

You've seen the approach of the O'Farrell Government in New South Wales. Many people  voted Liberal for the first time in the last state election and elected Liberal state MPs. What  have we got in return: $1.8 billion cuts to education, including to TAFE, which is very

important in Western Sydney; our Catholic system - schools really suffering, in crisis  because of those cuts; health cuts; taking radioactive waste from the Liberal heartland of  the North Shore and dumping it in Western Sydney at Lidcombe and Kemps Creek - treating  Western Sydney like a dumping ground.

This is the Liberal approach to Western Sydney. Contrast that with the Labor approach,  which has strong representation at the federal level from Labor at Western Sydney, a whole  bunch of dedicated talented Members of Parliament who are very committed to the issues,  as opposed to the Liberal Party sort of running this Western Sydney campaign from  Warringa and North Sydney, saying, 'This is our new heartland'. Well we're more than happy  to have Western Sydney as a battleground because we have a very good story to tell.

VAN ONSELEN: The Prime Minister says that she's going to set up a taskforce to deal with  gangs and crime in Western Sydney. I mean this is the Federal Government sort of moving  into state areas of responsibility, isn't it?

BOWEN: Well we want to work cooperatively. This is a big issue for western Sydney and  there has been a gun crime problem for Western Sydney, particularly in my own electorate  and Blaxland and elsewhere.

VAN ONSELEN: The O'Farrell Government says that most of that is to do with weak  Customs rules.

BOWEN: Yeah, well I would hope that Barry O'Farrell would stop trying to shift the blame  and actually work cooperatively with Julia Gillard and the Federal Government on this. I  mean, the figures I've seen show that most of the gun crime is conducted with, not  weapons that are brought in from overseas, but weapons that are stolen here in Australia.  So I'm a bit sort of over the blame game of, every time Barry O'Farrell's asked about this,  saying: 'Oh, this is all the Federal Government's fault; nothing I can do about this'.

Well he's the Premier. We do have a big problem in Western Sydney with this issue. I think  these announcements today from the Prime Minister and Jason Clare show that we're more  than prepared to get involved and to do things. There are federal responsibilities; there are  state responsibilities. Let's work cooperatively.

I don't - I think people of Western Sydney are over this blame game, over Barry O'Farrell  coming out and saying: 'This is all the Federal Government's problem'. They want us to work  together on it. They're sick of the shootings, and they want all levels of government -  federal, state and local; and local government has a role to play here as well. I know many  mayors are very concerned about this - they want us working together on it. This is what  we're saying today.

KELLY: How much of the problem that you face in Western Sydney is not so much federal  issues, but the Labor brand arising from the long period of state Labor government, which  ended in such a disastrous fashion with the suggestion of ineptitude and corruption?

BOWEN: Well let me say a couple of things about that, Paul. Firstly, I think people in  Western Sydney aren't alone. People in New South Wales have been disgusted by what  they've seen through the ICAC hearings. Let's go straight to the nub of the question - we're  disgusted, I'm disgusted by what I've seen in those hearings. I mean, it's a terrible, terrible  thing to be watching playing out, and yes, people are right to be angry and disgusted about  that.



I think John Robertson's taken a very strong approach on that going forward, but the State  Government, of course the State Government had its issues. I think you've got to look at the  State Government over a long period of time and say: the entire period of State Government  by the Labor Party did deliver to Western Sydney, you know.

Whether it's the M5 East, which, you know, opened up access to the city in a better way;  whether it's the transit ways; whether it was the investment in health, and all the hospitals  that the Carr Government in particular rebuilt, there was a real commitment to Western  Sydney from that government; but yes, of course, the people of Western Sydney were  disappointed towards the end of that government and made their views known at the last  state election in a very emphatic way - and that's appropriate - but what we've seen since  is the Liberal Government, as I say, recognise that by cutting health funding, cutting  education funding, dumping radioactive waste …

KELLY: Well back to Labor, I mean what's your view about the critique offered by people  such as Paul Keating and Mark Latham that Labor is not sufficiently attuned to aspirational  sentiment, that it's too tied in to old-fashioned trade unionism?

BOWEN: Well I say to that: 'Look at our policies'. Small business and aspiration is very  important. We have a Small Business Minister; we've got a strong small business policy. We  actually are introducing in effect small business tax cuts through our instant asset write-off  and our loss carry-back, which Tony Abbott would abolish.

So we have a pro small-business policy which goes to the heart of aspiration. Likewise,  coming back to universities - universities are the ultimate aspirational tool and we've  opened up university places to so many more people in Western Sydney more than  anywhere else we've seen the biggest increase in uptake of university places, so I agree  that the ethos of aspiration is very important, and I actually think that is supported by the  policy approaches that we've taken and we need to communicate that as well.

KELLY: Well what about Julia Gillard's line the other day. I'd like to ask you, do you agree  with what she said - that is, that you define Labor not as a progressive party, not as a social  democratic party, but as a labour party, that is as a trade union party, that's how you define  it - is that your view?

BOWEN: Well our historical links to the trade union movement are there for all to see, Paul.

KELLY: I know that. I know that, but is that your view now?

BOWEN: Well everybody will explain those links in their own ways. The Prime Minister was  making the point that we are a labour party with trade union links - yes, we are - but that's  not to say, of course, that we don't see our great role in life as promoting growth -  economic growth - to lift people out of poverty and to let that aspiration become a reality.

Aspiration is important, but more important is the reality which government policies can  open up by promoting economic growth and at the same time promoting opportunity  through education to make the most of that economic growth, which was opened up by  those Hawke-Keating reforms, which are so important in opening up our economy and  promoting economic growth and which have been responsible for Australia having the world  record of the longest continuing economic growth over the last 29 years.

VAN ONSELEN: But let's call a spade a spade here. The Prime Minister saying what she  said at the AWU conference was her playing to her ever-dwindling base within the party in  the face of leadership speculation. Now you're very close to Kevin Rudd, everybody talks  about you being a Kevin Rudd supporter. She was fronting the AWU; everyone knows that  they have got her back, as Paul Howes said - she was playing to an internal audience,  wasn't she, when she said that?

BOWEN: Oh look, you know, you can make that suggestion, Peter. I think the Prime  Minister was making a speech at an AWU conference just as she makes a speech you know  daily, at conferences around the country, at all sorts of institutions and organisations. That's  her role as Prime Minister, so she should, and yeah, you can read all you like into it. She  was making a speech at a conference, just as she does every day around the country.

VAN ONSELEN: Is Kevin Rudd coming back?

BOWEN: Kevin Rudd made his views very clear I think, sitting in this chair about a fortnight  ago, I don't …

VAN ONSELEN: Well he said that the speculation should be cryogenically frozen. My  understanding of cryogenic freezing is that you do that so you can come back.

BOWEN: I'm not sure what more Kevin Rudd could say. He's made his position very clear  that this issue was resolved last February, a year ago, almost exactly, and that as far as he's  concerned that is the end of the issue and that he supports the Prime Minister going forward  to the election. I'm not sure what more you expect him to say. He said it in his own words  here in this studio, sitting in this chair.

VAN ONSELEN: Okay, Chris Bowen, we appreciate you joining us on Australian Agenda,  thanks for your company.

BOWEN: My pleasure, thank you.

ENDS

