Not in my Name, Not with my Vote’; Australians ready  for change

The Australian Greens have launched the ‘Not in my Name, Not with my Vote’ campaign today,  giving people across the country a chance to stand up and say their vote won’t support the old  parties’ race to bottom on refugee cruelty.

“This campaign is about giving Australians a platform to tell Tony Abbott and Kevin Rudd that  cruel deterrence doesn’t work and they won’t stand for it,” Australian Greens Leader Senator  Christine Milne said.

“We are asking Australians to support the Greens compassionate plan for refugees including  increasing the humanitarian intake to stop people getting on boats.

“Punishing refugees won’t stop them taking a dangerous sea journey when they are fleeing war  and persecution. Punishment and cruelty has never worked and it never will.

“Australia is famous for ‘a fair go’. But the way Tony Abbott and Kevin Rudd are dumping  desperate people on our poorest neighbours is the furthest thing from that.

“Refugees contribute enormously to the cultural wealth and fabric of Australian society and they  should be celebrated, not imprisoned,” said Senator Milne.

The campaign is being supported by high profile Australians, including human rights lawyer  Julian Burnside QC and broadcaster Phillip Adams.

“So many Australians feel let down by the old parties and their desperate race to the bottom on  refugee cruelty,” the Greens’ immigration spokesperson, Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.

“The Greens are offering a better way. We want to see refugees given a safer pathway to  protection in Australia.

“The UN’s capacity to process refugee claims in Indonesia must be improved and that needs to  be backed up by an increase in Australia’s humanitarian intake.

“Dumping thousands of refugees, including families and unaccompanied children in island  prisons and tent-city slums is not what Australia’s commitment to a fair-go is all about.

“Children who have fled war after witnessing brutality deserve our care and protection,  regardless of where they have come from or the way in which they fled.

“There are thousands of disappointed people around the country who are planning on sending a  very clear message to the old parties when they go to the polls on the 7th of September.”



Media Contacts:               Senator Christine Milne                                Peter Stahel 0437 587 562

Senator Sarah Hanson-Young     Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760





