

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Channel 10 Meet the Press

10 March 2013

Subjects: WA election result, 457 visas, Schapelle Corby release, Ben Zygier case, North  Korea nuclear testing response

E&OE…

JOURNALIST I'm joined today in the studio by Malcolm Farr and Hugh Riminton. Good  morning to you both. And a very warm welcome as well to Deputy Opposition Leader Julie  Bishop.

Good morning to you Julie. Have you had some sleep overnight?

JULIE BISHOP No, not a great deal but I'm delighted to be with you this morning.

JOURNALIST Thank you very much for joining us. Let's look at the result for Colin Barnett,  being reinstated as Premier in WA. This obviously has federal implications. Which Federal  Labor MPs do you think should be nervous today?

JULIE BISHOP It was an emphatic result for Colin Barnett and his team. He has governed  well, he has gained the trust and confidence of the Western Australian people and it was a  strong win from a determined and decisive government.

In terms of the federal implications, yes there is no doubt this state election has reflected  people's views of the Federal Government and the Federal Government's policies - the carbon  tax, the mining tax, border protection issues, the 457 visa issue came into play.

In terms of the seats Labor should be concerned about - they only hold three seats at a federal  level and for example, Defence Minister Stephen Smith's federal seat of Perth has within it  the state seat of Perth. The Liberals won Perth in a decisive victory. I believe that should have  significant implications at a federal level for Stephen Smith's seat.

JOURNALIST There were some interesting preference flows as well?

JULIE BISHOP That's true. There were some interesting flows, in some seats the Greens  preferenced the Liberals in other seats Labor preferenced the Liberals over the Greens, the  Nats, it was quite a mix.

But at the end of the day it's been an outstanding win by Colin Barnett and his team. The  Liberals have gone from a minority government to possibly being able to govern in our own  right. However, Colin Barnett has made it quite clear he will continue the partnership with

the National Party, who did very well in this election as well. The Nationals picked up the  seat of Pilbara, for example and Brendan Grylls is now the new member for the Pilbara.

JOURNALIST Julie Bishop, you say the 457s argument which has been so much in the  spotlight with the Prime Minister saying she’s putting Aussie jobs first, that that had some  role in the way people decided. Can you quantify that? What was the reaction do you think  among voters there and how do you think that might play federally once people get to cast a  vote?

JULIE BISHOP Well let me put it in this context, Julia Gillard was asked not to come to  Western Australia on behalf of the Labor Party. They couldn't have distanced themselves  more from Julia Gillard. The only federal senior minister that turned up was Bill Shorten, and  it was rather a bizarre foray. He came over and embraced the most militant union in  Australia, the Maritime Union of Australia, and that was a strange way of sending a message  to the people of Western Australia, as if they needed reminding, that Labor is the party of the  unions.

Mixed into that was the attack by the Prime Minister on 457 visa holders. In Western  Australia, it's necessary for us to have overseas skilled workers in our work force because  they are an important part, for example, of the construction phase of some major projects. If  the construction phase can be completed, then there are many, many more jobs for  Australians. So it was strange, weird for the Prime Minister to attack foreign workers and by  implication, migrant communities during the West Australian election, when 457 visas are an  integral part of our economy.

JOURNALIST Some people have made the argument that the knocking of the 457 visa  holders by the Prime Minister damages our standing in Asia - is that your view? Can you  quantify it if it is?

JULIE BISHOP Yes I am concerned by that. There is no reason for Julia Gillard to have  launched this attack on overseas workers. The system is not being rorted. Labor claimed it  was but now they're having to manufacture the evidence to back that up. So I'm worried Julia  Gillard is targeting these workers - skilled workers from overseas - who come here, pay their  taxes and contribute to our economy as a smokescreen because of her failings on the border  protection front.

And particularly when asylum seekers who haven't had all their security and identity checks  done are being released into the community because the detention network is overwhelmed  and they're going on welfare. That is a very strange result for a Prime Minister, and I think it  is feeding into perceptions in the region, particularly when Pauline Hanson embraced Julia  Gillard's policies. That sends a very negative message throughout our region.

JOURNALIST Would you consider it a shameful thing to have a policy of yours ever  endorsed by Pauline Hanson?

JULIE BISHOP I would have thought that's a question you should put to the Labor Party….

JOURNALIST I'm putting it to you.

JULIE BISHOP Would you ever consider it to be a shameful thing to have a policy of your  party endorsed by Pauline Hanson?

JULIE BISHOP I think attacking foreign workers is a shameful policy.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop, the Premier has been returned with a huge amount of authority  and a mandate to get a revision of West Australia's GST returns. Aren't you, should the  Coalition be elected to government, aren’t you bound to acknowledge, do more than  acknowledge, to actually act on Premier Barnett's demands?

JULIE BISHOP First of all, there is a review under way, the Greiner Review and when the  Government gives its response, we'll give our response. We've undertaken to look at this  matter, should we get into government, at the next federal election.

I think the clear path ahead is to ensure that states that are not performing well are given  opportunities to do so. So states that have Labor-Greens alliances for example should be  looking at growing their economies and not looking for even greater handouts from the  Federal Government through the GST system. That’s going to be the answer to it.

JOURNALIST It's a matter of equity now for the West Australians. You know that better  than anybody on this show. Will you do something to rebalance those payouts to restore some  equity?

JULIE BISHOP We recognise Colin Barnett's argument on this point. We've said that. Tony  Abbott has said he will work with Colin Barnett on this matter and we'll look at it should we  get into government.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop, if we could move along now to speak about the story today in the  papers about Schapelle Corby and the possibility of her early release with the government  agreeing they'll essentially vouch for her if she is paroled in Indonesia. What's your response  to this?

JULIE BISHOP It is appropriate the government should pursue all avenues on behalf of  Schapelle Corby, avenues that might be available in the Indonesian legal system. It's not clear  to me how the government can guarantee an individual's behaviour when they're overseas.  Perhaps the government can clarify that. I don't understand the nature of the guarantee. That's  not been made clear, but it is appropriate that the government seek to pursue an opportunity  for Schapelle Corby to secure parole. She has been in jail for over 8.5 years.

JOURNALIST This idea of governments being responsible for Australians abroad, does that  idea sit well with you and your party? Because should you become into power in September,  it's something you might have to look at.

JULIE BISHOP Of course, Australia has an obligation to look out for its citizens when  they're overseas but there are limits to that. Of course if people get into difficulty within  another country's legal system, you must abide by that legal system. We have an extensive  consular network and that should be made available to people who seek it, in so far as we're  able to do so.

We can't meet everybody's concerns but at any one time there are possibly up to 1000  Australians who may be in detention or in jail somewhere in the world. Our diplomatic  network does try to extend consular services to them.

JOURNALIST We need to take a break right now. Please do stay with us. We'll hear more  from Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop in just a moment on Meet the Press.

Remember you can join the conversation at any time via Facebook or Twitter. Back now to  our guest, Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop.

Ms Bishop, before the break we were speaking about Government's responsibilities to  Australians abroad. If we can now talk about the Ben Zygier case - what lessons, if any, have  you learnt from the government's handling of that?

JULIE BISHOP Well, it would be helpful if Stephen Smith, the then Foreign Minister, would  give a full explanation as to what went on. Clearly, there was a significant breakdown of  communication within his office. I find it very difficult to believe that no-one in his office,  particularly after receiving written ministerial briefs, brought to his attention the fact there  was an Australian citizen in jail in Israel, involving national security and seek and secret  intelligence matters.

I find it extraordinary that no consular follow-up was made at all. No attempt to inform the  Australian Ambassador in Israel, no attempt to contact his family in Australia, and no attempt  to follow-up the Israeli Government to determine that he was receiving access to lawyers and  family visits. In retrospect, we learn that he did have access to his family but the government  didn't know that at the time.

JOURNALIST Ms Bishop, back during the Australian Wheat Board scandal, this was a  scandal involving some $300m worth of alleged bribes, the then Foreign Minister Alexander  Downer was able to establish he had not seen diplomatic cables about this incident going  through his office. Isn't it even more likely that someone wouldn't have seen any cables on  Mr Zygier going through Mr Smith’s office?

JULIE BISHOP Quite the contrary, and Alexander Downer answered numerous questions  about this matter. It was the subject of detailed interrogation during Question Time, Senate  Estimates and the like.

JOURNALIST He didn't see the cables, did he?

JULIE BISHOP Stephen Smith is yet to give any explanation as to how it is he didn't see the  written briefings nor receive the briefings from his very competent chief of staff.  Interestingly, Malcolm, this was at the very time that the Australian Government was in a  lather about Australian passports being used by Israeli intelligence agencies. At the very same  time this matter arose, the Government was in the process of expelling a Mossad agent from  Australia. So somebody must have thought maybe there was a connection, maybe there are  questions to ask.

JOURNALIST Can we go to the passport issue? Mr Zygier had come back to Australia at  least twice to get his name changed by deedpoll and get issued with new passports and then

go back to Israel where either then or later it was found he was working for intelligence  services.

Would you as foreign minister clamp down on the issuing of fresh passports to people with  dual nationalities? Are you concerned about what Foreign Minister Carr has called the  possible debauching of Australian passports and the danger to Australian passport holders?

JULIE BISHOP I'm not aware of what that man did was illegal under Australian law.

JOURNALIST It wasn't illegal. It's not a very nice thing to happen, surely?

JULIE BISHOP Well it certainly does raise a number of questions and certainly that's  something I'd look at very closely. That's why I'm so concerned as to why this didn't ring  alarm bells anywhere in the government, even though the highest levels of government were  aware that an Australian citizen had been detained in an Israeli jail over national security,  secret intelligence matters and he had a number of passports.

You would have thought somebody would ask the question of whether there was any  connection with the Dubai matter or something they should look at or indeed find out if he  needed consular support. Not even a phone call was made.

JOURNALIST Julie Bishop what are you going to do if you become the Foreign Minister to  ensure the integrity of Australian passports? It is now clear out there that Australian passports  are being used in espionage service by foreign countries? We have lost the freedom as  Australians travelling abroad that when we put over our Australian passport it will be  assumed by the country that we’re travelling to that we’re nothing but innocent people  travelling. What do you do to ensure and improve the integrity of that system?

JULIE BISHOP Clearly the integrity of the passport system is vital. I will look very closely  at this matter and of course the Zygier case has highlighted the concerns. I recall at the time  of the Dubai incident, making reference to Australian passports being used in this way and  being absolutely slammed by the government that I should make such a suggestion. In  retrospect, perhaps we should have looked more carefully at what was happening at the time.

JOURNALIST Didn't you also say that Australians used foreign passports as well in spying  activities? Wasn’t that your point at the time?

JULIE BISHOP Mr Zygier is an Australian citizen, was an Australian citizen.

JOURNALIST But you said Australian intelligence organisations were using forged  passports - you said that in May 2010?

JULIE BISHOP No I didn't, I didn’t Malcolm. The point is at the time that Mr Zygier’s case  was brought to the attention at the highest levels of the government, the Prime Minister’s  office was informed, the Attorney-General's office was informed, and the Attorney-General  has confirmed quite appropriately that he was aware of the matter and he was briefed. The  Foreign Minister's office was informed and yet no-one thought to make any enquiry of his  wellbeing, even though he was being held in an Israeli jail on national security, secret  intelligence matters.

JOURNALIST Can I take you to another quick point? North Korea has been developing its  nuclear arsenal. It says it has weapons on standby and has threatened to convert Washington  into a sea of fire, even allowing for North Korean rhetoric. Should we in Australia be  concerned about North Korea?

JULIE BISHOP Yes we should because North Korea's development of nuclear and ballistic  weapons is a threat to regional and international security. We should welcome the fact that  China has co-authored and indeed supported further sanctions on North Korea through the  Security Council.

Instead of North Korea making these threatening statements against the US, it should be  prepared to sit down and discuss its concerns.

JOURNALIST The reality is there have been years of diplomacy, years of those six-party  talk processes and none of it has worked. They've developed their nuclear weapons. What are  the lessons out of the North Korean experience that we might need to apply for example to  Iran? Is, for example, one of the key lessons that talking just doesn't cut it if a country really  wants a nucler bomb?

JULIE BISHOP What has changed is China's attitude. China has been a close ally, perhaps  North Korea’s only ally and now China has run out of patience. Up until now China has been  prepared to indulge North Korea to an extent, it’s now not prepared to do so. I think its sent a  very powerful message to North Korea that its provocative behaviour will not be tolerated  and the increased sanctions, the tougher sanctions are appropriate. We should not give up on  dialogue, I don't think the United States thinks that’s a good idea and I’m sure that China,  now that they’re on board, will assist in trying to bring North Korea into the international  community, trying to engage with North Korea.

JOURNALIST Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop, we're going to have to leave it there  but thank you very much for your time today.

JULIE BISHOP Thank you for having me on the show.

- Ends -



