

INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY, ABC RADIO NATIONAL

WEDNESDAY, 24 JULY 2013



FRAN KELLY:       The Immigration Minister Tony Burke spoke to Rod St George  last night after that program, and I spoke to the Minister a  short time ago.



TONY BURKE:     These allegations were first put to me about two weeks ago  or thereabouts, maybe a week and a half ago when I did the  interview for that program. Rod St George's name at that  point was not provided to me. I was given his name and  details at about eight o'clock last night, so last night was the  first time I was able to have a direct conversation with him  and start to work through these issues.

The allegations are horrific, there's no other way of describing  it. I wish I had an opportunity to be able to get the specifics of  them earlier than last night, because I would've started acting  on them earlier than last night, but there's no doubt that  what has been described involved some situations and crimes  which must not be allowed to occur.

FRAN KELLY:       So what are you going to do about it? Rod St George is  claiming some people, the most vulnerable there amongst  them, have been raped, are being sexually assaulted, are  being tortured. There's descriptions of one man had a  perforated eardrum after solvent was poured in his ear. What

are you going to do to make sure these sorts of crimes don't  keep happening? What will you do?

TONY BURKE:     There were some very specific suggestions that Rod St George  put to me last night which I'll be looking at directly.

FRAN KELLY:       What are they?

TONY BURKE:     Things as simple as the fact that at the facility it was  impossible to separate anyone, so if you had one group that  was actively demonising, causing all sorts of damage to more  vulnerable people there, then you didn't have a way of  physically making sure that more vulnerable people were  being kept separate from those who were being responsible  for the aggression.

FRAN KELLY:       And that's the nature of the physicalness - the physicality of  the camp. What are you going to do about that?

TONY BURKE:     Well, it was put to me last night, he said that he thought  some of that may have actually been addressed since he left,  but not sure whether it's been done to the full extent  possible. I'll be in Manus for the next couple of days, and I'll  have a look for myself. Because we're doing the significant  expansion, we're in a situation where issues of design are able  to be looked at afresh as well, and for all the people who are  currently on Manus, I've been in a process of working through  to get them off before new groups arrive so it means issues  like that one, where he's dealt specifically with configuration  problems, I'm confident we should be able to find a way of  doing something about that.

It also went to issues about training and staffing as well, and

about some specific issues that went to where levels of  authority and staffing arrangements didn't match some of the

cultural expectations of authority and some ways that we  might be able to do things about that. So there's some very  specific issues that is recommended to me that I work  through, and...

FRAN KELLY:       It also went to the culture of the Immigration Department  and the officials there representing the Department on the  island. I mean, the implication is that the immigration staff  basically don't countenance any criticism, in a sense almost  turn a blind eye to what going on, and the answer to all  concerns about people was no one leaves the island.

TONY BURKE:     And there'll be - there are more formal ways to deal with  allegations of that kind, and that gets followed through. I  don't think anyone in the Immigration Department would  have any doubt, particularly after the next visit, of what my  expectations are.

FRAN KELLY:       Hearing these allegations and descriptions of life on Manus  Island, does it make you rethink this immediate significant  expansion, to use your word, that's about to happen? A sense  that you might take a pause in that because things in Manus  Island really aren't ready for a significant expansion?

TONY BURKE:     Even the whistleblower himself wasn't recommending to me  that he thought it needed to be shut down. It was a case of  organisationally putting the structures in place and putting it  in place quickly to avoid these sorts of things being possible to  occur.

FRAN KELLY:       I'm not talking about shutting it down. You're talking about  expanding it to house 3000 people.

TONY BURKE:     That's correct, and you're also looking at very significant  changes in staffing and the staffing levels, so your opportunity

to do things about the culture and do things about levels of  training is presented as a direct and very - you know, there's a  complete opportunity on cultural change when you've got  those sorts of expansions happening.

So on that, in terms of what - all I'm saying on that, Fran, is

even the whistleblower himself wasn't saying shut it down. He  was saying it can be fixed, and these are the things that can  be done to fix it and that's what I intend to work through. I  believe that we absolutely need to follow through on making  sure that we have as many places available in Papua New  Guinea as required for the people who want to test our  resolve on the new policy.

FRAN KELLY:       And as many places are required is looking like it's going to be  a significant number of places. I think five boats have arrived  since Kevin Rudd announced the PNG solution last Friday,  carrying more than 300 asylum seekers. Reports of another  boat on the way. It looks as though this announcement so far  hasn't slowed the boats.

TONY BURKE:     Well, there's been a couple of things. First of all, when the  Prime Minister announced it, we were completely up front.  We knew the people smugglers would try to test our resolve.  Secondly, there have been, and I don't want to turn this into a  party political debate, but there have been some strong  messages that have come from the Opposition claiming that  this can't be implemented and claiming that there are caps or  limits which the people smugglers could then fill.

Now, those views do encourage people to get on boats and to  test our resolve, and if they think there's a capacity limit then  they'll try to fill it so they can go back to business as usual.  The only way to be able to make the policy work, the only way  to be able to make sure that people smugglers are not

actually able to sell to desperate people residence in  Australia, is to make sure that whatever capacity is required is  put in Papua New Guinea.

FRAN KELLY:       So how quickly, though? I mean, Tony Abbott says your  policy, this solution, won't work because you're not even  sending people there yet. You're too slow about it. How  quickly do you believe you need to get people sent to Manus  Island, despite all these problems we've now heard of?

TONY BURKE:     I would find it hard to think of many things less responsible  than the quote you just referred to from Tony Abbott. He's a  former Health Minister. He used to campaign on vaccination.  He knows exactly what it would mean if we were sending  people to Manus Island within 24 to 48 hours as he said we  had to do if we were serious yesterday. If you were to do that,  you wouldn't be able to conduct your checks on whether or  not people have active tuberculosis. You would not be able to  do the vaccinations and inoculations that are required from  some people who have never had the first vaccination in their  life before.

What he was suggesting and daring us to do, puts people

directly in harm's way and you can only read it one of two  ways. Either he was saying we should not do the health  checks and just put people in a situation of dangerous disease  or he was setting up a test that he knew would fail so that he  can encourage people to get on boats. To be honest, I was  absolutely appalled by that one. There's a lot of things in  politics where you'll think it's just part of the argy-bargy of  political debate, but on this one, we're talking about him  actively encouraging people to put their lives at risk on the  high sea because he thinks it helps him in the election.

And I can't countenance that for a minute. I said the moment

this was announced, when I stood beside the Prime Minister  of Australia and the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea,  that it would take a couple of weeks once people arrived  before we were able to do health checks and start sending  people across. But be in no doubt, people would be sent  across. I said it would take a little bit longer when it involved  children because I wanted to make sure the facilities there  were up to standards that I believed were required for the  care and welfare of children and I wasn't going to set an  arbitrary time limit on it but no-one should be in any doubt  that children and family groups will end up having this policy  applied to them. Because if you don't do that, people  smugglers will fill boats with children and that would be an  appalling outcome.

But on each of those issues, having explained the importance  and the risk of that public policy, if it's not followed, Tony  Abbott has gone and made the comments he's made. I, you  know, I don't want to just throw shots across the table back  and forth but I cannot believe the irresponsibility of that one.

FRAN KELLY:      But Minister, my only response to that is you've said yes, it  may be a couple of weeks. Now that we have these  allegations from Rod St George and you're going to act on  them and deal with them is your pledge. How quickly can you  do that? Do you still plan on sending people within a couple  of weeks which is what you just said then?

TONY BURKE:     I do. The people who are currently on Manus, I'm in the  process of removing. So the specifics of the groups that have  been involved in that behaviour won't be there. And I'll be in  Manus Island this week to have a look and make sure that  some of the direct suggestions that have been made to me  including the concept of the capacity of being able to separate  people have a way of being implemented.

FRAN KELLY:       You're listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest this morning is  Immigration Minister, Tony Burke. Minister, what's the litmus  test for success for you? What's your benchmark?

TONY BURKE:     I want to see fewer people drown. I want the drownings to  stop. It's as simple as that. I'm not somebody who bashes the  table and says - look how tough we are. It's not my style to  pretend that, you know, our borders are being invaded and to  use that sort of language. It's really simple for me. We've got  people drowning in the Indian Ocean and I want it to stop.  And until very recently, since the original Malaysia agreement  had fallen over, we didn't have anything in front of us that  allowed us a way of taking the product off the hands off  people smugglers that they were selling. To take the product  away from them.

FRAN KELLY:       Immigration Minister, Tony Burke, speaking to me earlier this  morning. And as you heard there, the Minister is headed to  the Manus Island Detention Centre and also to Nauru at the  end of the week. It's 10 minutes to eight on Breakfast.



