

Shadow Attorney-General  Shadow Minister for the Arts

Parliament House  Canberra  ACT  2600  Telephone (02) 6277 4205  Facsimile (02) 6277 8523





THE PARLIAMENTARY INTEGRITY AWARDS  The Accountability Round Table



Acceptance Speech for the Button Award - Mark Dreyfus

Wednesday 11 December 2013



Thank you very much. I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet  and pay my respects to their elders past and present. I acknowledge our distinguished  guests and in particular Sir Gerard and my parliamentary colleagues who are here,  parliamentary staff, and friends in politics in various ways.

The last awards presentation I went to was the ARIA awards a couple of weeks ago, in my  capacity as Shadow Minister for the Arts. Accepting awards is very difficult, and I’m  finding it difficult, but it’s seemingly particularly difficult for musicians. Jessica Mauboy  distinguished herself by saying “shooby-dooby-doo” as she received her award, and a  number of the award winners said, “I don’t know what to say” - you won’t find me saying  that too often -  but Kevin Parker, who is the main song writer for Tame Impala, a rock  band I’m sure well known to everybody here, who received not one but three awards for  their work, he offered “thanks to the band of idiots I work with” - and I won’t be doing  that.

I want to start by saying that in the six years I have worked in this building, I’ve worked  with some very committed, very talented and exceptionally hardworking parliamentarians,  public servants and advisers, and I can’t begin to single out all of them but I’m going to do  the invidious thing of singling out two. The first is Andrea David who would be with us  here, but she is in New York taking a well-earned break before she returns to work as a  lawyer in Victoria. She was my adviser while I was Attorney-General and worked with  extraordinary devotion on what was a very difficult project, which is the whistle-blower  protection legislation, that is now law in Australia.  I’ll come back to this, but the second is  Anna Dacre, who is a very long serving member of the staff of this Parliament and served  as the Secretary for the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee when I was the Chair.   That Committee is the committee which produced the report in 2009 on a scheme of  whistle-blower protection legislation for the public sector in Australia. I mention these two  only by way of example. I could stand here for a very long time and mention others who  assisted in all of the tasks that were mentioned in the citation, because one cannot do this  work alone.

The second thing I’d say is to say how very proud I am to receive this award, not just  because it is called the Button Award - named for someone who has been a great figure in  my life, one of my predecessors, albeit in the other house in this Parliament, someone who  I knew well, who encouraged me to come here and leave a relatively comfortable life as a

2

Melbourne barrister - Sir Gerard’s probably thinking it is not such a comfortable life  because you have to appear before the High Court and other things, but compared to  coming here it is a relatively comfortable life.  But I did leave. And I’m proud to be here  and to receive this award.  And to say I feel supported by receiving the award. I feel  supported in all the work that I’ve done and it’s good to have the work acknowledged. And  I would say that it’s not a personal award, it’s an acknowledgement of the work that I’ve  been able to lead or that I’ve been able to achieve.

It is curious to be acknowledged for doing the things that I came here to do. I don’t need  any acknowledgement because the work itself is satisfaction enough. I’ve spent my  working life working on the issues that I work on here like improving access to justice,  transparency, openness, accountability in government, on better government and to have  had the privilege of coming here to work in this Parliament, to make changes in the law, to  achieve changes in administration has been a rare privilege. I’ve had the opportunity to  carry forward the work that I’ve wanted to do all my life. It is work that never ends. I’ll  quote one of the ancient Jewish texts which says, “It is not incumbent on you to complete  the work, but neither are you at liberty to desist from it.” It’s a famous quotation, but it’s  apt for the work that we do in this building. In a true sense though, I stand on the shoulders  of others and it was nice to be reminded by Tim Smith of the length of the project of  achieving whistle-blower legislation in the Commonwealth public sector.

The Commonwealth Parliament was the first to examine this and I look back to reports  done by Senator Barney Cooney in 1993 and 1994, never able to be acted on by the then  government and not acted on by the next government, and in the meantime by the time I  came as Chair of the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee to be looking at a scheme  of whistle-blower protection for the Commonwealth, every state and territory had  legislated, which probably made our task somewhat easier.  But even then it was a  somewhat slower project than I had anticipated given that we produced a unanimous cross-party report on what should be the elements of a scheme of whistle-blower protection for  the Commonwealth. It took longer than I would have hoped. It took from the delivery of  the report in 2009 and the announcement of the government response in March of 2010  until June of 2013 to legislate for it. But I am in the unusual and quite gratifying position  of having been the Chair of the parliamentary committee that recommended the scheme  and then being the Minister bringing the legislation into the Parliament and making sure  that it passed.

The third and final thing that I want to say is to thank Sir Gerard for his remarks. I accept  Sir Gerard’s reticence in commenting on individuals and I would not seek it, but I don’t  think he needs to be at all reticent about commenting on the interactions between  government and the judiciary or indeed reticent about commenting on the activities of  government. Sir Gerard is someone that worked at the intersection of government and the  courts for very much of his working life.  As you’ve been reminded by Tim, Sir Gerard  was President of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and then on the Federal Court and  then the High Court. I had the privilege of appearing in a number of cases before Sir  Gerard which were at the intersection of government and the courts.   Cases like Johns v  Australian Securities Commission about the powers of a Victorian Royal Commission and  the use that it made of compulsory evidence obtained by a Commonwealth Government  instrumentality of the Australian Securities Commission.  Or Theophanous vs. Herald &  Weekly Times Ltd, one of the free speech cases, another case quintessentially about the role  of government and what the law should say about political speech.

3

It was good to be reminded by Sir Gerard of the public fiduciary duty that I owe and share  with all of my parliamentary colleagues. It’s a very fine way to look at the role that we  play here and it is something that I would wish that all of us, at least some of the time,  reflected on because it gives you an excellent frame from which to view our activities. And  good also to be reminded of the moral challenges that arise in asylum seeker policy and I  do think we have to keep reminding ourselves that there are moral challenges here, they are  not merely party political issues.

Perhaps finally to say I was given an advance copy of Sir Gerard’s remarks.   I was struck  by his reticence to comment on individuals in this context, and I accept that one should not  expect comment on any one actual individual, but he has commented in one of his  extrajudicial writings about the importance of who is here serving in this parliament and I  just want to read a single sentence.  This is from the foreword written by Sir Gerard to an  excellent book by Gerard Carney called “Members of Parliament - Law and Ethics,” in  2000: “the efficiency and integrity  of political institutions are functions of the  qualifications and character of those in whom political power is reposed and of the manner  in which that power is exercised.” And I’d take Sir Gerard to be saying that individuals  who serve here do matter and for that reason I would say that recognition of the work of  individuals is a worthwhile activity.  I commend the Roundtable for these awards because  they do draw attention to the importance of the work that each one of us does and the  difference each one of us can make to the activities of this Parliament and the government  of Australia.

Thank you very much.





