



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  CAPITAL HILL WITH LYNDAL CURTIS  WEDNESDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2013

SUBJECT/S: Temporary protection visas .



LYNDAL CURTIS: Richard Marles, welcome to Capital Hill. The Minister Scott  Morrison says the action that Labor and the Greens took in the Senate to  disallow Temporary Protection Visas has left those in the country remaining on  bridging visas getting less money than they would have got under temporary  protection visas with no work rights, so effectively in a worse position. How do  you answer that?

RICHARD MARLES:  Well firstly, the policy of trying to introduce temporary  protection visas by the Government was misconceived and ultimately is a  redundant idea ever since the then Labor Government introduced the PNG  arrangement. Simple fact is, if TPVs are never going to apply to somebody who  is coming to this country in the future, then the introduction of TPVs cannot act  as a deterrent. You know, the Labor Government took Australia off the table, it is  very important that TPVs don’t open the door back up and put Australia back on  the table, and that is the only way they could operate in relation to somebody in  the future.

CURTIS: But they - the Minister says they are needed to be dealt with the  people who are already here who now are left on bridging visas?

MARLES: Well that flies entirely in the face of the rationale for TPVs as is seen  in the explanatory memorandum of the regulation itself which describes TPVs as  principally being about a deterrent for people getting on boats. Now, if you’re  only going to apply it to that cohort of people who are already here, well then it  is neither an incentive or a disincentive, because it simply doesn’t apply to people  who might be making a decision about whether or not to get on a boat and so -

CURTIS: But it could still, it could still apply to, couldn’t it still act as the  deterrence the Minister wants along with the offshore processing arrangements  Labor put in place. But in the meantime the Minister still also has to deal with the  people already in Australia who are left now on bridging visas with less  government support than they would get under temporary protection visas and  no work rights?

MARLES: Well, the first part of that question, Lyndal, is absolutely the critical  point in the question of deterrence. If Scott Morrison is actually saying that  temporary protection visas may still apply to people who are not yet in Australia,  then he has just opened a door that the PNG arrangement closed. He has put  Australia back on the table, when Labor took it off the table, that’s why we  opposed temporary protection visas in the Senate on Monday night.  What Scott  Morrison is now doing, in relation to those people who are already in Australia, is  frankly being mean for the hell of it, it has no deterrence value at all, because  the rules have simply changed, we assume that Scott Morrison is saying that  TPVs would not apply to anyone coming to Australia in the future, and therefore  the decision to not progress people’s applications, to keep people on bridging  visas, well firstly, its policy on the run, policy on the run from a Government in  chaos. But secondly what it means is that there is going to be nearly 30,000 who  are on the government tab, who Australian tax payers are paying for, without  the issue ever being resolved.  Now that’s an appalling state of affairs, its  obviously difficult for the people involved, but it its very costly for the Australian  taxpayer and Scott Morrison has failed to answer that question.

CURTIS: But wasn’t the processing of these people’s claims taking a lot of time  anyway, in the period in which they’re, still under your Government’s policies, on  the Government tab as well?

MARLES:  Well, but the moment their claim is processed, either they are given a  visa and there is an opportunity for them to contribute to our economy because  they are given the protection which is accorded to someone who is a refugee or  they are found not to be a genuine refugee and their transfer back home is  facilitated.  But either way, they start the path of moving away from being on  the Government tab. What Scott Morrison has said today, is that this group are  now on the Government tab indefinitely. That’s what he is saying. And that is  going to cost the Australian taxpayers in relation to sustaining this group of  people and that is the chaos which is the policy on the run that this Government

is now making.  I think Scott Morrison needs to remember, he’s no longer in  opposition. He is actually the Minister for Immigration, it is his responsibility to  manage this situation and he is patently failing to do so.

CURTIS: But he’s also a Minister that came in with a long-standing promise to  reintroduce temporary protection visas, didn’t he?

MARLES: Well, he was a Minister who said he would come and make a  contribution to stopping boats coming to Australia. “Stopping the boats” was the  catchcry of the Coalitions campaign before the election. What has stopped the  boats is the PNG arrangement. The only contribution TPVs can make to that is to  undermine it by putting Australia back on the table, if he is suggesting that TPVs  may apply to people who are coming to Australia in the future. If they are not  going to, then they are redundant policy and this is a man that is too proud to  accept the fact that the PNG arrangement has already moved well beyond the  original rationale for TPVs.

CURTIS: Is it the case you can do nothing legislatively, nothing in Parliament, to  block what the Minister has done today?

MARLES: Well we will have a look at what options we have available to us, but  at the end of the day, the decision by the Government if that’s where this goes,  in refusing to continue to process those people who are in Australia, is a decision  which is at the expense of Australian taxpayers, which puts a large lot of people  in limbo, but does so at the expense of Australian taxpayers and we will be  paying that bill in a million different ways.

CURTIS: When Labor was in Government, you reversed a lot of the positions  you had held in your first term, you reintroduced offshore protection, why is  temporary protection visas, abolishing them, the thing you’re holding onto?

MARLES: In a sense that’s a good questions Lyndal, in that what is suggests,  which is right, is that we are dealing with an evolving situation, I think this is  something that the Minister has failed to understand. The circumstances that we  are experiencing in 2013 are in fact different to what they were in 2009, very  different to what they were during the Howard era, so the suite of Howard era  policies are unlikely to be the solution in 2013, no matter what they did back in  the early 2000s. In fact if you look at TPVs, they did little during the Howard era  themselves. When you look at when they were introduced, we actually saw an  increase in the number of people coming to Australia and an increase in the  proportion of women and children who were getting on boats and taking their  lives in their own hands by doing so, so even in that time this was not policy  which worked as it was meant to work. Our view has been that we need to  evolve as the problem evolves, we need to come up with solutions that deal with  this is in a contemporary way, that is what the PNG arrangement has done, it

has taken Australia off the table. It is the thing that has worked, its why it’s so  important that we back it in, and its why TPVs frankly are dangerous in terms of  trying to take Australia off the table and giving people smugglers a different  product a different product which they can buy.

CURTIS: Richard Marles, thank you very much for your time.

MARLES: Thank you Lyndal.



ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524

