THE BOLT REPORT

2 JUNE 2013

INTERVIEW WITH SCOTT MORRISON

ANDREW BOLT, PRESENTER: Under the Howard Government’s border laws we  had just one boat of asylum seekers land around every four months. But Labor  weakened those laws in 2008. On Monday a Parliamentary committee was told what  happened next.

MARTIN BOWLES: Since September 2008, until the end of April 2013, we have seen  some 39,500 people arrive irregularly. In this financial year to date, as at the 24th of  May, 22,265 IMAs have arrived.

ANDREW BOLT: Joining me is Opposition Immigration Spokesman Scott Morrison.  Scott, in the past two months we’ve seen boat arrivals shoot up to 100 a day. Are  these people really fleeing danger, as we used to think, or are we seeing mass illegal  immigration?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, what we’re seeing is an open invitation from the Gillard  Government, that has been running for years, and it’s pretty much put out the call for  all comers. How people’s claims are ultimately assessed, we will see, but the benefit  of the doubt is always given, regardless of whether people have documents or not.  And so I think that leaves a very significant question in the minds of Australians,  particularly when you’ve got thousands upon thousands of people with legitimate  claims waiting offshore, who don’t have the money to get on a boat, and continue to  be denied by this Government because they’ve let the boats in.

ANDREW BOLT: Well the reason I wonder whether it’s mass illegal immigration  now is that this week two boats carrying Africans turned up, which seems to be a new  development. It used to be Italy and Greece that got African asylum seekers, but those  economies are now in trouble. Is Europe’s collapse likely to lead to more people from  Africa and places like that coming to Australia instead?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, I think the real point here is that the Gillard Government  is known globally as a soft touch on this issue, and people will go where the door is  open, and that’s certainly the case under this Government. And we’ve seen  particularly, over the last 12 months, the nationalities that have come into Australia,  whether it’s Vietnamese, or those from Africa and other places, on top of the usual  load of those coming from Afghanistan, Iran, and Iraq, and so on - so, I mean, there is  a real, I think, perception out there - and it’s based on the failed policies of this  Government - that the door is open, and they can come as long as this Government is  here. Now, we’re on boat 699, Andrew, and I suspect the Government will announce  sometime today the 700th boat that’s turned up. More than 35,000 people have turned  up since the last election alone. If I’d said that before the last election, that 35,000  people are going to turn up in the next term if you re-elect Labor, I don’t think many  people would’ve believed me, but that’s what’s happened.

ANDREW BOLT: When you say you’ll stop the boats, right, in your next term, does  that mean stop all the boats, some of the boats, or get it down to about three boats a  year, as happened under the Howard Government?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, we’re aiming for the Howard Government outcome.  That’s what ‘stops the boats’ means. And when we left office, there was an average of  around two people turning up a month. Now the average for this financial year is over  2,000 per month, and as you said earlier, for the last two months we’ve been over  3,000 per month. Now, where it goes from here is anybody’s guess, over the next few  months, when we already have around 23,000 people in the system here in Australia -  on detention, in bridging visas in the community, and community detention. I suspect  by the time of the election we’ll have around 30,000 people in that situation, and that  will be one big Labor legacy of chaos that if a Coalition is elected we will have to  address.

ANDREW BOLT: Now you said you want to get it down to John Howard-type levels  - so that’s three boats a year - how much depends on Indonesia being cooperative?  The Indonesian ambassador this week said his country would not cooperate. The  Indonesian President, Bambang Yudhoyono, has said he would - or at least in private  I believe he said he would. But he’ll be gone next August. Does that mean your  window of opportunity is from now until next August - August next year?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, what happens subsequently in any Indonesian election is  a matter for the Indonesians, but obviously, regardless of when that election takes  place, we want to hit the ground running on this. We have to hit the ground running  on this, and that’s where we’ve been spending an enormous amount of our time in  trying to get our plans ready and in place and ready to go. Now, that has involved  being up in Indonesia, talking directly to officials, and other ministers up there, and of  course as well as the President himself. Now, I mean, it is not our policy to cross  Indonesia’s sea border, or compromise their sovereign territory, or anything like that.  That’s never been our proposal. I mean, these are Indonesian boats, with Indonesian  flags, with Indonesian crews, coming from Indonesian ports. Now, on the last  occasion, those vessels returned across that sea border under their own steam. So, I  mean, I think there’s a bit of confusion about this policy, but there’s certainly none on  our part.

ANDREW BOLT: Scott, we’ve seen many signs of a failure of a significant minority  of Muslims fail to integrate in Australia - jihadist preachers in Sydney, hundreds of  Muslims serving in Syria with jihadist militias. What changes do you plan to  multicultural policies or immigration to deal with this dangerous militancy?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I think the first thing we have to do is ensure that  everybody understands there’s one rule for all. And there are no exceptions here. I  mean, the recent case of an offender not standing up for a judge in Sydney I thought  was disgraceful. I mean, there are no special exemptions, there are no special deals for  anyone of any faith - Christian, Islam, whatever. That is one of the great things about  Australia, and we need to understand that freedom of religion applies to everyone, but  that comes with responsibilities as well, and that’s for everyone to respect our laws,  and that our laws apply equally.

ANDREW BOLT: Scott Morrison, thank you for joining me.

SCOTT MORRISON: Thanks a lot, Andrew. Good to be with you.

ANDREW BOLT: Coming up - how could Labor and the Liberals think this was the  time to give themselves $60 million?

