

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

2GB Sydney with Steve Price and Andrew Bolt

10 April 2013

Subjects: Bob Carr’s comments on Margaret Thatcher, Julia Gillard’s visit to China, Sri  Lankan boat arrival, overrated travel destinations

E&OE…

JOURNALIST Thanks for your time as usual.

JULIE BISHOP My pleasure, good to be with you.

JOURNALIST Julie how would you interpret Bob Carr’s comments? Start with this - do you  believe his recollection in the first place?

JULIE BISHOP Well why has he raised it now? What was his motivation in raising these  allegations?

JOURNALIST Well she’s dead I guess, that’s why.

JULIE BISHOP Well within 24 hours of Baroness Thatcher dying. If he was so concerned  about this conversation why didn’t he raise it at the time when she was in a position to  confirm it or deny it?

He expects us to just assume that this conversation took place, but of course he doesn’t raise  it until after she has died and for an Australian Foreign Minister to accuse a former British  Prime Minister of racism, a particularly nasty slur within hours of her death is breathtaking in  its insensitivity and lack of decency. I question his motivation, raising it now. All he could  have been trying to do is make a cowardly and graceless attack on her reputation and slur one  of the great Conservative leaders of the 20th Century.

I believe that Bob Carr is rapidly showing himself to be incapable of performing the role of  Foreign Minister with the necessary skill and diplomacy that is required.

JOURNALIST I don’t think David Cameron, but this is presuming that David Cameron is a  true conservative and not a fraud himself, the British Prime Minister would have difficulty as  a conservative dealing with Bob Carr after this kind of slur. But you know what I find kind of  amazing Julie? We’re invited by Bob Carr to see this as an unabashedly racist comment. So  she’s made it without shame, any sense of shame, unabashedly. Why is it that the one time  according to him that she makes an unabashedly racist comments it’s to him, it’s never been  on the public record. How did that happen?

JULIE BISHOP That’s right. What was his motivation in raising it now? If he was so

concerned about this, why didn’t he raise it at the time?

JOURNALIST But why did she choose the Foreign Minister, or whatever he was then, Bob  Carr of all the people in all the world in her long career to make an unabashedly racist  comment to - no one else on the public record. Isn’t it interesting that no one has ever said,  Bob Carr once told me that Margaret Thatcher was a racist.

JULIE BISHOP But the other point is, he claims she had this conversation with him when  she was retired from politics, we don’t know when it was, we don’t know her state of health,  we don’t know anything about the timing of this and I just think it’s shameful that he’s raised  it now.

But worse than that it’s the fact that he casts these slurs against the former British Prime  Minister as being a racist, and her comments apparently on Asian immigration, he did this  while he was on an official visit to China. I just think that is further evidence of his  unsuitability for the job.

JOURNALIST We ought to track back when Baroness Thatcher was in Sydney, after leaving  the office of Prime Minister and had had a visit to Fiji that would be an interesting diary line  to work out.

JULIE BISHOP Let’s face it, Bob Carr should explain himself. He’s got to explain why he  waited until now to make this, essentially very serious allegation against her and does he  really think this is an appropriate thing to raise within 24 hours of her death? That’s why I’ve  called upon him to apologise to the family of the late Baroness Thatcher.

JOURNALIST So who goes now to the funeral next Wednesday representing the  Government?

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s a matter for the Government but I would certainly not be sending  Bob Carr. He’s shown that he hasn’t got the skills, the diplomatic skill in particular to  represent Australia. Fancy an Australian Foreign Minister making an attack on a former  British Prime Minister.......

JOURNALIST Oh no, we’ve seen that before what was the name of that Foreign Minister  that used to do this all the time, Liz Paterson… I can’t remember.. I can spot the face quite  well..

But Julie can I just ask you, if it’s not taking you out of your comfort zone, if the Baroness  Thatcher had said something like this, and she didn’t say the word Asian even Bob Carr  concedes that, but talking about migration generally, would she have had a point? Is it racist  to suggest that any country might have too many immigrants?

JULIE BISHOP Well who knows the context in which she made these alleged statements and  now that Carr is agreeing that she didn’t say 'Asian' she could have been referring to  anything, she could have been talking about overcrowding in major cities, who knows but I  just think it’s so cowardly and graceless and insensitive for Carr to raise these statements and  allegations now knowing that Baroness Thatcher cannot defend herself. She can’t deny it, she  can’t confirm it, it’s just his word.

JOURNALIST So you don’t want to go into the argument on the grounds that it might not  have been right? But I think it’s an interesting argument to have.

JULIE BISHOP Andrew it’s an interesting argument but I don’t know the context in which  she’s meant to have said it. I think Bob Carr should explain himself, but first of all he should  apologise to her family.

JOURNALIST How important was the deal signed in China yesterday by the Prime  Minister?

JULIE BISHOP I think it is significant progress in the sense that it certainly elevated the  relationship and I’ve been very critical of this Government for failing to focus sufficiently its  priorities, resources and effort on this relationship.

It seems that the Prime Minister has come late to the realisation that China is a priority for  any Australian Government, particularly as it is now our major trading partner and yet on the  back of her second visit to China she has claimed ownership of this relationship. It was a high  priority for the Howard Government, it certainly flourished under the Howard Government as  it did under Hawke and Keating.

JOURNALIST Well explain how these things work. Do they give you a heads up on these  things given that we’ve got an election just six months away? Or is this part of governing,  you don’t have to let the Opposition know you’re going to do something like this?

JULIE BISHOP Well this raises a very interesting point Steve. I obviously welcome any  effort at strengthening our trading relationships with other countries but the Government has  announced an election, they are telling us that it will be held on the 14th of September. I think  it would be appropriate, highly appropriate in fact to consult with the Opposition on any  major announcements, any particular appointments that it proposes to make. They don’t have  to seek our approval but they should at least consult with us because we are leading into an  election. It’s a campaign in one sense of the word and the Government should at least consult  with the Opposition before they make major decisions or major appointments.

JOURNALIST Well I’m sure you remember, 1996 was it, Paul Keating went to Indonesia  and did a deal with some Bahaso, signed a treaty with Indonesia, just before John Howard  defeated him at that election the next year.

JULIE BISHOP And as a result of that the Howard Government introduced the Joint  Standing Committee on Treaties so that there would be parliamentary oversight of these  kinds of secret deals that Keating had done.

But this development in the relationship with China should be welcomed. What is missing is  the conclusion of a free trade agreement and I’ve been very critical of the Government  because we commenced negotiations for a free trade agreement in 2005, by the way so did  New Zealand. New Zealand concluded their agreement in 2008 and ours is still sitting in  Craig Emerson’s in-tray somewhere. It's hardly progressed at all. So until we actually see the  concluded free trade agreement I think the Government has made some progress but no  where near enough.

JOURNALIST We have a, seemingly a lot of free trade between us and Sri Lanka currently.

What do you make as a West Australian of a Deutsche Bank fishing boat sailing into  Geraldton Harbour yesterday?

JULIE BISHOP Yes I guess the Deutsche Bank marketing people might be rethinking that  one. But the fact is the Government has lost control of our borders, we know that, we’ve seen  over 35,000 try and make their way to Australia via the people smuggling trade because the  people smugglers know that the Government hasn’t got the political will or the skill to stop  the boats and stop the people smuggling trade. Now the entire Western Australian coast is a  target for people smugglers.

The Government has the opportunity to remove the mainland as a target for people smugglers  but they have failed to pass the legislation through the Senate. They can’t blame the  Coalition, they can’t blame Tony Abbott, we supported this legislation, they didn’t get it  through the Senate. So this Government just lurches from crisis to chaos when it comes to  border protection.

JOURNALIST Julie one of the ways, the key to stopping the boat people will be your  relationship with Indonesia and Indonesian cooperation and things like visa checks on people  from Iran, things like using boats, perhaps provided by us, to intercept these boats and turn  them back and thirdly to allow the Australian Navy to return people it’s picked up back to  Indonesia. Do you think, can you foresee the point where the navy will be returning boat  people back to Indonesia, even if Indonesia hasn’t formally given agreement?

JULIE BISHOP Andrew there will need to be a high level of engagement, consistent,  persistent behind the scenes discussions and negotiations with Indonesia. I don’t want to flag  the challenges I think we will meet because I believe we will need to negotiate quietly,  sensibly, logically with Indonesia and we will be able to achieve the kind of result that we did  when the Howard Government was in office.

JOURNALIST Sure, but you’re not ruling that out that we would, if push came to shove,  return people to Indonesia with or without Indonesian agreement?

JULIE BISHOP Andrew it would have to be done with Indonesian cooperation just as we’ve  got cooperation from Sri Lanka and yet the Government doesn’t seem to take advantage of  the fact the Sri Lankan Government is too willing to work with Australia to intercept these  boats and turn them around. Obviously if these boats are in international waters Australia can  turn them back, if they are in Indonesian waters we must cooperate and work with Indonesia.

JOURNALIST One last question. As Shadow Foreign Minister you’ve travelled all around  the world, you’ve seen a lot of places, not all nice. Reading in Huffington Post a list of the  most overrated travel destinations anywhere what’s your most overrated? Berlin? Chicago?  Costa Rica? Colorado? Few people would have travelled more than Julie Bishop, I want to  know what she thinks. I want to create an international incident by the way.

JULIE BISHOP I’ve done a lot of travelling over many many years, long before I went in for  Parliament when I was a partner of a law firm we set up a system of connected firms, an  association of law firms throughout the world and so I travelled to many of these places and I  have to say I love travelling. There have been plenty of places that have not met my  expectations but I’m not about to offend them!

JOURNALIST She couldn’t possibly say Melbourne that would be the Victorian vote. Oh for  heavens sake Julie, c’mon!

JULIE BISHOP Every place on Earth has its fascinations and I’ve been to some terrifying  places, I was in Zimbabwe during the 2002 presidential election campaign and that was a  pretty scary..

JOURNALIST Yeah but that doesn’t count as an overrated travel destination because I’ve  never heard anyone rate it in the first place. I put it to you Orlando - that has got to be the  most overrated travel destination in the world?

JULIE BISHOP Well I guess that’s why I’ve never been there.

JOURNALIST Thank you Julie we’ll let you off the hook.

JULIE BISHOP My pleasure.

- Ends -



