

Julie Bishop MP

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Sky News with Kieran Gilbert Canberra

16 September 2013

Subjects: Syria, Indonesia, Coalition front bench announcement

E&OE…

KIERAN GILBERT Foreign Minister Elect and Deputy Liberal Leader Julie Bishop, thanks  for your time.

JULIE BISHOP Good to be here.

KIERAN GILBERT Lots to discuss.

First to international matters. Syria says it will commit to the US Russia plan on chemical  weapons once it's received UN approval.

There's not much time for further diplomacy is there? These are quite an onerous set of  conditions and timelines set on Syria. JULIE BISHOP That's right. This is a very significant  and positive step forward in the whole issue of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

There will be a report delivered to the United Nations by the weapons inspectors today New  York time that will set out the use of chemical weapons. It won't lay blame but it will indicate  what weapons were used and where and how.

And then the framework that's been put in place by the United States and Russia will come  into play and that has a very onerous timetable with an ultimate view of total elimination of  chemical weapon stockpiles in Syria by the middle of 2014.

KIERAN GILBERT It doesn't lay blame and that's obviously in part because Russia has  questioned the guilt of the Assad regime over that chemical attack.

Given that, is it appropriate to be questioning Russia's intentions in all of this?

JULIE BISHOP Well the UN inspectors didn't have a mandate to lay blame. Their mandate  was limited to identifying the weapons, what was used and where.

The Assad regime has now admitted that it has a chemical weapons program, it has chemical  weapons stockpiles and that's why it has submitted to this program for the securing and  destruction of the stockpiles under international control.

KIERAN GILBERT But do you think Russia's intentions need to be questioned here given  that they still are asking whether or not the Assad regime was guilty of this attack east of  Damascus?

JULIE BISHOP It will be interesting to see their response to the UN report. I have had a  briefing on this. There's a compelling case that chemical weapons were used in Damascus on  21 August and there's little room for doubt that they came from the Assad regime.

There's very little evidence at all that in any way the Opposition, the rebel forces could have  had access to them at this point at this time. So it will be interesting to see Russia's response.

But what we have to focus on now is this framework for the securing and destruction of the  chemical weapon stockpiles and this will act as a deterrent. It's essentially taking away Syria's  chemical weapons program. It will act as a deterrent to others.

But of course this doesn't resolve the underlying conflict in Syria that's going on to this day.

KIERAN GILBERT Indeed, and much of the talk has been about the chemical weapons  arsenal. The tragic fact is that the vast majority of those killed have been through traditional  weapons.

JULIE BISHOP That's right. Over 100,000 people have been killed in the conflict. A fraction  have been killed by chemical weapons.

But the use of chemical weapons is against every international norm. Syria itself is a party to  the Geneva Protocol of 1925. It is now going to become part of the - sign up to the Chemical  Weapons Convention.

So that's a good sign that a country that has had a chemical weapon stockpile that tragically  has used them and the UN report I think will bare that out today, is now going to submit to  international control and that's a positive sign.

This would not have happened had the United States not threatened a military strike.

KIERAN GILBERT Well it's still possible isn't it because President Obama has stressed force  is still an option. How likely is it that military action still will be pursued in the event that  Syria is not as forthcoming as they need to be?

JULIE BISHOP Clearly the United States are maintaining all options are open and the  responsibility now lies on Syria and to an extent Russia as its stronger supporter to comply  with the directions of the UN in relation to the securing and destruction of their chemical  weapons stockpile.

KIERAN GILBERT On Indonesia, when are the first talks likely between President  Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Elect Abbott?

JULIE BISHOP They will take place at the end of this month. On Saturday I'll be travelling  to New York for the United Nations General Assembly Leader's Week and I have bilateral  meetings scheduled with the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, Marty Natalegawa. We'll  commence talks about a range of things.

We shouldn't just view - in fact we will not make the mistake of viewing our relationship  with Indonesia just through the prism of the issue of asylum seekers. We have a much  broader relationship with Indonesia and I intend to discuss a whole range of issues with  Foreign Minister Natalegawa.

KIERAN GILBERT When you say the end of the month though just to clarify, is this before  the APEC summit?

JULIE BISHOP Yes.

KIERAN GILBERT So there'll be a separate visit to Jakarta, is that right?

JULIE BISHOP That's what's being planned at present. It's subject to everybody's travel and  other arrangements.

KIERAN GILBERT Sure. Well on Marty Natalegawa the Foreign Minister, he says we will  have a discussion, he's quoted in the Jakarta Post over the last couple of days saying; we will  have a discussion with Abbott prior to the APEC summit in October. We will reject his  policy on asylum seekers and any other policy that harms the spirit of partnership. Quite blunt  words there from your Indonesian counterpart.

JULIE BISHOP We welcome the fact that he has also said that he wants to sit down with us  and look at the detail of our policies.

But there's a principle here. Indonesia and Australia both agree that the people smuggling  trade should stop. I don't think Indonesia was particularly happy when Kevin Rudd changed  the laws back in 2008 that changed the whole situation as far as people smuggling was  concerned, and all of a sudden Indonesia once more became a transit country.

So we both want to stop the people smuggling trade. We both want to stop the deaths at sea.  Hundreds and hundreds of people have died at sea. Neither Indonesia nor Australia want to  see that occur again.

So it's a question of how we're able to achieve it.

KIERAN GILBERT You've got a bit of work to do though to win them over.

JULIE BISHOP We have a set of policies that we will put in place and we will not breach  Indonesia's sovereignty.

You'll also notice that Foreign Minister Natalegawa says we will not have any policies that  breach our sovereignty. We're not intending to. That is not the point. We respect Indonesia'  sovereignty, they respect our sovereignty, it's enshrined in the Lombok Treaty.

But what we have in place is a series of policies that we intend to implement by legislation  and operationally and they will not breach Indonesia's sovereignty. I'm not asking for  Indonesia's permission, we're asking for their understanding. Such as we...

KIERAN GILBERT There's obviously some suspicion there though isn't there, there's a level  of suspicion there within the Yudhoyono administration that you're going to have to manage.

JULIE BISHOP Of course, all relationships require managing. But there is a level of mutual  respect between Indonesia and Australia and we will maintain that.

We've said there'll be a “no surprises” policy with Indonesia and we will talk through all  these issues and I am in absolutely no doubt that we'll be able to implement our policies.

KIERAN GILBERT: You will obviously be announced the new Foreign Minister as of this  afternoon, that's no news to anyone, but you'll be the only woman in the Cabinet apparently  of 20 people, one woman in 2013. Is that enough?

JULIE BISHOP I expect that Tony will announce the Cabinet at some time today and as he  said and throughout the election campaign he wants to maintain stability and the team that he  took to the election was essentially going to be the team that he put into Cabinet and the  ministry.

There will be some changes, but with Sophie Mirabella standing back from the Cabinet  position while her seat is still being determined, there is one less woman in the Cabinet.

But there are other changes being made and we do have a wealth of talent in our party. We  have a number of new members, over 30 new members and I've met all of them.

KIERAN GILBERT You'd be happier if there was - you had some other representation?

JULIE BISHOP We always want to promote talented women and the Liberal Party has a  history of promoting women. A number of the firsts in political history for women have been  from the Liberal side of politics.

KIERAN GILBERT I'm told that junior ministers, Michaelia Cash, Fiona Nash said to be  promoted and also Kelly O'Dwyer from MP to Parliamentary Secretary. Would those moves  be an attempt to compensate for the lack of representation in the Cabinet?

JULIE BISHOP You've obviously got some very good contacts within Tony Abbott's office.  I'm impressed.

KIERAN GILBERT [Laughs] Okay, so is that a yes?

JULIE BISHOP No, I'm not saying anything until Tony makes the announcement later today.  It's the leader's prerogative to announce the Cabinet and the ministry. It's the leader's  prerogative to choose it.

I have no doubt that Tony Abbott's received plenty of advice from his colleagues, from the  public, from the media, but it's his decision.

KIERAN GILBERT Bronwyn Bishop is going to be Speaker endorsed by Tony Abbott to be  the Speaker in the 44th Parliament, what sort of speakership can we expect from the member  for Mackellar.

JULIE BISHOP I believe that Bronwyn will restore dignity to the House of Representatives.

The last few years have been rather chaotic in the Parliament and the Government of the day  of course has to wear the blame for chaos in the Parliament. After all the Government is in  control of the House of Representatives, so if the House of Representatives is out of control  it's the Government's fault.

So we believe that Bronwyn will be an outstanding Speaker. She knows the standing orders  backwards, as has been evident on many occasions during Question Time, but she's also a  very gracious woman and I think she'll bring a great deal of dignity to the House of  Representatives.

KIERAN GILBERT Doesn't the Coalition have to own its own share of the chaos, though?  You say it's been a chaotic Parliament, but surely there was...

JULIE BISHOP Well, it was a hung Parliament and the Opposition's role was to hold the  Government to account. We had no idea that the Government would provide us so much  material to work with.

It was a shambolic government and, of course, this is continuing - the division is continuing  within the Labor Party as you now have the competing factions once more going head-to-head over the leadership issue.

KIERAN GILBERT Finally, when in government, obviously, decisions have to be made and  you anger people.

Ian Macdonald says - issued a statement. He's one of those demoted in today's new ministry.  He says what should've been one of the proudest days of my life has turned into one of the  worst after a phone call Tony Abbott saying he has no room for me in the new ministry.

He's obviously angered. That's one person on the way out.

JULIE BISHOP This does happen.

We had too many people in the ministry, and that happens in opposition, but in government  there's a set number that you can have for the Cabinet, the Outer Ministry and parliamentary  secretaries. We had more than the scheduled number, so some had to go.

It's always a difficult decision and I'm sure that Tony's anguished over it, and people will be  hurt.

But I am sure that the team spirit within the Coalition is such that we'll all work together and  will continue to be an effective and confident government.

KIERAN GILBERT Julie Bishop, thanks for your time.

JULIE BISHOP It's been my pleasure.

- Ends -



