THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC MELBOURNE  MORNINGS  WEDNESDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2013  8.40AM

SUBJECT: Manus Island, 457 Visas

JON FAINE: One of Australia's great political hot potatoes is looming to be an issue yet again in this  year's federal election. Julia Gillard has recently shuffled her front bench and the new Minister for  Immigration and Citizenship is Brendan O'Connor, who has just been to Papua New Guinea on an  orientation visit to have a look at Manus Island.

Brendan O'Connor, good morning to you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good morning Jon.

JON FAINE: What was it like?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The centre itself was adequate, I think. It's a temporary facility, but, look, it's  always difficult. You're dealing with transferees, people who are seeking asylum, people wanting to  know that - what will happen with them, and that's why I took considerable time not only to talk to  the service providers there but also to those that are in the centre.

JON FAINE: You spoke to people who are seeking asylum, who are asking you, in fact, to exercise  your discretion to let them in?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, they spoke to me about their concerns. Of course, the process that they  - where their claims will be considered, will be done, under PNG law. And I met with the Foreign  Minister who's also the Immigration Minister as well in my visit and he made clear he's already  stated publicly that they're looking at the process and looking to expedite that process so people's  claims can be considered.

JON FAINE: Did you meet people who you think are genuine refugees or did you meet people who  you think are trying to get around the system?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I'd rather not sort of prejudice their claims…

JON FAINE: I'm not individualising it, I'm asking you generally.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, well, I'm saying to you I don't want to prejudice their claims with my  insights. But can I just say this, people did present themselves as asylum seekers. Of course, that -  those matters have to be determined and they have to be determined properly by our agencies and  in this case by the agencies of PNG.

We, as you well know, John, we have over 40 million people displaced around the world. We have 15  million recognised as refugees. It is a huge global problem and, as you know, recently we've  increased our humanitarian program to take in now more per capita than any other country in the  world. But we can only do our fair share. We cannot - and people, you know, I think quite rightly do  not expect this country to be accepting well beyond that, and I think that's why this issue is so  complex and so difficult.

JON FAINE: Did you meet anybody who changed your mind about the way the system operates?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No. Well, firstly there've been a lot of claims and I'm attending to some of  those in relation to the standards and conditions and we're looking to fix some of those matters,  but…

JON FAINE: And we'll come to that in a moment…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Sure.

JON FAINE: …but I'm talking about the humanity. Were you touched in any way?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Of course. Of course, I mean, look, you know, when you're in this position you  always feel for people who are looking to find themselves in a better place, and…

JON FAINE: A better place, or just somewhere where they're not killed, subjected to torture, less  rape…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, that's why of course we need to contemplate whether people are  fleeing persecution. I'm a very - I'm a strong defender of the Convention. I believe that…

JON FAINE: No, but when you say looking for a better place people may think that these are simply  people electing to make a lifestyle choice…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, well, I'm not suggesting that…

JON FAINE: …rather than fleeing…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …I'm suggesting that there are…

JON FAINE: …persecution…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, there are those that are…

JON FAINE: …torture…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …that may have fled persecution, there are those who are seeking to enter  first world countries. The difficulty on occasion, of course, is distinguishing between the two. There  are literally millions of people that would move to first world nations if they could and they wouldn't  be eligible for - pursuant to the Refugee Convention.

JON FAINE: But I'm mindful of the distinction that needs to be made every time we have these  discussions, and in the minds of many people they think that people claiming refugee status are  trying to rort the refugee system, and yet every day we get reports, for instance, that Tamils have

been and still are being subjected to systematic rape, torture and assassination for their political  views. And yet people say oh, no, they're just trying to get to Australia so they can make money to  send home.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I don't say that. I say that there are people who seek to come to first  world nations or nations that are signatory to the Convention on occasion because they're fleeing  persecution. There are many others that are, of course, seeking to come to first world nations for a  better life, and it's always difficult to distinguish between those two groups of people.

JON FAINE: You said that there were aspects of the accommodation that you said needed attention.  What are they?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, for example, there's a temporary school there for the children that are  at the centre. I wanted to make sure there's more books available, I wanted to make sure that the  standards of the bedding and so on is suitable. I mean, now…

JON FAINE: Isn't it at the moment substandard?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm sorry?

JON FAINE: Is it substandard?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Look, I think…It's in a temporary facility. No, I think that the arrangements are  adequate. In fact, in the province itself people see that they're being treated better than those that  live in the province, so there is always an issue about the local area and people making comparisons  there. And…

JON FAINE: Well, that's always the problem if a rich country like Australia decides to offshore  accommodation to poor countries. Timor was suggested, that was very quickly thought to be absurd.  Manus Island, Nauru, we have the same issue in each of these venues, do we not?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm just sensitive to the fact that when you speak to locals in PNG who are,  you know, living a reasonable life and it's in their community, and I'm just making the point that they  draw comparisons. And in so far as the conditions are concerned, very few things were raised with  me by the transferees themselves. The big issue they raised was getting some certainty about the  processing of their claims, and that's understandable, and that's why I could convey to them that the  PNG Government is considering that matter in I think next week.

So that certainly allayed some of their concerns, but - and I also pointed out that we have, as a result  of the expert panel's recommendations, a no advantage principle because we are adamant to deter  people from taking the most dangerous path, particularly, quite often of course in a secondary  movement - that is, leaving a place where they're not being persecuted and, of course, dying at sea. I  think Australians have seen too many people die at sea, too many children, too many adults, and  that's really, you know, that's something we really have to try and prevent.

JON FAINE: Minister, a couple of days ago The Age newspaper on its front page ran a story from  Bianca Hall, who used freedom of information in order to obtain access to incident logs from Nauru.  The incident logs show hunger strikes, self harm, attempts at suicide and any number of issues to do

with human rights abuses by Australia of people in our care. This is a looming disaster, and it's on  your watch now.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, firstly can I just pick up on the point that you raised about not having  access to Manus. I understand you've got an issue about media not having access…

JON FAINE: Well, that's another issue, which is that for reasons I don't understand the ABC has been  refused access, GetUp! have been told they're on a banned peoples list. This is what Russia does  when it wants to stop people inspecting gulags in Siberia, Minister.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I wouldn't compare PNG with Russia of the 1950s if that's what you're  doing. PNG makes these decisions, and by the way GetUp! - quite honestly, if you're going to make  comparisons about what organisations should go through centres, the Red Cross has visited there  and written a report, UNHCR have visited there and they've got open access to those - to that centre  at Manus. So you've been given misinformation about the fact that there are people not being able  to access not only the…

JON FAINE: I have not been…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …centre, but - well, we suggest…

JON FAINE: …given misinformation, it's a fact that GetUp! have been refused access…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:…to your listeners, Jon, you suggested to your listeners that the people…  there are not bodies, very eminent bodies, going in and accessing this centre. Now, I would say that  the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and the Red Cross are in fact the types of  organisations that should have access, and indeed do have access, to the centre. Now, as for  whether journalists and others get a chance to access the centre…

JON FAINE: Why shouldn't the ABC be allowed to go?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That is the decision of the PNG Government, not the decision of Australia,  and quite…

JON FAINE: They do what you tell them.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I find it quite patronising and typical of some critics that they like to suggest  that somehow Australia gets to make decisions on the sovereign soil of another nation.

JON FAINE: We tell New Guinea and we tell Nauru exactly how these centres should be managed.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, that's absolutely untrue.

JON FAINE: I don't believe you.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, that's your problem, not mine. Let me just explain to you. There's a  memorandum of understanding, and that MOU is determined by negotiations. We treat the  Government of PNG with respect. My counterpart, the Foreign Minister and Immigration Minister,  who's someone who I have a high degree of respect for, he worked, you know, as an equal with  Chris Bowen and he'll work as an equal with me, and he makes decisions in his own country. I don't.

JON FAINE: What have we got to hide there, Minister?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I just indicated to you that if you were to suggest to me who should be  accessing transferees in the centre I would first say the Red Cross and UNHCR are the bodies who  should be given access, but of course I do not have a problem in others being given access…

JON FAINE: Can the ABC go there?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR:  That is something that the PNG Government should consider…

JON FAINE: Will you give the ABC…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: But I think it's wrong for you to consider - for you to determine that it's my  decision, not the PNG's decision. It is their decision.

JON FAINE: Will you ask the PNG and Nauruan authorities to allow the ABC to visit and film?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I've raised the matter about access with the PNG Government. It's for them  to determine. I think access and transparency is a good thing. I think some of the reports that've  come out about the centre are in - are not correct. For example, your next guest, Senator Hanson-Young's been there. She seems to have a totally different view of the centre. The Shadow Minister  will be visiting, as I understand it, on Friday. So there are many, many people and many  organisations that are accessing that centre on Manus Island, as should be the case. As should be the  case.

JON FAINE: Will you advocate for the ABC to be given access to Nauru and Manus Island?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: As I said to you, I have no problems with that and I'm happy to…

JON FAINE: That's a different thing…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: …I - let me just finish my sentence.

JON FAINE: Saying you have no problems is different…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm happy with that and I'm happy to convey that to the PNG Government. I  think transparency is a good thing, but I think the position's been misrepresented to some extent,  Jon, in that there have been very significant organisations, very reputable ones, who write reports,  who have had concerns, and they still have concerns, and I'm attending to some of those matters. I  want to satisfy those who've raised legitimate concerns about the centre, and I do believe in access  and transparency, and I'm very happy to make that very clear.

Indeed, I've already made that clear in general terms and I'm happy to be more specific, because I  think with that, you know, if you have a cloak of what would be perceived secrecy then people can,  of course, draw conclusions, as you say yourself. And that's not in the interests of anybody. I don't  think I have - certainly the Government, PNG Government, has nothing to hide.

JON FAINE: Minister, my time is almost up, but just briefly I noticed on the weekend you announced  changes to the 457 visa arrangements.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Yes.

JON FAINE: How can there be 1000 people just in Victoria working in retail on 457 visas? What is  there - what could there possibly be in retail that you need to bring someone in from overseas to  do?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Good point.

JON FAINE: A thousand of them just in Victoria.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's a good point. Look, can I say this work was well undertaken by Chris  Bowen before I became Minister. I just want to make that clear, it's not like I made a decision two  weeks after I'd been the Minister. A lot of the work was done by the Ministerial Advisory Council on  Skilled Migration, and there are people who are - there are employers sponsoring - who sponsor  people and they dress up jobs. For example, in retail they may well have said it was a manager,  managerial job, but we…

JON FAINE: We don't have any managers here?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, I'm just making the point. There are certain occupations that are  allowed to be considered. My point - I'm agreeing with you on this one, Jon  - I think this has to be  properly examined. There's been too many jobs that have been dressed up to look like they're skilled  jobs and, of course, when they come in they're not skilled. Two third of our permanent migration  path is skilled migration, and that's a good thing. But temporary visa protections - temporary visa for  skilled workers is there to be used where there are shortages, and all I want to do is stop the rorts,  and if you don't support these reforms you support the rorts. So I think the Opposition have to  rethink their position on this.

JON FAINE: Are you going to Nauru soon?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I am. I'll be going to Nauru as soon as possible.

JON FAINE: Enjoy the trip, and I hope the ABC can also go and have a look and tell the Australian  public what the money is being spent on and what the conditions there are really like. Thank you for  your time today.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks Jon.

JON FAINE: Brendan O'Connor, the new Minister for Immigration and Citizenship.



