Shadow Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison

ABC Insiders, 3 March 2013

BARRIE CASSIDY, PRESENTER: Now we'll go to our program guest, the Shadow  Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison, who has just toured the Manus Island  facilities in Papua New Guinea. He joins us this morning from Port Moresby.

Good morning, welcome.

SCOTT MORRISON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION: Good morning  Barrie, good to be with you.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Just before we start I know you also wanted to pay tribute to  Peter Harvey?

SCOTT MORRISON: Yes I do, my condolences from everyone in the Coalition to  Peter's family. I grew up watching Peter learning my politics over the news  broadcasts. And it's a terrible loss and our thoughts are with his family and his  colleagues who love him dearly.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Now Scott Morrison, how do you plan to notify residents when  asylum seekers move into the neighbourhood, how do you do that?

SCOTT MORRISON: Let's just go back to first principles. What we are talking about  here are people who are not yet been found to be refugees, who would normally  have been in detention if the Government's detention centres hadn't filled up and the  Government had decided to just let everybody out. The process at the moment is  people would be put into the community for a period of around six weeks where they  go into some arranged accommodation.

Now, that was the arrangement in Macquarie University and what the Macquarie  University incident highlighted was that there had been no guidelines set out about  what appropriate accommodation was. The Department didn't even know that there  were people at Macquarie University. They in fact denied it last August.

So what that incident highlighted was there was an absence of protocols and  procedures and so this canary in the mine incident, if you like, should have been a  wakeup call to the Government to review those procedures.

If you're going to let 10,000 people out into community detention or on bridging visas  who would otherwise be in detention, well there should be some safeguards and  procedures in place, not just for the community but importantly for those you're  releasing into the community because there's been many cases now revealed of  people living in quite squalid conditions out there.

BARRIE CASSIDY: How will you do it? How will you notify that asylum seekers  move into the neighbourhood? Is it a letter box drop, how do you do it?

SCOTT MORRISON: As I said, the accommodation people are going into is  arranged by the service providers. Now, those service providers have the opportunity  to say in Macquarie University's case have a requirement that people living in that  facility are notified at the time. It's not a very difficult exercise, Barrie.

My question is why wouldn't they have a right to be notified if they're living in that  same facility. I mean that's not an uncommon thing for people to expect if the  Government has lost control of the detention centres and they've taken the decision  to put people into the community and actually take out the lease, if you like, on that  accommodation. So referring to here is the accommodation the Government is  directly involved in purchasing and putting people into.

BARRIE CASSIDY: That works in terms of institution but if somebody moves into  number five or number three or something in your street how will you notify them? Is  that when the letter box drop comes in?

SCOTT MORRISON: Again Barrie, I'm referring to the arranged accommodation by  the service providers. That's what I'm referring to, that's what my press release  referred to. This is where the Government themselves through their service providers  are taking out the lease. Where the Government, through their service providers, are  entering into an arrangement with say Macquarie University or the University of  Western Sydney or any number of these places.

I've also said this week that the police should be notified where people are being put  into the community as well. Now that's as much for these people's own protection as  anything else so the police are just aware of people in the community and why you  wouldn't consult the police or advise the police to again to me is a mystery and I  think shows an absence of the Government thinking these things through which they  never do.

They just make decisions on the run.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Why do residents then need to know? Why do they need to  know? What sets asylum seekers apart? Why do they need to know they're living  next door to a asylum seeker?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well Barrie, why shouldn't they know is my point. If I was the  parent of a person living at Macquarie University then I don't think it's unreasonable  that if Macquarie University has entered into an arrangement with the Government to  house a reasonable number of people, that they should be advised of that.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Why?

SCOTT MORRISON: I mean that doesn't seem to be an unreasonable thing for  people to expect because people would otherwise be in detention, Barrie, and these  people are the responsibility of the Minister for Immigration. They are in a special  class because they would otherwise be in detention and the Minister for Immigration  is responsible for them.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But they're not in detention

SCOTT MORRISON: I don't think it's unreasonable for the Government to be forth  right with people. The Government shouldn't hide this information.

BARRIE CASSIDY: They're not in detention because they're criminals.

SCOTT MORRISON: They're in detention, Barrie, because at that stage of the  process we don't know whether they've been found to be refugees or not, the  refugee convention allows people to be detained while they're determining their  refugee status as a course. Secondly, their identity hasn't been fully tested nor has  the ASIO done full security checks on anyone who has been released.

There is a light touch based on who people say they are but as we know with more  than 90 per cent of people turning up without documentation then I think these are  reasonable, common sense safeguards, Barrie, and I think the community has a  reasonable expectation the Government would have some sort of protocols or  guidelines in place.

And I ask you this question, is it appropriate to have the Macquarie University  arrangement in place? The Government doesn't have an answer to that question  because they didn't even think about it. They don't even have an answer or a policy  and that is what I'm highlighting is the problem. There is an absence of process and  guidelines here and this incident has highlighted it.

BARRIE CASSIDY: All of these people have had security assessments?

SCOTT MORRISON: No, Barrie, they have had light-touch assessments based on  an identity that has not yet been established. ASIO does not do full security  assessments until someone has been found to be a refugee. That's the testimony of  David Irvine the head of ASIO. There's a light-touch assessment based on the  identity the asylum seeker claims to have. Now that is not a full ASIO assessment by  any stretch of the imagination.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Are you not overreacting to one case of an alleged indecent  assault?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, again, Barrie, I think the overreaction is on the hysteria to  my comments. What I've said is this is a canary in the mine incident that has shown  up a failure and absence of government process.

BARRIE CASSIDY: One case.

SCOTT MORRISON: That's the issue, the absence of ... the absence of  Government. Well Barrie, they didn't know there were people at Macquarie  University. They didn't know.

BARRIE CASSIDY: The department put them there.

SCOTT MORRISON: They had no idea about the people who were in Parramatta in  the office buildings or in Brisbane. The Government doesn't know what's going on  and I think that's a problem. Now you may not but I think it's a problem and I think it's

important the Government take stock of a rushed decision and get some proper  procedures and protocols in place. I think that's what the community would expect  and it's certainly what I would do.

BARRIE CASSIDY: If it were true it would be a problem but the Immigration  Department claims they know where these people are, the Red Cross know where  they are and the Immigration Department insists that they report in regularly and if  they change addresses they must let them know.

SCOTT MORRISON: Explain this to me. Why is it then that the Department of  Immigration had to apologise when they said they had previously denied the fact that  there were people at Macquarie University? They denied it, they didn't know they  were. They didn't know there were people out in Parramatta either Barrie. So if you  want to believe the Government's spin go right ahead, I don't.

BARRIE CASSIDY: You asked me to explain it, they said that last August, were they  there last August, I don't know?

SCOTT MORRISON: Yes, they were Barrie and they admitted that and apologised  for being wrong about it. Did they know these people were out in Parramatta in those  squalid conditions? Did they know they were up in Brisbane in similar squalid  conditions? Did they know there were people in aged care facilities adjacent in  Adelaide?

What is highlighted is they rushed this decision as they've rushed every decision  because they can't control the borders, they couldn't control the detention centres  and they're just dumping people in the community. Now that's not good for those  individuals and I think there are issues for the community to look at as well. So look,  I've just said look, they've been shown up for having a poor process. They should  review their process. Now that's what I think a good minister would do who was on  the ball.

BARRIE CASSIDY: The asylum seekers can't work, it's within their interests to stay  in touch with the Department of Immigration so of course they know where they are  at any given time and the person who was charged with the indecent assault by the  way...

SCOTT MORRISON: Explain the situation in Parramatta. Explain the situation in  Parramatta where there were people living in squalid offices, explain how the  Department thought that was a good idea. Explain to me how Macquarie  accommodation was considered to be appropriate or inappropriate and the answer is  the Government had a view neither way because they don't have a policy. There's  no policy, Barrie. There's none. So don't you think there should be one?

BARRIE CASSIDY: They actually contacted the Sri Lankan who was charged with  indecent assault and notified him to come into the Department so they must have  known in the first case where he was.

SCOTT MORRISON: So they must have been very happy with the accommodation  he was living then in Parramatta and they must have thought that accommodation

was therefore appropriate and had full knowledge of the nature of the  accommodation. They didn't because it was squalid. The Government doesn't know  what's going on and that's the point I'm making. If people want to get side tracked  with the hysteria about the usual claims and rebuttals I get when three years ago  Barrie I said people would continue to die on boats if the Government continued on  this path and people called me racist. People should concentrate on getting policies  right.

BARRIE CASSIDY: When you blocked families going to the funerals of those killed  on Christmas Island.

SCOTT MORRISON: I did not do that, Barrie, as you know. What I suggested was  those funerals could have taken place on Christmas Island and when I discovered  that wasn't possible those arrangements went forward. It was never my intention to  separate those families from the funerals at any time. Another beat up which I think  was very appallingly handled by the reporting.

BARRIE CASSIDY: How do you feel then when people in your own party say that  some of your comments bring out racist elements in the community?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well I reject those statements and those have always opposed  the Coalition's border protection policies in government and opposition. They  opposed the Howard government policies that were very effective so I'm very  pleased to stand by the Howard government policies and the approach that we took  then and the approach I intend to take if we're elected and I become the minister.

BARRIE CASSIDY: When you look at the social media there's some nasty things  said about asylum seekers at times. Does it concern you if you do identify them and  tell people where they are that it might expose them to intimidation?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, one of the reasons that I think police should be notified  when people go into the community is that they could be aware of people in the  community and obviously that impacts on the sort of protection and support that is  going to be needed in the community. I mean people are just dumped into the  community Barrie, blind, out of sight, out of mind and I don't think that's how this  should operate and let's go back to the fundamental point, they would all be in  detention, they would all be in detention except for families released under the  residence determination provisions if this Government hadn't filled our detention  centres to the brim because they can't get the policy right on the borders.

I mean it all goes back to this border policy failure. This is the consequence of the  Government's failure. Cost, chaos, tragedy, blow outs in the budget of $5 billion  since the last election. I mean if the Government wants to talk about forecasting on  budgets they got it wrong by $5 billion on asylum seekers since the last election  alone. It's a mess and others may want to defend them for it. I'm certainly going to  hold them to account for it.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Are you aware in the last three years more politicians have been  charged with offences in Australia than asylum seekers?

SCOTT MORRISON: Barrie, you seem to be missing the point. The procedures have  been found to be wanting, that's the issue. This specific incident has highlighted a  broader failure of policy and process. That's the point. The specific incident will be  dealt with in the courts. That's how it will be dealt with. But the individuals we're  talking about here are subject to a process which I think is deficient. It's been shown  up to be deficient and a good minister would rather than deflecting attention and  making excuses would actually get the policy right which this minister is not doing.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Okay, you've just had a look at the facilities at Manus Island,  what are your impressions?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, I think here we've got another case where the  Government has been forced and kicking and screaming into a decision and they've  taken some rushed decisions up here in Manus, I believe. I think the combination of  the single adult males and the family services up here is very problematic.

Yesterday I sat down with those living in the centre, with a group of mothers in  particular and they expressed to me very serious concerns about the behaviour of  the single adult males, I'm talking about protest activity, fighting and loud noises and  these sorts of things, I'm not suggesting anything else, and they were very  concerned about that.

And I've always been puzzled Barrie as to why those two groups of people are within  the one facility. There's a fence in between with a big green sheet over it but the  combination of those two groups I don't think is as appropriate and it's certainly  something I'd be taking a look at and I think the Government would need to explain  why they're finding the need to do just that with this facility. I mean it's not done  anywhere else in the detention network.

Other than that, Barrie, I mean the centres they're temporary and they're sadly going  to be, I think, temporary for a very long period of time. The permanent facility is some  time away and I think that's going to present some very difficult challenges for those  operating the centre and for the people who will be living there and I don't make any,  you know, misrepresentations about that at all. I mean I think it's going to be tougher  in Manus.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And in your conversation with asylum seekers, the living  conditions the main thing on their minds or is it the need to have a way forward so  that they know what the procedures are going to be?

SCOTT MORRISON: I think that's the primary one, Barrie, the point you last made.  There are issues about the facilities and they're temporary and particularly for the  single males in tents that's a pretty tough environment. For the families who are in  the more permanent accommodation, there was a request made for air conditioning  for the children and I know that's been put to the Minister and it's for him to respond  to that. That would certainly help them with their learning because I think they're  finding it difficult to sleep at night but that's some of the feedback I got.

But their major issues really are about why are they there and why are the people  who came out on the same boat on bridging visas in Australia, that seems to be

completely puzzling to them and it's puzzling to me also and the other issue they  raise is getting that process started.

I met with the chief migration officer here in Port Moresby. I met with the provincial  authority and those putting that process together. I think the Papua New Guinean  Government is moving as quickly as they can to put try and get these processes in  place. They will be doing the assessing and they want to get the job done right.  Australians will be training those people who will be doing the assessing and the  sooner that can get started I think the better but I can't fault the Papua New Guinean  Government for the efforts they're making to get all this in place.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Scott Morrison, thank you for time. Appreciate it.

SCOTT MORRISON: Thank you very much, Barrie.



