1









Christine Milne   Australian Greens Leader



Monday 29 April

Press conference

Transcript

Subjects: Budget, mining tax, Sri Lanka, marriage equality

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well the big news today is the world has reached 400 parts per million in terms of  carbon dioxide and global warming. It’s the hottest we’ve been in 3 million years and this means that  we are running out of time to reduce emissions and make the transition to the low carbon economy,  which we know is going to be the competitive space in this century. This accompanies reports from  AEMO, the Australian Energy Market Operator, saying that it is technically possible to achieve 100  per cent renewable energy. It’s just a question of when we would like to do that by and how much  we want to invest in doing it. And that is good news for Australia. David Cameron has come out in  the UK and said very clearly that the countries that are going to be most competitive in this century  are those that make the transition to clean energy, and I couldn’t agree more. Which brings me of  course to the federal budget and the Prime Minister saying that she expects there to be a $12 billion  black hole in the budget as a result of company tax profits because of the high dollar predominantly.  However she has framed the debate in the wrong way, she is trying to suggest it’s a question of  whether we have a deeper and deeper deficit or whether we go ahead with national reforms. Well  the Greens are saying let’s go ahead with the big national reforms, we’re right behind investing in  education, getting the National Disability Scheme up and running. We are absolutely behind  improving dental health for the Australian community. But that means raising money. And so instead  of framing it as a choice between the higher deficit or the reforms, it should be the reforms, plus  raising money, plus the deficit. We know we have to go into deficit but at the same time we have got  a revenue raising issue in Australia and it’s time both the Coalition and the Government addressed it.  And that’s why the Greens said fix the mining tracks, fix the mining tax and we could raise $26 billion  in order to fill this hole; get rid of fossil fuel subsidies  - $13 billion over the forward estimates by just  getting rid of fossil fuel subsidies and that is to the big miners, that is not to agriculture but to the big  miners. So why wouldn’t you address the global warming issue, make Australia more competitive as  a national economy and raise money. It makes sense. The only reason the Prime Minister and Tony  Abbott will not touch the mining companies or the fossil fuel subsidies is that they are afraid to take  on those interests and instead want to slash and burn where Tony Abbott is concerned, and the  Prime Minister says she wants to make careful cuts. Well it is not a careful cut, it is a reckless cut to  take money out of universities. We need to invest in education, from early childhood through to

2



university right through life. Education is one of those things that will make us competitive in this  century and it is a false economy absolutely to think you can rob Peter to pay Paul in education  funding. Let’s fund education, let’s raise the money by getting rid of those fossil fuel subsidies.

I wanted to just make a quick comment on Sri Lanka. Australia should stay home from CHOGM. It is  quite clear that the Canadians are taking the moral leadership on this issue, increasingly human  rights advocates around the world are talking about ongoing torture, ongoing human rights abuses  in Sri Lanka, the Prime Minister should be listening to those in taking a stand, instead of turning a  blind eye and she’s turning that blind eye because she thinks it is more important to send asylum  seekers back to Sri Lanka than actually address the reason why they are seeking asylum in the first  place and that is the persecution that’s going on there at the moment.

The final issue of the day, marriage equality - let’s get on with marriage equality now. Let’s legislate  it before the election. We now have an opportunity, we’ve got a live bill in the House of  Representatives and in the Senate. Adam Bandt and Sarah Hanson- Young, the Greens are prepared  to move on this right now and the only impediment is that the Coalition won’t provide a conscience  vote. This is Tony Abbott - so Tony Abbott should give the conscience vote to his members in both  Houses of Parliament and we can legislate this before the election. And if people want to vote for  marriage equality they should vote for the Greens at the federal election. If not before that, vote  and get onto Tony Abbott to change the Coalition's position before the election and let’s get it voted  on before we go to the polls in September. The whole issue of trying to push it out to get discussion  on a referendum or a plebiscite is a deliberate distraction away from actually dealing with it now.  Let’s actually focus on Tony Abbott. Will you give a conscience vote to your members right now so  we can vote on this and get it up before the federal election?

JOURNALIST: Just on the cuts the Government says it has to make to bring in the NDIS and bring in  Gonski - will the Greens oppose some of the cuts?

CHRISTINE MILNE: We’ve said quite clearly we want to raise money, we were the ones who called  for the deficit in the first place, we thought it was sensible because jobs were being lost, particularly  in manufacturing across the country and we said that was a bad thing. So we called for the deficit  but we’re also recognising you can’t drive the deficit deeper and deeper and deeper as the Grattan  Institute has said, we need to raise money, that’s why we’re saying raise it from those who can  afford to pay and that is the mining industry and get rid of fossil fuels. We’re also saying we will not  support the cuts to the university sector. We support investment in education at every level. It is  completely wrong to try and pit the university sector and students at the tertiary level against  children in schools. Bad idea, go back and rethink that one.

JOURNALIST: Will you block that in the Senate though, the university cuts specifically?

CHRISTINE MILNE: The Greens have said that if the Government brings legislation in to cut  universities we won’t pass it.

JOURNALIST: Are there any other specific items that the Greens won’t pass?

CHRISTINE MILNE: So far that is the only specific area that the Government says they would cut in  order to fund Gonski. We want Gonski implement, we were the first ones to sign-on, we think it’s  great. And the reality is that if you are going to get away from an economy that is dig it up, cut it

3



down, ship it away you invest in people’s education, and that goes from early childhood to tertiary  and it is a nonsense for someone who says she is an education crusader to say we are going to take  it out of universities to put it into schools. We need schools and universities and TAFE colleges  funded.

JOURNALIST: Are potential other cuts the government may announce between now and then, will  the Greens look at those and look at blocking those in the Senate?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well the Greens have said very clearly that we will look at every bill that comes  through between now and the election. The Government is going to announce their budget very  shortly, and let the budget come through with very specific bills and as they come through we will  look at them, but we are keen to say to the Government we are right there to work with you to get  rid of those fossil fuel subsidies $13 billion can be had right now as can $26 billion by fixing the  mining tax. And the square question to Tony Abbott and Julia Gillard is why are you prepared to let  the richest companies in the country that send most of those profits of overseas - why are you  prepared to let them off the hook and take the money out of the pockets of single parents? It’s not  only the NDIS and Gonski that needs funding. We need to lift Newstart. We can’t have people left in  poverty. We have to fix this issue of single-parent funding and Newstart - that is an imperative, but  that means you have to raise money and the money is there to be had, what isn’t there is the  political will to take on the people who can pay.

JOURNALIST: What negotiations if any have you had with the Government about changing the  mining tax?

CHRISTINE MILNE I have had numerous conversations of the Prime Minister over the last year on the  mining tax. Since the Government walked away from the Greens earlier this year I haven’t had any  conversations with her, but I got up the Senate Inquiry into the mining tax and witness after witness  makes it perfectly clear that the Government did a deal with the mining companies which essentially  gave the Government a political win and the mining companies a massive profit win. That was the  deal that was done and they’re not prepared to revisit and what that says to the Australian  community is that Labor and the Coalition are in bed with the big miners and they are not prepared  to change that and it’s only the Greens who will take this on and we will continue to do so.

JOURNALIST: You haven’t spoken directly with the Government since that agreement was torn up -  have the Greens lost their leverage in that respect?

CHRISTINE MILNE: no at all because the leverage is in how the votes fall in the Federal Parliament. It  is the votes that count and we have made it quite clear to the Government that we will not support  cuts to university funding, we will support changes to the mining tax and we have got another  hearing on the mining tax today and yet again I’ll be saying to the Prime Minister through the  Parliament - fix the mining tax, the money’s there to be had, let’s make people living below the  poverty line on Newstart, let’s actually give them some hope. Let’s get single parents some hope,  let’s actually take on the people who can pay for goodness sake stop talking about Bruce Springsteen  and actually act on the sentiment of equality.

JOURNALIST: Do the Greens support a referendum on gay marriage? In the paper today indicating  you did.

4



CHRISTINE MILNE: What the Greens’ position is is we need to get on and do it now. I think the whole  issue of the referendum and the plebiscite has been a deliberate distraction and I am saying what we  want to do is actually get on and legislate it now. If the conversation goes onto the plebiscite and the  referendum it lets everybody off the hook until after the election. I don’t want that to happen. I  want marriage equality now, it is a matter of discrimination that we’re dealing with and that’s  something that the Parliament can legislate for. It is already in the Constitution that the Federal  Government has responsibility for marriage so you don’t need to change the Constitution to deal  with it, what you do need to do is use the Parliament to make clear what the law is and the law  should say that we have marriage equality in Australia just like the French, just like the Americans  are going to do, just like New Zealand has just voted on, we are looking increasingly and increasingly  last century and this is something this Parliament can act on now before the Federal election.

JOURNALIST: So you don’t support referendum?

CHRISTINE MILNE: No a referendum isn’t necessary to deal with this issue because it’s already in the  Constitution. On the question of plebiscite that is an opinion poll only - I much prefer legislation to  an opinion poll. We don’t need another opinion poll, what we need is action now on addressing  marriage equality and that means voting in the Parliament and putting Tony Abbott right in the  spotlight. He is now crab-walking away from this by trying to say that after the election he will give  his members a conscience vote. People are saying let’s not talk about it now let’s get up this furphy  of an issue.  It is a furphy, Tony Windsor recognises that and he has been saying today he wouldn’t  put it up, we’re not putting it up what we are putting up is legislation to have marriage equality go  through the Parliament now and the question to Tony Abbott is - do you support a conscience vote  and if so let’s have it now and let’s have the vote before the election.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) call for a referendum, do you think that recognises that there is a disparity  between community opinion and what’s happening at a parliament level?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well I certainly think the reason that there’s any talk at all about going out to a  referendum on this issue or a plebiscite or anything else is that the community is just totally  frustrated that the Parliament isn’t reflecting the community view. And that’s obvious wherever you  go people say what is going on here what is wrong with Tony Abbott and Julia Gillard. The fact of the  matter is that the leadership of both the Coalition and the Labor Party that is the problem. If they  change their position tomorrow then this would go through very fast. The only reason that members  of the Labor Party and the Coalition are still opposing marriage equality is that they don’t want to be  seen to be disloyal to their leaders. That’s it. So the questions to Julia Gillard is why are you caving in  to the shoppies union, why are you caving into Joe de Bruyn, why are you just relying on the  numbers boys in the back room and blocking marriage equality, and to Tony Abbott - stop fudging  this issue and saying you’ll give a conscience vote to your party room after the election, if you’re  going to do it after the election, do it now, let’s get it through now.

JOURNALIST: Just on revenue again quickly  - GST is one way that’s been raised to increase revenue,  Nick Minchin said GST is the best way to raise revenue - do you think that increasing the rate or  broadening the base is a feasible option that you’d support?

CHRISTINE MILNE: No I don’t want to see the GST changed and nor do I want to see the rate  increased, and I think this is another issue that, isn’t it interesting that the Coalition always want to

5



go after the community and they don’t want to raise the money from the big vested interests that  can afford to pay. You really have to look at the state of this nation and the vulnerabilities we’ve got.  The Carbon Tracker came out last week saying that these fossil fuel industries is a big carbon bubble  and that the share value of a lot of these fossil fuel industries is inflated because many of their  reserves we simply can’t afford to extract and yet you have got Tony Abbott saying that he is going  to get rid of the mining tax, he says he’s going to get rid of carbon pricing, he says he’s  going to use  taxpayer dollars to pay polluters not to pollute and refuses to say where the money is going to come  from. I think it’s pretty clear where the money is going to come from - slash and burn the public  service and from him raise the GST and get consumers to pay for it, well that’s the wrong way to go.

JOURNALIST: One of the biggest factors influencing the decrease in revenue is the high Australian  dollar, Ross Garnaut is one economist that says we should cap the dollar, what’s the Greens’ view on  capping or limiting the dollar?

CHRISTINE MILNE: I’ve seen this debate about interfering in the dollar and I’ve also seen the remarks  from the Reserve Bank board. I think it is an issue that I would be prepared to listen to what the  Reserve Bank board has to say and watch the debate. I don’t have a definitive view, but it’s not  something that the Greens are backing at this point. What we are backing is saying, and we’ve said  this all along, is let’s get our fair share back from the mining industry to put into the budget so that  we can fund the things that are nation-building for this country into the future.

JOURNALIST: Just briefly, Penny Wong said this morning that no one could have predicted this drop  in revenue. Do you think that’s correct - that Treasury or no economist could have predicted it?

CHRISTINE MILNE: I think what has happened is that people have just assumed that if commodity  prices come off then the dollar will come back. What they hadn’t perhaps factored in is the extent to  which Australia has become a safe haven for investment for other currencies and that has led to the  issue with the bond market and so on. So there is an argument that they may not have predicted  that in the light of the European crisis but nevertheless there has been a sufficient trend with mining  booms in the past to know that after the boom there is always a bust and we should be looking at  how you even out the impact of the mining boom on the manufacturing sector because we all know  that manufacturing and education and tourism have taken a hit because of the high dollar and that  was entirely predictable and the fall in company tax to those sectors ought to have been predicted.

JOURNALIST: Should Treasury review the way it does its modelling and predictions given the  forecasts that have been incorrect so far?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well I think that’s largely up to Treasury and I think since they have now got it  wrong to the extent they have I think they will be asking themselves the same questions.



