MEET THE PRESS

28 APRIL 2013

INTERVIEW WITH DAVID BRADBURY

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Hello and welcome to Meet the Press. I'm Kathryn Robinson. On  today's show - plunging into deficit - we speak to Assistant Treasurer David Bradbury about the  Budget black hole, and how long it will take to be plugged. Throwing his hat into the ring - mining  magnate Clive Palmer joins us to discuss his political aspirations. And cultural cringe - theatre legend  John Bell on why John Bell on why we still underplay our artistic achievements.

JOHN BELL: We still undervalue what we can do here. And it’s only when somebody wins an Oscar or  a - we think “Oh my God, we can do it too. We’re that good.”

KATHRYN ROBINSON: More on that later, but first, within just a few weeks, Treasurer Wayne Swan  will deliver a Budget which economists tip will show a multi-billion dollar deficit. Some even predict it  will take a decade to get back into the black. The Sunday papers suggest the Prime Minister is already  planning for the fallout, with the morale-boosting trip back to western Sydney on the cards for late  May. To look at this and more, I'm joined by our panel this morning, Network Ten's national affairs  editor, Paul Bongiorno. Tory Maguire, News Ltd's opinion editor. And national political correspondent  Steve Lewis. Good morning to you all. And our guest this morning, in our studio with us, is Assistant  Treasurer David Bradbury. Welcome to you this morning, Minister, thank you for your time.

DAVID BRADBURY: Good morning.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Let’s talk about the Budget. It’s the last throw of the dice, if you like, for the  Government. It’s a pre-election budget. What’s it going to look like, and what’s in it for families?

DAVID BRADBURY: Well, you won't be getting any scoops about what will be in the Budget, as you can  appreciate, but obviously this is an important Budget for the Government and for the country. It's a  budget that will represent a consolidation of many of things that we’ve been doing in recent years,  and that has been in large measure about trying to make sure that we achieve some sustainability  moving forward. And that means about having a look at, on the revenue side, what money is coming  in - we've been dramatically hit by the ravages of the global financial crisis, and what has followed.  Our revenues have been hit to the tune of about $160 billion. That means, like anyone trying to  manage a budget, if the money coming in has been hit with such a sledgehammer, then you need to  have a look at your expenditure, you need to make sure that expenditure is being targeted to the  areas where it’s needed most. We've said consistently that we are not about austerity, we’re not  going to take the country down a philosophical pursuit that says that we will trash jobs, and trash the  economy, in order to simply balance the Budget. We will do what is necessary in a responsible way,  but we will do what we’ve always done, and that is put jobs first.

PAUL BONGIORNO: But we know that you’ve got two very big ticket items out there - you’ve got the  Gonski education reforms, and you’ve got the NDIS, the disability reforms. Given that every senior  economist in the country is pointing to the fact that the Budget’s either going to need tax rises or  massive spending cuts, does anything that you or indeed the Liberals put forward before the Budget -  can it survive election day? Won't there have been to be broken promises?

DAVID BRADBURY: Well we are, as you say, determined to deliver on these big-ticket reforms. These  are reforms that as a Labor Government we are determined to not only roll out plans for, but to  entrench for the future of the country, whether it be the national disability insurance scheme, and  making sure that we do what Labor Governments before us have done - whether it be implementing  Medicare, entrenching that as a part of the social fabric.





PAUL BONGIORNO: Well Medicare had a tax attached to it. Won’t you have to raise taxes?

DAVID BRADBURY: Well look, in terms of how we are funding these matters, obviously that will be  absolutely central to the Budget itself. We'll be releasing those details in the fullness of time. But it  will be critical that we set out a very detailed plan for how we intend to pay for these reforms. If we  don't, then obviously, the longevity of those reforms will be under question. So we need to make sure  that we have a very strong set of figures behind how we will fund it, and that’s what we’re  determined to do.

STEVE LEWIS: Minister, with Labor well behind in the polls, can we expect this - a pre-election Budget  - to include a raft of giveaways and sweeteners for middle Australia?

DAVID BRADBURY: Look, I think the reality is that the days of - back in those days where Peter  Costello and John Howard would be waiting for the final figures of revenue to come in, before they  put the final touches on the Budget, and all of a sudden billions of extra dollars were flowing in, and  they really had trouble finding how they were going to throw the money out the door fast enough.

STEVE LEWIS: But you said this won't be about austerity. We can expect Labor will fund a whole raft  of sweeteners and giveaways to middle Australia, can't we?

DAVID BRADBURY: Look, the time for giveaways has well and truly passed. If you’ve been looking at  the reports that have been issued by many economists over recent times, and you listen to what the  Government has actually been saying, we are living in a different world, post-GFC. The mining boom  continues to provide enormous opportunities for us, but the peak in prices has come and gone. We  are now moving into a future where we need to make sure that we have a sustainable fiscal  approach. Now that means that the giveaways, you know, some of them pretty blatant in the past,  particularly during the Howard era. But I make the point, that there’s been a lot of commentary about  some of the reports in the last week. The macroeconomics report that was released made a simple  finding - that the final five years of the Howard Government was the most fiscally reckless period that  we have seen in recent years. Not something that got a lot of attention. But I guess what we’re saying  is that those days have come and passed. We need to be responsible, and we will be delivering a  responsible Budget that will deliver on our big commitments.

TORY MAGUIRE: Minister, I know you’re not in a position to tell us what’s in the Budget, but what are  the areas where spending can be cut? I mean, there must be sectors that have been identified, and  certainly economists across the country have identified areas that spending can be reined in. You  know, you must have some sort of at least broad approach to how you’re going to get the deficit  under control.

DAVID BRADBURY: And we will be releasing those details, as you can appreciate it. But I think it’s  worth actually having a look at what we’ve done, and one of those other reports released this week,  which was the Grattan Institute's report - they made one observation - that when it comes to so-called middle class welfare, which every man and his dog is out there telling you, needs to be what we  take an axe to. They made the point that Australia is actually leading the world in targeting our  benefits and assistance. Now that’s something that has not just happened overnight. We've actually  taken some really difficult decisions over the last few years. I have to say -

TORY MAGUIRE: But that report also said that without drastic action we’re going to be running  massive deficits into the foreseeable future.

DAVID BRADBURY: It did, and I’m not going to agree or disagree with the details of the figures that  they’ve released. But what I will say is that the things we’ve been doing have not been popular, and I  just want to underline this point. When I'm out there door-knocking in my electorate, no-one ever  thanks you for putting in place a means test on the private health insurance rebate. But I tell you  what - if we did not take that action, then health spending in this country would be even less  sustainable than it is today.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Minister, the Treasurer admitted in an article he wrote for the Chifley Institute  that Labor hasn't always pulled the right rein. What’s been the biggest mistake in the last five years?

DAVID BRADBURY: Look, I’m not going to give a running commentary on the things we’ve got right or  the things we haven’t. I think they’re matters left for books that people might choose to write at  some very distant point in the future.

STEVE LEWIS: Well, there’s a few of those coming along. Are you planning to pen a book?

DAVID BRADBURY: For my part, I have to say that I think we have managed to get the big calls right,  and when people look back on what we’ve done in office, and they look at the global financial crisis,  the biggest economic downturn of a generation, and we got the calls right. We stimulated the  economy. There will continue to be debate about it, but everybody knows - when you travel around  the world and you have a look, Australia is the standout performer. Why? Yeah, we did have the  capacity to do it, and that should be acknowledged. But we made the right calls when the challenge  came forward, and I think that’s why hundreds of thousands of Australians that have jobs today  recognise the fact that that’s because of the action that we took.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Minister, we need to take a break right now, but do stay with us. After the  break, we look at the battle for western Sydney, with David Bradbury.

***  KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Welcome back to Meet the Press, and don't forget you can join the  conversation on Facebook or Twitter, using the hashtag #MTP10. Our guest today is Assistant  Treasurer David Bradbury. Minister, there are reports in the paper today that Julia Gillard is returning  to the west in Sydney, to shore up the morale of her MPs, of which you are one of them. What can  she possibly say to you to boost morale?

DAVID BRADBURY: Well I welcome the Prime Minister to come out to western Sydney, whenever she  can, and she has been a regular visitor to the region. Look, I don't think there’s anything out of the  ordinary here. Like I said, she’s been to the region many times, and this is the usual sort of thing you  get in the lead-up to an election, where it’s an opportunity to speak directly to all of the candidates.  But I hope when she comes out to western Sydney she uses the opportunity to remind people right  across the region of the dangers of an Abbott Government. And one of the points that needs to be  made is that there are hundreds of thousands of pensioners across our region that face a pension cut,  after having seen their pension increase under Labor over successive years. That is what we have. Mr  Abbott has said you don't have a carbon price, you don't need the compensation. That means slashing  pensions, it means ripping away family payments to hundreds of thousands of families in the region,  and about half a million people potentially will lose the tax cut that we’ve delivered. So I think it’s  important that the Prime Minister continue to come to the region, and to use it as an opportunity just  to remind people of the stark difference between us and our opponents.

STEVE LEWIS: Minister, last time the Prime Minister was in your neck of the woods, which was a  month or so ago, she was criticised for not doing street walks, for not actually meeting with voters.  Would you be happy to do a street walk with the Prime Minister down the main street of Penrith  today?

DAVID BRADBURY: Yeah, look, I would.

STEVE LEWIS: How do you think she’d be received?

DAVID BRADBURY: And I’ve done it before, and on the last occasion, prior to the last visit, we did a  street walk through the Penrith Plaza.

STEVE LEWIS: And you wouldn’t need extra protection today?

DAVID BRADBURY: Extra protection just to keep people away. There were people mobbing us. And  that was the truth of it. That is the truth of it. There were cameras there, people knew what was going  on. And in fact, that was not long after the carbon pricing arrangements had been revealed. So I think  that in the end, you’ve got to understand, we live the sort of life that you go out there, and it’s a  rough-and-tumble life in politics, there are always people prepared to let you know what they think.  But at the end of the day, I think one of the great things about our country is that our political leaders  are given the opportunity to get out and mix in the community, something that the Prime Minister  has done in the past, and I'm sure she’ll continue to do.

STEVE LEWIS: Would you rather have Julia Gillard or Kevin Rudd though, walking through the streets  of Penrith? Kevin Rudd is mobbed when he is out in the public. We see that time and time again. Isn't  the brutal reality that he is more popular with voters, particularly in seats like yours, Lindsay, which is  very marginal, and you’ll be working very hard to try and retain it. But Kevin Rudd is still more popular  than Julia Gillard, and when she gets out on these street walks, she doesn't provide that bounce, that  boost, that you’re seeking?

DAVID BRADBURY: Well, look, I'm not going to go back to the old days of leadership talk. I think that's  been well and truly resolved. I just ask the question - how many times must it be resolved before  people actually get over it.

TORY MAGUIRE: I think that’s probably a good question for some of your colleagues, Minister,  because it’s pretty clear - the big interview yesterday, published with Simon Crean, where it was  pretty clear that he has not moved on from his position of a few weeks ago, when he brought on the  non-spill, and he is not prepared to shut up, and he’s not prepared to stop critiquing the performance  of the Prime Minister. How confident are you that, you know, the person that - the leader that you  supported, is going to have a free run between now and September 14.

DAVID BRADBURY: I just find it extraordinary that we’re here talking about something that Simon  Crean had to say, and I’ve got a lot of time for Simon. The point was, we have had, in the last 24  hours, the Liberals out there talking about how they will increase the GST. Nick Minchin out there -  not some rogue element within the Liberal party - this is the bloke that Tony Abbott’s only the leader  of the Liberal Party because he had the blessing of Nick Minchin. He writes an opinion piece yesterday  saying that the future of the Liberal Party is to do what Jamie Briggs and others within the Liberal  Party have already said should happen, is to jack up the GST. Now I would much rather, and I think  the Australian people deserve the opportunity to hear about, the policies that will actually impact on  their lives, rather than these issues.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well okay Minister, let's talk about the issue that really does exercise the mind of  voters in western Sydney, and particularly in your seat, and that is boat people. The Opposition,  thoughtfully, yesterday put out a press release showing that 19,000 boat people have arrived already  this financial year, it will hit 20,000. When you’re knocking on the doors in your electorate, what do  you tell your electors about asylum seekers and how the Government is dealing with it?

DAVID BRADBURY: Well look, this is obviously an issue that is of concern to people, not just in  electorates like mine in western Sydney but I think it’s an issue right around the country. And I think  people, you know, genuinely would like to see this issue dealt with and resolved. And I think the thing  that I say to people is that -

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, the argument is that Labor’s been there five years, and it’s gotten worse  every year.











DAVID BRADBURY: Well, true. Look, they’re the arguments that people put. But equally I make the  point that we have a proposal in the Malaysian arrangement that will effectively take people and put  them back to those parts of routes that they’re travelling through on their way to Australia. Now, until  we implement all of the details of the expert panel's recommendations, then I don't think we are  going to have an effective response. We are out there doing all that we can, we’ve embraced offshore  processing as a means of addressing these issues. When it comes to those that have been coming  through the Sri Lankan pipeline, around about 1,000 have been sent back to Sri Lanka, because they  were not genuine asylum seekers.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Well, Tony Abbott’s still promising to stop the boats, Labor’s given up promising  it.

DAVID BRADBURY: Well what Tony Abbott needs to answer is if he does get into Government, will he  completely rule out embracing something along the lines of the Malaysian arrangement? Now, the  reason I say that is that he has done everything within his power to block that in the Parliament. But it  wasn't that long before we came up with this idea, that his own Shadow Minister had a proposal, not  to send them to Malaysia - which we are told is such a terrible place you can’t send anyone, but yet  they say they’ll turn boats around and send people back to Indonesia, which is not a signatory to the  Convention anyway - but Scott Morrison had a proposal to actually not send people back to Malaysia,  send them back to places like Iran and Pakistan. Now, will Mr Abbott rule out having any sort of  return arrangement of the sort that we’ve put in place with Malaysia? I don't think he will rule that  out, because at the end of the day, what he has done is deny our Government the opportunity to take  the sort of action that we think as being necessary. And at the time, he was criticised for it, I don't  think nearly as much as he should have been. But at the end of the day, he’s the bloke that says he  wants to stop the boats. We had a real solution to try and address that. He voted against it.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Minister, I’m afraid we’re out of time, but thank you very much for joining us  today on Meet the Press, Assistant Treasurer David Bradbury.

DAVID BRADBURY: Good to be with you.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Well, coming up next on the program - Clive Palmer - is it possible he is about  to become a titanic Thorn in the Government's side? His aspirations to make The Lodge his home, in  just a moment.

