Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

Sky News

Australian Agenda

Scott Morrison

14 July 2013



Interview with Shadow Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison

Australian Agenda program, 14 July 2013



Peter van Onselen:  As mentioned in the introduction the issue of asylum seekers is continually in the news  and again yesterday with another tragedy at sea. And off the back of that whatever  your political persuasion, whatever your view on the issue of asylum seekers, certainly  it will be an election issue - and a major one at that. And to discuss it we're joined now  by the Shadow Immigration Minister Scott Morrison, welcome to the program.

Scott Morrison:  Thanks Peter.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I just ask you about the tow-back policy. There's been a discussion about aspects  to it and no doubt we'll do that again today, but I haven't heard anything about the  kind of resources your planning to put into it. How many Customs vessels would you  see as playing a role in tow backs? Logistically how would you approach that?

Scott Morrison:  The turn-back policy that we've had, where it's safe to do so, would be deploying the  assets and resources of our existing fleets. And don't forget at the moment those fleets  are currently deployed in wide-ranging tasks running a water taxi service and  increasingly running search and rescue operations. So they are already running at a  very significant level of operations. Now we will be posing a similar significant level of  operations so there's nothing to suggest at this stage, and in any of the advice I've  received, that it would require a massive change to the extended deployment, just the  nature of the deployment.

Peter van Onselen:  I guess where I'm coming from on this though is that when the Howard Government  towed boats back before the circumstances weren't as significant in terms of the  number of boats arriving, and I'm just wondering simply on logistics whether boats

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

having to take individual boats back when there are so many coming, what does that  do to the front line of border protection?

Scott Morrison:  Well, in terms of your existing assets, that exist both within navy and border  protection, you'd also know that there's been a significant change in what we actually  deploy now compared to what happened back in 2001 with the Armidale class and  we're now getting the Cape class vessels in the Customs starting to be rolled out and  deployed as well. Now, the extent to which other vessels need to be leased and  brought in to add to that task, well, that's obviously something operationally that would  have to be decided at the time with the support and assistance of the relevant  agencies.

Peter van Onselen:  You'd be open to the potential need of more boats if you're going to be using the  existing fleet to tow boats back?

Scott Morrison:  No-one should be under any doubt that we will use every resource needed to get the  job done because if this is not achieved, and we believe it will be achieved, then what  we've seen overnight again, which is a terrible tragedy, we all agree with that -  everyone who's in this debate understands that these are terrible tragedies and I don't  think anyone should doubt anyone's sincerity about the sense of loss that we all feel  when this happens - but this will keep happening unless it stops, and it won't stop until  it stops.

Paul Kelly:  Under your policy who decides if it's safe to turn back the boats?

Scott Morrison:  It's done within the chain of command, Paul, as we've discussed many times, and that  chain of command runs obviously from the commander at sea and they have certain  decisions that they take, it runs through NORCOM, it runs through border protection  command in Canberra, it runs through the entire chain of command.

Paul Kelly:  Who decides though? Who actually takes the decision?

Scott Morrison:  On each occasion, Paul, the scenario and the situation will determine where decisions  are taken at each level. I mean, in many cases commanders make decisions. In many  cases those at NORCOM and border protection command make those decisions. On  occasions it has to go higher than that, but the chain of command respects the  responsibility of each person within that chain of command and the authorities that

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

each have and information they each have. So that's why I've been very consistent on  this in saying it will be taken in accordance with the chain of command...

Paul Kelly:  Well, can I just clarify, that means the politicians don't take the decision, or have I got  that wrong?

Scott Morrison:  Well, at the end of the day, at the end of the chain of command is a politician.

Paul Kelly:  Sure, but I'm talking about individual decisions. I understand you have a policy on this,  but if we come back to whether or not a boat is going to be turned, according to  whether or not it's safe to do so, does a politician take that decision or not?

Scott Morrison:  As I said, the chain of command will work through the risk issues at each level. And the  extent to which the commanders are seeking direction or advice on policy or directions  then they would seek those directions of the politicians framing the policy. They  provide those orders and instructions and they are worked through the chain of  command at sea.

Paul Kelly:  But in an operational sense...

Scott Morrison:  At every occasion level, and this is very important, every single occasion this can play  out differently, every single occasion.

Paul Kelly:  I understand that.

Scott Morrison:  And that has - and the risk is managed through the chain of command and it is our  policy to respect the chain of command.

Paul Kelly:  I understand all that. The question I'm asking is, in terms of an operational situation, in  terms of turning a boat or what might happen on the boat, might that decision go to  the political level?

Scott Morrison:  Well, if it's elevated to that level and they believe they need a decision...

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

Paul Kelly:  So that can happen.

Scott Morrison:  If they believe it needs that sort of direction in order to implement a policy, then  obviously those within the chain of command can seek that guidance. But the point as I  stress again, there is an established chain of command that has been operating for a  very long time. It's there to manage risk. It's there to manage safety issues. It's there  to manage the effectiveness of the mission. And we put our faith in that chain of  command.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask the same question just for some clarity in a slightly different way. If in that  chain of command, the commander of the vessel dealing with the situation tells the  politician that it can't be done, there are too many risks, there's no circumstances  under which a politician would overrule that and say "It's our policy, we're doing it."?

Scott Morrison:  This is one of the misnomers. The chain of command doesn't involve commanders  talking to politicians.

Peter van Onselen:  It would on the red phone that Tony Abbott wanted to introduce.

Scott Morrison:  That was someone else's suggestion. That was never Tony's suggestion. Tony's  suggestion was always that these decisions would run with the chain of command and  obviously at the end of the chain of command is a Minister and the Prime Minister. The  Minister and the Prime Minister deal with the CDF and they deal with those at the  senior levels within navy and border protection command. The people dealing with the  person on the vessel, the commander on the vessel are their immediate superiors.  That's how it works. Now, others may have wanted to try and confuse all of that for  their own misrepresentative purposes. Our view has always been the same. There's a  chain of command. We respect it, we honour it, because that's what makes the risks  being able to be managed in the best way, and it enables safety to be managed in the  best way. But most importantly of all it ensures the integrity and success of the mission  which is what it's all about.

Paul Kelly:  Well just explain to me, if you turn around a boat, why would that boat go back to  Indonesia?

Scott Morrison:  It's an Indonesian crew, it's an Indonesian flag vessel.

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison



Paul Kelly:  Why would it go back to Indonesia though?

Scott Morrison:  Exactly the same person that Admiral Ritchie...

Paul Kelly:  I mean, the purpose of the boat was to come to Australia.

Scott Morrison:  And it will only have enough fuel to get it back to Indonesia as was the case last time.  Admiral Ritchie made that very important point in fact, Admiral Ritchie, a former head  of Navy. We've had Major General Molan whose record in Iraq we all know very full  well. And we've had Brigadier Hogan who has been our most recent defence attache in  Indonesia have all made it perfectly clear about how this can work and must work and  should work.

Paul Kelly:  Sure. So you're attracted to the idea of reducing the petrol level so that the boat can  only just get back to Indonesia. Are you...of that concept?

Scott Morrison:  As we've talked about before, Paul, I've always been clear about what happened last  time, and that is what happened last time, as Admiral Ritchie confirmed. But one thing  I'm not going to do on this program or any other program is to give people smugglers  a heads-up on our tactics. They will confront our tactics if we're elected at sea, or on  land, because our tactics go across the full breadth of operations. And they will deal  with those when they're confronted with them.

Paul Kelly:  Now, there's one point I want to clarify. In the communique released when Kevin Rudd  met President Yudhoyono they complained about unilateral action. I just want to clarify  your position on this. As I understand it you want to work with Indonesia but you  reserve the right for Australia to take unilateral action. Is that essentially where you  are?

Scott Morrison:  You can put whatever term you want to put on it. What I've said and what Julie has  said and what Tony has said is we'll take decisions on our side of the border that we  think is in Australia's interests. Of course we're going to work with Indonesia wherever  we possibly can and one of the areas I think are very critical for us to work with them  most urgently and most quickly is in the area of search and rescue. Now, a year ago I  was making this point and prior to that. I mean, the search and rescue operations and

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

capacities and response capabilities aren't where they need to be, and Indonesia has  very clear responsibilities under the Safety of Life at Sea Convention and the ability to  respond to incidents and receive people as a first place of safety as is their obligation.  Now, this is an area that doesn't seem to have been part of the discussion that our  Government has been having with Indonesia for some years, and I think that's quite an  urgent matter. I have for more than 12 months, two years, I've been making this point  and there just doesn't seem to have been much progress.

Paul Kelly:  Fine, well, I understand that point that you want to work with Indonesia.

Scott Morrison:  Yeah.

Paul Kelly:  But can I ask you again, are you prepared in relation to boats to take unilateral action?

Scott Morrison:  We're prepared to take the decisions that we take on our side of the border that best  pursue our national interests.

Peter van Onselen:  Does that include unilateral action?

Scott Morrison:  Well, you define 'unilateral action' for me...

Paul Kelly:  It obviously does.

Scott Morrison:    ...and then I can respond to your question because people seem to have lots of  different definitions of it. But let me be clear, we will take the actions that we believe a  sovereign nation must take on our borders, as John Howard did, we would do the same  thing. I've referred to the action he took on the Tampa, I've referred to the action he  took with turn backs. These are the things that fall within our domain to make  decisions upon.

Peter van Onselen:  You say that lots of people have different definitions of unilateral action. I think that's  the reason that must be the case is because you and Julie Bishop do, because she's  said quite clearly on 'Insiders' that there will not be unilateral action whereas you've  made it quite clear that there will be.

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

Scott Morrison:  Peter, I know media like to get into the gotcha moments around words, but I think the  practical effect of what Julie and I said are as exactly the same and that is the  turn-back policy goes ahead. That's what goes ahead.

Peter van Onselen:  You're turning back boats whether Indonesia cooperate or not but you'll try to seek  their cooperation.

Scott Morrison:  Of course we'll seek to work with Indonesia, not just on those matters if necessary but  on all matters. I've made the point about what's going on in Indonesia. I mean, why is  there no confirmation of what the special operations funding is for the Australian  Federal Police this year in Indonesia? Why have they taken AFP officers off the ground  in Indonesia, where apparently we're trying to disrupt people smuggler activity? Why is  our progress in terms of getting stronger border patrols in Indonesia that stop the  planes, so they don't get on boats, why has that gone nowhere?

Peter van Onselen:  But do you concede that it's more difficult to get agreement with Indonesia because of  the realities of the heightened political debate in this country, not just about tow backs  but about the whole border protection issue? Done quietly, Indonesia might go along  with different policy scripts but given where we are and where we've got to over the  last few years any Government is going to find it much tougher to get Indonesia to  agree on any policy including tow backs.

Scott Morrison:  Well, that will be a situation that we'll have to confront if we're elected. But you don't  have a good relationship I think, as Alexander Downer pointed out over the last week  or so, that isn't based on respect. And a self-respecting country is always going to put  its sovereign interest first and make its decisions on its side of the border according to  its priorities and Australia's interests, and that's what we will do. And I honestly, based  on the rhetoric from Kevin Rudd over the last week or so, don't get that impression  that that's his view. I mean, I don't think we should be rolling over. I think we should  have a respectful position but also a strong position.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask a more general question. Do you agree with my understanding of the  international law of refugees that if you flee a country and end up in a non-signatory  nation, whether it's Malaysia or Indonesia, that you are still technically a refugee even  though the Australian public quite understandably views you as an economic refugee at  that point because you're looking to hop to a better country like Australia. Technically  under the international laws, am I right that you continue to be a genuine refugee until  you get to a country that is a signatory nation?

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison



Scott Morrison:  Well, I think that is an issue of interpretation. I mean, the convention talks about rights  of refugees principally rather than asylum seekers. You're not a refugee until you've  had a proper refugee status assessment that actually finds you to be one and the  Refugee Convention talks about refugees having fled directly from that place of  persecution. Now, I don't think anyone could define Indonesia as a place of persecution  for Afghans or Iranians. I mean, they get visa on arrival in Indonesia so I don't think  Indonesia can classify as a place of persecution for those individuals.

Peter van Onselen:  But the standard of interpretation seems to be what I've described it.

Scott Morrison:  The interpretation that some put forward is that if you go through a country that is not  a signatory to the Refugee Convention then you can still pursue a place that is. Now, I  think that's a matter of interpretation.

Peter van Onselen:  What's your view on it?

Scott Morrison:  Well, I think Australia should be defining better what we understand these definitions  mean because we signed the convention and I have always had reservations about  how the interpretation has evolved over the years. The convention is one issue but it's  actually been the interpretation of that issue that I think has played into the hands of  people smugglers over time and I think that's something that will require us to address  at some stage.

Peter van Onselen:  I'm really interested in how you think that happens because to me when you take the  heat out of the debate - there's so much heat in this debate - that is actually one of the  more interesting angles to have to discuss...

Scott Morrison:  Sure.

Peter van Onselen:  ...because advocates of refugee rights or of asylum seeker rights point to the fact that,  or the idea rather than the fact that they can go through countries that are  non-signatory nations and continue to pass through, that's what the conventions say.  You're unsure that that interpretation is...



Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

Scott Morrison:  What I'm confirming is that that is an interpretation that is put out there and that  seems to be the prevailing interpretation in terms of how these matters are addressed.  But that doesn't mean Australia is under any obligation if it took the sovereign decision  to do so, to define them in those terms. I mean, Australia is sovereign when it comes  to its own laws and we have an excellent track record having settled over 800,000  refugees since the Second World War.

Peter van Onselen:  So in your view we can have a different interpretation to that but still maintain our  signatory status.

Scott Morrison:  Of course you can. I mean, Australia is sovereign. I think that's the point I'm trying to  make. Whether it's in dealing with Indonesia or dealing with the UNHCR or dealing with  any other country, Australia is sovereign. And Kevin Rudd seems quite happy to hand  over these decisions to international bodies and other countries. We have to take our  own decisions, as John Howard famously said, on our borders.

Peter van Onselen:  But sovereign nations, when they sign up to international law, are bound by those  international laws. It's a matter of interpretation is what you're talking about.

Scott Morrison:  Sure. We may be bound by what we signed up to but that doesn't mean we have to be  bound by what every other person since who has an opinion on it seeks to force on  Australia and I think that's one of the frustrations in the community that a lot of these  international organisations and conventions as they grow and they burgeon and people  add layer and layer and layer of additional obligations to it, I think what we originally  signed up to increasingly doesn't look like that today.

Paul Kelly:  This week when a vessel picked up asylum seekers, you said the Opposition would  have been prepared to use the SAS. What's your policy on using the SAS?

Scott Morrison:  What I said was that merchant vessels operating in the area should know from the  Australian Government that if they're put in a situation of duress that they feel that  they are not able to take the decisions about their own vessel and take it to the next  port or wherever they plan to do it - in that case it was back to Indonesia - then they  should know that if they put out a request to Australia to come to their aid, then we  would. Now of course I know that you can't just go and turn up at a merchant vessel  that hasn't sought your assistance but they need to know that we would show up and  under a Coalition Government if that request was made, we would show up.

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison



Paul Kelly:  Okay, so you're sending this as a general message to the captains of such vessels.

Scott Morrison:  Of course.

Paul Kelly:  Would you expect that they would call on your assistance?

Scott Morrison:  That's a matter for them.

Paul Kelly:  I mean, surely they wouldn't.

Scott Morrison:  Well...



Paul Kelly:  I mean the last thing that you would want...

Scott Morrison:  ...I don't know if you can make that comment or the reverse, Paul. I mean, they would  make their own decision

Paul Kelly:  Would the captain want the SAS on board? Surely not.

Scott Morrison:  Well, I mean, if that captain and particularly the ship's owner didn't want a two-day  re-route which would cost them millions of dollars and they wanted to be able to get to  their next port and they had the very firm offer of assistance from Australia to ensure  that they could do that and that the safety of the people they've rescued could also be  guaranteed, well, I think there's a good argument for them to take that offer but that's  a matter for them, not for the Australian Government.

Paul Kelly:  Okay, so the only circumstances under which you would deploy the SAS would be upon  a request.

Scott Morrison:  Well, when you're on the high seas in that situation, I mean, that's the legal situation  and I never suggested anything different. But the other point I was making was this, if

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

you're talking about that incident or you're talking about the passable incident which  occurred within the last 12 months and indeed the Oceanic Viking, and you look at how  Kevin Rudd dealt with that issue and how Julia Gillard dealt with the next one and then  Kevin Rudd dealt with this, there is a line of softness in their response and that's really  the problem. If you compare that to the way that John Howard dealt with it in the  situation he had at that time and the legal situation he had at that time, John Howard  was prepared to take action. Kevin Rudd is always prepared to roll over. And that's the  difference.

Paul Kelly:  I want to ask you about this proposed conference, the conference that emerged from  Kevin Rudd's visit to Indonesia. What are your expectations about this conference and  when do you think it will be held?

Scott Morrison:  Well, we have no idea when it's going to be held, that's the first point.

Paul Kelly:  Do you think it will be held before the Australian election?

Scott Morrison:  I think that's completely speculative at this point as to when it would be held. But  whenever it is held we've said that we think the idea of getting a subgroup of the Bali  process together to talk about deterrence issues, and I notice that the Government has  clearly ditched their regional processing framework position which Kevin Rudd and  Chris Bowen hailed as being the answer when they went to Bali, that seems to be off  the agenda now, as well as the Malaysian people swap, that's off the agenda. So Kevin  Rudd has no policy now. His policy is to get on a plane and go to a conference that he  hasn't got a date for, that he's not organising and to talk. Now, particularly in response  to the issues of the last 24 hours I just don't think that comes anywhere near an  adequate response, and the difference that will be at this election, is Kevin Rudd doing  more talking after the date of the election or Tony Abbott taking action to implement  the policies that are within our power to implement from day one. That's a very clear  choice that Australians have.

Peter van Onselen:  One of which is stop the boats and there's been some movement on the timing of stop  the boats, whether it would be immediate or whether it would be by the end of the first  term. I'm not interested in that. What I'm interested in is the definition of 'stop the  boats'. Are we still, at the end of a first term of a Coalition Government, allowed to  have a certain number of boats for that to still be considered a success or is it  Howard-esque reaction where it is completely stopped.



Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

Scott Morrison:  Well, the Howard-esque reaction and the Howard outcome is what we're seeking and  that's what we've given commitments to, and while a few boats kept coming over the  period of those last six years, we all know the very low level of their arrivals and that's  the outcome that we're committing to. And because that is the outcome - the only  outcome frankly that I think is something that's going to put an end to what we've  seen over the last 24 hours, in particular 48 hours. But let's go back to the Prime  Minister's speech at the Press Club. It was put to him very directly, will he give a  commitment to stop the boats and his answer is no. There's a very clear difference  here and the reason Kevin can't give - the Prime Minister cannot give that assurance is  he knows he doesn't have a policy to stop it. Now, he may disagree with our policies  and he may want to spend every day from now until the election trying to convince the  Australian people that the boats can't be stopped but what the Australian people should  know about that  is he's given up. He's given up. He doesn't have a set of policies. He  doesn't believe it can be done and his view of the future is more talk and more boats.

Peter van Onselen:  Can I ask you in a general sense there, we've seen the polls tighten. The latest  Newspoll, there's mention off the top it's now 50/50 between the two major parties. If  the Government has been as bad as the Opposition has said it has been for the last  three, even six years, what is so wrong with the Opposition that half the voting public  actually don't want to elect you?

Scott Morrison:  I don't know I'd characterise it that way. I think what we're seeing is a bit of a political  fascinator over the past few weeks and that's not unsurprising.

Peter van Onselen:  And the public have just been fooled by that?

Scott Morrison:  No, what I'm saying is when you have an event like this there's going to be a period of  interest. But look, we'll see what happens as the weeks go out. The thing that the  Prime Minister I think assumes in all of this is that he thinks the answer to every  problem is more Kevin. More Kevin is always the answer for Kevin Rudd. And he thinks  the Australian people want more Kevin. Well, he'll continue to make that point. But  more Kevin means his record and you will have seen in the advertisements that the  party has been putting out over this last weekend, they're just facts. I mean, people  shouldn't judge Kevin Rudd on his smile or how well he walks through a shopping  centre. They should judge him on his record. We know what Kevin did the first time  round as Prime Minister. We know the decisions he took to roll out the Rudd carpet to  people smugglers. We know what he did in debt and deficit. We know what he did on  pink batts. And they're facts and that's his record. That's his form, and any punter

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

who's looking to make a bet is going to look at the form guide and Kevin Rudd's form  guide is a shocker.

Paul Kelly:  He's going to change the carbon pricing arrangements and surely this will be a new  difficulty for the Opposition because presumably he'll move quicker to the Emissions  Trading Scheme. How do you combat that?

Scott Morrison:  Before the last election Julia Gillard said there will be no carbon tax under a  Government she led and we know that was a lie. Now we've got Kevin Rudd promising  to change the name of the carbon tax. There's still a price on the other side. There's  still an impact on electricity bills on the other side. This is just a change of name. It's  not a change in terms of the impact on household budgets, in terms of the impacts on  cost of living, in terms of when you look at your electricity price power bill, the impact  will be there.

Peter van Onselen:  It's a big difference though if it's a floating price which reduces it rather than the fixed  price that it is now.

Scott Morrison:  It is still a price. And there will...

Peter van Onselen:  But there's a price on carbon if you have Direct Action because there's...

Scott Morrison:  No.

Peter van Onselen:  ...billions of dollars going in to addressing climate change.

Scott Morrison:  No, I reject that. There will be a price courtesy of Kevin Rudd on your power bill for  carbon tax effectively because it's still the same thing on the other side of the election.  And the contrast is this: do you want that? Do you want that price on your power bill  on the other side of the election under Kevin Rudd's policy, or do you want Tony  Abbott's policy to get rid of it?

Peter van Onselen:  But what's the difference if you've got a market mechanism pricing carbon versus a  Government handout to business mechanism under Direct Action? At the end of the

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

day, there's still billions of dollars going into climate change one way or the other. It's a  matter of whether you're a party that supports a market mechanism or Direct Action.

Scott Morrison:  No, the difference is that Kevin Rudd wants to put a direct price on your power bill  through his carbon tax. It's still a carbon tax by another name. I mean Kevin Rudd is -  this is just classic Kevin Rudd. Change the name to change the conversation. It's still a  carbon price, it's still a carbon tax. It will be on the other side of the election and  there's a very clear difference. Promising to change the name is not a promise to get  rid of the carbon tax.

Peter van Onselen:  Why did you think it was a good idea under Malcolm Turnbull, as one of his key  lieutenants, yet now it's become such a bad idea when the Liberal Party moves away  from the ETS?

Scott Morrison:  Copenhagen, simple. Copenhagen changed the entire dimension of this debate, and  Kevin Rudd went to Copenhagen and he got his answer. He got his answer about  where the world was going and everything that's happened since then has only  confirmed that position. So why...

Peter van Onselen:  But you seriously thought that there would be an international agreement there.

Scott Morrison:  Copenhagen changed everything and - but it would seem that Kevin Rudd who's been  for it, against it, for it, against it, for it, against it, depending on whatever way the  political wind is blowing, he now says he's going to go for the carbon tax and he'll  continue it in a different form but it still has the same impact on householders at the  end of the day. And now as you were talking about in your introduction, Paul, he will  reign supreme if re-elected for three years. I mean, we saw how arrogant Kevin Rudd  was the first time round when he had to be responsible to the Caucus. I mean, just  imagine what this bloke will be like if he's re-elected and no-one can touch him once  he's in office.

Paul Kelly:  As a Shadow Minister are you prepared to debate Tony Burke, the Minister?

Scott Morrison:  Of course I am. I already have.

Paul Kelly:  You are.

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison



Scott Morrison:  I have. We were both on South Australian radio in the course I think of this last week  and we actually did have a chat about...

Peter van Onselen:  Let's be more specific.

Scott Morrison:  It wasn't exactly a prearranged interview and debate that we - look, as you see, we go  backwards and forwards on points all the time. But my point about this is the same as  Tony's. Are they campaigning or are they governing? If you're governing, well, recall  the parliament and let's see you govern. But if you're campaigning, call the election  date and let's get on with it. It would seem that Kevin at the moment is worried about  going to an election because he thinks people need more Kevin before the election date  is held. He should call the election.

Peter van Onselen:  Does Tony Abbott think people need less Tony Abbott before the election? He just  wants to get on with it.

Scott Morrison:  What the Coalition think the Australian people need is the certainty and stability of an  election date and for us to be able to get on with the election and to end this period of  almost, I'd argue, unprecedented instability.

Peter van Onselen:  So will you go to fixed terms in Government?

Scott Morrison:  There's no proposal to that, as you know.

Peter van Onselen:  But the stability and the certainty of that is exactly what you're talking about.

Scott Morrison:  No, the stability and the certainty that we need and that we've been denied the last  three years has been because of this dysfunctional and chaotic parliament that we've  had and a dysfunctional and chaotic Government that we've had. I mean, this  Government if they go past August 21 will not be on borrowed time. They will be on  stolen time, stolen time from the Australian people. They've got three years to govern.  They've done an appalling job of it and it's time that we have an election. We talk -  we've had the failed Malaysian solution, the failed East Timor solution on boats. We've  had all these failed solutions. The regional processing solution and all this sort of stuff.

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison



Peter van Onselen:  Nauru.

Scott Morrison:  When I say - no, I wouldn't argue that. The Government may have incompetently  implemented our policies as they have done but that doesn't surprise me. You can't  trust Labor to implement Coalition policies that they don't believe in, whether it's  offshore processing or anything else. You've got to trust people to implement these  policies who believe in them, and Kevin Rudd does not believe in the Coalition strong  border protection policies.

Paul Kelly:  Now just back to this question of debates, if you're prepared to debate Tony Burke why  aren't we seeing Joe Hockey debate Chris Bowen? Why aren't we seeing Tony Abbott  debate Kevin Rudd?

Scott Morrison:  Well, for the reason I said, call the election and there will be the debates.

Paul Kelly:  You didn't talk about an election. I asked you if you're prepared to debate Tony Burke  and you said yes.

Scott Morrison:  I don't think there's been any lack of clarity, Paul, about the Coalition's position on the  context of debates.

Paul Kelly:  So the Coalition does accept debates, do they, they accept debates now?

Scott Morrison:  Call the election and there will be debates. As I said, Tony and I had one the other day.  It wasn't a prearranged one. It was brought on by Leon Byner by surprise on both of  us. But - and we were happy to engage in that at the time. If the Prime Minister wants  debates then call an election and we should have the election solution when it comes  to border protection. All Labor's solutions have failed. We now want an election solution  on our borders so people - Australians can decide the policies we have on our borders,  not the faceless men of the Labor Party, not a Prime Minister reappointed for the  second time who actually started all this mess almost six years ago that has resulted in  the chaos and the cost and, sadly, the tragedy again that we've been reminded of most  recently.

Peter van Onselen:

Australian Agenda 14 July 2013 Scott Morrison

So once an election date's known you're available to come here on Australian Agenda  and debate Tony Burke at any time?

Scott Morrison:  Well, we'll set those arrangements with all the various programs because I suspect  there will be a lot of interest and that's as it should be. That's as it should be. I have no  concerns about debating the Labor Party on border protection policy. I haven't in a day  I've been in this job. But there needs to be - there needs to be an election date. I  wanted to debate Senator Evans at the last election on border protection policy at the  Press Club and he refused to turn up. So I've been prepared to debate this, but the  Prime Minister needs to set the date for the election solution.

Peter van Onselen:  Scott Morrison, appreciate your time. Thanks for your company.

Scott Morrison:  Thanks a lot.

