

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

2CC with Mark Parton

6 March 2013

Subjects: Prime Minister Western Sydney visit, 457 visas, border protection policy, budget  management, Ronald MacDonald house radio-thon

E&OE…

MARK PARTON Julie Bishop is the deputy leader of the opposition, she joins us right now.  Hello.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning Mark.

MARK PARTON It was an extraordinary day yesterday for name calling and brick bats  being thrown from trench to trench wasn’t it?

JULIE BISHOP Well I think it’s a rather dispiriting period of time. The Prime Minister has  claimed that she’s not campaigning, she’s governing but in fact she’s got a whole caravan of  people out there in Western Sydney and she seems to have such a stage-managed campaign  underway it’s hard to see when she’s governing. But for a Prime Minister who claims she  wants to meet the people of Western Sydney, she’s gone to great lengths to avoid talking to  any of the people who actually live there.

MARK PARTON And that’s been the extraordinary aspect of this three days in Western  Sydney thus far hasn’t it? That when it comes to touching the people, there hasn’t really been  a great deal of that.

JULIE BISHOP Yes, it seems to be very stage-managed and there are many reports in the  papers from journalists who are actually in Rooty Hill at present who say that Julia Gillard  seems to be going out of her way to avoid meeting any local people.

But she’s launched this extraordinary attack on people who come to Australia to work. It  appears she’s got no evidence to back claim that the system of so-called 457 visas or skilled  workers is being rorted and we can only conclude that she’s bowing to pressure from the  unions.

MARK PARTON Bowing to pressure from the unions and I guess bowing to the pressure of  the people because I guess, irrespective of the fact that the Immigration Department will tell  you that the temporary work visa applications have been trending downwards and downwards  for quite some time, there’s a perception out there on the street that that’s not the case.

JULIE BISHOP That’s why we need a Prime Minister with the courage or the authority to  explain that it is wrong to run a fear campaign against foreign workers and by implication all

our immigrant communities and that 457 visas do have a place in our labour force. In fact the  numbers of 457 visas that have been granted under the Gillard Government are greater than  the number that were granted under the last year of the Howard Government.

I come from Western Australia. In the mining sector the fly-in fly-out workforce, that’s not  for everyone and there certainly are times, like in the construction phase of a major project  where a company just cannot get Australian workers and it’s simplistic to say all the needs of  these massive projects in the North of Australia can be met from within Australia.

MARK PARTON Julie Bishop is with us, the deputy leader of the opposition. You  mentioned that the Prime Minister’s Western Sydney trip is a bit stage managed. You guys  could have done with a bit of stage management yesterday because wow, there were some  differing positions on various policies. What are you going to do with Scott Morrison who I  think, I agree that he will be the man to rein in this flood of boat people, but he’s a bit  extreme on a number of things isn’t he?

JULIE BISHOP Scott Morrison has exposed the government’s failings in the border  protection area and he pointed out that this failing of the government, it would have to be one  of the greatest in a generation. There’s been a $6b blowout in the detention network. 35,000  people have now made that dangerous journey to come to Australia by boat, via the people  smuggling trade and it is estimated that about 1000 people have died at sea under this  government’s watch and no one within the government is taking responsibility for it.

The Australian people can be sure that under a Tony Abbott-led government, with Scott  Morrison as the Immigration Minister we’ll put in place the policies that will stop the boats  and ensure that people come to Australia via our immigration system.

MARK PARTON We understand all that. But these calls for behavioural protocols don’t  seem to be being supported by anyone else in the government other than Scott Morrison.

JULIE BISHOP Well Mark, under the government’s own mandatory detention policy the  people that we are talking about would be in detention centres until all their background and  security checks had been completed, but because of Labor’s decision to weaken the border  protection laws, the whole detention network is overwhelmed and people are being placed  into the community before these security and background checks are being completed.

The government is not taking any responsibility for them. We now know they didn’t know  that these people were living in university accommodation, they didn’t know people were  living in unused office buildings in squalor in Parramatta.

MARK PARTON And that’s obviously a failing. But do you support Scott Morrison’s call  that we alert members of the community when asylum seekers are moving in. That we’ve got  these behavioural protocols in place, treating these people like I don’t know, people who  aren’t quite human.

JULIE BISHOP Well Mark that’s not right. There are obviously behaviour protocols in place  when people are living in detention centres. Not unreasonably the Parramatta Council has  wanted to be informed when large numbers of people are being placed by the government in  situations where they are living in unused buildings in Parramatta. University students,  likewise, want to be told that the accommodation that they’re living in, student

accommodation they’re living in, is being used by the government for large numbers of  people who are still to undergo background and security checks.

So I don’t think that’s unreasonable, where the government is moving a large number of  people into an area who are still to undergo these checks, I’d want to be told and I think other  members of the community would want to be told.

MARK PARTON The Business Council of Australia wants the government, who has of  course delivered $170b in budget deficits over the past four years to generate surpluses of  about one to two per cent of gross domestic product and they’re basically calling upon  governments, the one that’s in place now, the one that may be in place from September to  reign in spending. I think most of Australia’s with them on that. Is there a chance though, that  your leader is going to promise too much in the lead up to September in an effort to win  government and you may find yourself in exactly the same spot?

JULIE BISHOP We will promise to live within our means and Tony Abott, Joe Hockey and I  and others were all members of the John Howard/Peter Costello government that delivered  successive surpluses, in fact, this Labor Government inherited a $20b budget surplus.

In the last four years this government has delivered record breaking budget deficits and this  year they’re on track to deliver another $50b deficit. They will have spent something like  $200b more than has come in in revenue. So we have a track record to reduce government  debt. We seem to be in the position of always inheriting Labor’s debt. We will pay it off, we  will save the interest that is having to be paid each year on Labor’s debt and we will work  toward putting the budget into surplus as soon as possible. We’ve done it before and we can  do it again.

MARK PARTON Julie Bishop we are running a one day radio-thon this morning for Ronald  MacDonald House here in Canberra. I’ve got to put you on the spot while I’ve got you on air  and say is there any chance of a donation from the deputy leader of the opposition?

JULIE BISHOP Fair enough. It’s a good cause and I’m happy to donate $100.

MARK PARTON Alright, I’ll put you on hold and put you back to David so he can process  that for you and thank you very much, we really do appreciate it.

JULIE BISHOP It’s a great cause Mark and I’m happy to contribute and I hope others of  your listeners likewise will dig into their pockets and give some money to Ronald  MacDonald house.

MARK PARTON Thanks for coming on this morning, appreciate it.

- Ends -



