





ABC AM

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

Subjects: Syria - chemical weapons use.

15 June 2013

HOST: America and its allies are scrambling to reassess their  approach to the Syrian conflict after the United States announced  the Syrian president Bashar al-Assad had definitely used chemical  weapons against his own people.

The US president Barack Obama is yet to speak publicly and his  administration is being very careful about how much it reveals, but  the topic is bound to dominate discussions with his European  counterparts at the G8 summit in Northern Ireland next week.

(other interviewees)

HOST: The Australian Foreign Minister Bob Carr joins us live now to  talk about this latest development.

Minister, how do you - how significant do you think this decision is?

HOST: Well obviously we take very seriously the US conclusion, that  based on intelligence there has been multiple use, although on a

small scale, of chemical weapons; that's repugnant to us. Australia's  been a leader in this field. The convention on chemical weapons use  is there because this is a mass atrocity weapon.

So, we've got a keen interest in this, and we acknowledge the  seriousness with which the American administration takes it.

Our approach continues to be one focused on a political settlement.  And what America has said increases the possibility of a successful  Geneva Two, if the Russian response is that a Geneva Two  conference is the best way of averting a trajectory of increased  Western support to the Syrian opposition.

HOST: So are you suggesting that this is really just as much a  message to Russia as it is to the rebels and the regime in Syria?

BOB CARR: I'm not entitled to put that interpretation on it. But, we  want Russia and the United States to walk into a Geneva Two  conference, and bring with them the involvement of both sides of  this appalling war of attrition in Syria.

A political solution is directed immediately at attaining that cease fire  that will end the demolition of homes and the wounding and slaying  of a wretched suffering people. And second, set up an institution, a  transitional governing authority with full executive powers that can  steer the country to that happy day when the people of Syria  themselves will choose their government.

HOST: Minister, it seems as though the Americans are talking  specifically about small arms weaponry in their assistance to the  rebels. Is that, in your view, going to alter the outcome for the  rebels?

BOB CARR: I haven't got the advantage of a military assessment in  front of me, but I think there has been a consensus that the Assad  government is mightily well equipped, especially with air defences.

It has the advantage of a Warsaw Pact style army, and indeed, as has  been pointed out to me, it has an approach to chemical weapons  that was true of Warsaw Pact style armies when the existed in  central and eastern Europe; that is, that they're conventional - a bit  of conventional weaponry.

Assad is certainly better supported by his own forces than was the  regime of president Gaddafi.

HOST: What are the implications in all of this for Australia?

BOB CARR: Well Australia adheres to a position where one, we'll  continue to be one of the most generous suppliers of humanitarian  support to the refugees; refugees I've met in Jordan and most  recently in Lebanon. These people have arrived, crossing the border  at night with only the clothes they stand in. They've lost everything;  many unaccompanied children, which renders it terribly tragic.

We've supplied $78 million through United Nations agencies to go  these refugee camps, supplying them with the emergency  accommodation, the drinkable water, the child protection officers,  and the rest that they so desperately need; so humanitarian support  is the Australian focus.

Plus the advocacy, this is the second leg of our policy on Syria, of a  medical pact; so that if the fighting continues, at least doctors and  nurses will be protected, and hospitals not used as bases or targets,  and that medicines will flow in convoys into all parts, all zones of the  country.

And the third leg of our policy is to advocate that political solution;  initially a cease fire, and then a transitional governing authority in  the country to steer it towards a pluralistic future, a plural  democratic Syria, a multi-faith country.

HOST: Does this decision in any way extend our obligations? Would  you expect that America might ask that Australia might contribute to  the small arms weaponry to be distributed to the rebels?

BOB CARR: No, I couldn't see any way in which Australia would  respond by providing military support to the rebels, it's not our  sphere of influence or responsibility. And our target will be a political  solution, humanitarian involvement, the advocacy of a medical pact  to see that medicines can reach this country, and the protection of  minorities. I think this is an important theme; I've raised the  protection of Syrian minorities whenever I've spoken to Europeans,  Arab or American figures. We've got to see, we've got to see that all  minorities in this country are protected and are not subject to the  targeting that could well be their predicament even when the  fighting stops.

HOST: Minister thank you.

BOB CARR: My pleasure, thank you.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



