The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Operation Sovereign Borders  Sunday, 13 October 2013

Interview with Andrew Bolt, The Bolt Report

Andrew Bolt: Early this year, we were getting 500 boat people every week. In the  first three weeks of the Abbott Government, it's fewer than 80 a week.

Mark Binskin: This means that, in the first three weeks of Operation Sovereign  Borders, there's been a total of 215 arrivals transferred.

Andrew Bolt: Joining me is Immigration Minister Scott Morrison. 80 boat people a  week - part of that is due to the Kevin Rudd deal to send boat people back to Papua  New Guinea, but do you think you've made a difference too?

Scott Morrison: Well, I think, at this stage, 80 a week is too many. We're certainly  not making any grand claims about this or, as the previous government used to  when they had levels of arrivals five times what they were at a previous election  when they took over. So, look, we're just getting on with the job, Andrew. What the  numbers are - and what the numbers are, others can read into that. We still have a  lot of work to do here. The government left us virtually nothing - an empty shell -  when it came to the PNG arrangement. I mean, all the work about putting that into  practice has had to be done by this government. For example, there was no funding  for offshore processing from the 1st of January. There had been absolutely a blank  page on resettlement practices in Papua New Guinea. I mean, there's just nothing  there. The cupboard was bare.

Andrew Bolt: Is there a higher tempo of cooperation between Australians -  Australian officials and Indonesians in Indonesia to stop the boats?

Scott Morrison: Absolutely. I mean, the cooperation we're achieving with Indonesia  is very encouraging. The Prime Minister's visit with President Yudhoyono, I think,  provided an excellent platform. There are good relationships to draw on. But you've  got to give the funding support to people working up there - in particular, our Federal  Police and other agencies. I mean, they need to be able to plan with certainty. I  mean, they were previously having to beg, borrow and steal their budget from right  across their organisation to try and keep a presence up in Indonesia. We've relieving  them of that burden, we’ve relieved them of it, and we're relieving them of it further to  ensure that they can commit to joint operations up there, and we're already seeing  results from that. The commissioner, Negus, outlined some great early activity, but  there's still a long way to go. But there is a long way to go, Andrew. And I don’t want  to - I can't overstate that enough. We've got a lot of work to, do and we're getting on  with it.

Andrew Bolt: One of the things... is one of the things you're looking at doing  providing Indonesia with boats for its coastguard or whatever in order to be able to  either stop some of the people - boats coming, or take over the passengers when we  intercept them?

Scott Morrison: Well, as you know, part of our policy was to invest in improving the  search-and-rescue response capability in our partnerships with Indonesia. Now that's  important. We had that horrific incident off West Java recently. And the practice of  Australian vessels going 195 nautical miles to effect rescues and so on when we  could invest cooperatively and work together to improve the capability and the  response capacity of Indonesia in these circumstances, I think, saves lives. And I  think that's something that the Indonesians are also very concerned about, and so  that gives us a very strong platform to work together on these issues. It's one of the  many operational understandings, as I've termed them, that I think we can work  constructively to achieving in this broader framework of strategic trust that I think  exists with Indonesia, which the Prime Minister and President Yudhoyono have been  able to establish.

Andrew Bolt: Well, there's been a lot of media reporting about how you've backed  down on some of your policies. Can we just clarify that? Have you given up, in fact,  your policy of, say, paying Indonesian villagers for information to stop the boats, or  even paying to buy the boats?

Scott Morrison: Well, the full arsenal of measures that we have talked about,  prepared ourselves for, we've made available to the government. But these  measures have been grossly misrepresented, both to our counterparts in Indonesia  by the former government, and also the media. Our policies and the ones you've just  mentioned - these were all about joint operational exercises and getting funding to  those joint operations. So the intent was always they be done together. There was  no suggestion with those measures, as they were caricatured by others, that they  were somehow a unilateral action of Australia on those matters. So, no. The full  arsenal remains available. For those areas where we're working directly together in  joint operations with the Indonesian government, then of course that is a cooperative  process. We are providing the funds that enables those joint operations to take  place, Andrew. And that's the point - those funds, those resources, that commitment,  that resolve to do these things on the ground at a much higher tempo and much  higher level just simply wasn't there. And that's what's making the difference.  Indonesia knows we're very, very serious about working together with them to make  their borders stronger and make the region's borders stronger, which at the end of  the day makes our borders stronger.

Andrew Bolt: We've seen Labor have a leadership ballot and the results of that  ballot are being announced today. Has this process encouraged you to think about  democratising your process of choosing your leader?

Scott Morrison: Well, we're very happy with the process of choosing our leader. Our  process chose Tony Abbott who is now the Prime Minister. But what I've noticed  about the Labor Party's process is, in the fanfare of this other campaign they've been  running, they seem to have forgotten about the campaign that happened before,  which was the election they lost. They seem to have forgotten the fact that they've

lost an election and the reasons for losing that election. They think it was all about  personalities, but remain in complete denial about the policy failures that led to their  loss.

Andrew Bolt: Scott Morrison, thank you very much for joining me.

Scott Morrison: Thanks a lot, Andrew.

Andrew Bolt: Coming up - Labor gets a new leader. Peter Costello and Michael  Costa rate his chances.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm208688.htm   Last update: Monday, 14 October 2013 at 09:16 AEST



