

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



Sky News On The Hour

30 July 2013

Subjects: Nauru asylum seeker plan

E&OE…

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop, welcome to the program.

The plan that’s been announced by the Coalition today as far as Nauru goes is a five year  plan. Is it still the Coalition’s pledge to stop the boats in your first term in government?

JULIE BISHOP Yes we are committed to dismantling the people smuggling trade that was  reinvigorated when Kevin Rudd changed the laws in 2008. Our commitment to rigorous  offshore processing in Nauru will be complemented with processing on Manus Island.

But what Scott Morrison announced today is part of a long term commitment to ensure that  we have the capacity on Nauru to process asylum seekers and to accommodate their  resettlement. It’s part of a plan that we’ve had for a number of years.

Our commitment has been longstanding. It’s based on the laws and policies that worked in  the past and we believe will work again. It’s one aspect of it. DAVID SPEERS Why do you  need it for five years if you’re going to stop the boats in three years?

JULIE BISHOP Well the backlog of people is enormous. Almost 50,000 people have tried to  come to Australia since Kevin Rudd changed the laws in 2008.

DAVID SPEERS Ok so the boats would stop but you would still need processing beyond that  three year period?

JULIE BISHOP And that’s what occurred under John Howard when we stopped the boats  then there was still the process of looking at their applications, health checks, security checks,  the offshore processing and then resettlement and that does take time.

But by the time we left office in 2007 there were only four people who’d arrived by boat still  in our detention network. It takes time and given the massive crisis that has been sparked by  Kevin Rudd’s failure to maintain the policies that worked, it will take time..

DAVID SPEERS It is unusual for an opposition to negotiate such an agreement with a  foreign government. What is the status of this agreement? What has Nauru actually agreed to  here?

JULIE BISHOP Well this is a continuation of what we did in government. We had an  offshore processing facility in Nauru. We entered into those arrangements.

We have continued to work constructively with the Nauruan Government, keep them  informed of what we would do if we were returned to government. That’s what Scott  Morrison has been doing on Nauru. He has been talking through the policies, talking through  the ideas and what commitments we would expect from a Nauruan Government and what  we’d give in return.

DAVID SPEERS They have agreed to this expansion and importantly to resettle refugees  there? Because that’s the different part than the Howard Government plan.

JULIE BISHOP Well this is my understanding. These are discussions Scott’s been having  with the Nauruan Government. These have been ongoing to some time.

We are not able to formally enter into an agreement on behalf of the Australian people  because we’re in Opposition but we can come to an understanding with the Nauruan  Government and this has been part of our ongoing discussions with them that have been very  detailed over a long period of time.

DAVID SPEERS So they have given you some sort of commitment though that should you  win the election they will resettle refugees there in Nauru?

JULIE BISHOP Scott is very confident that we will be able to achieve what he has set out in  his discussions today.

DAVID SPEERS And you have you had any conversations with the Nauruan Government?

JULIE BISHOP Over the past few years I have. Not today I haven’t.

DAVID SPEERS But over this issue of resettling refugees?

JULIE BISHOP The Nauru Government has now made Nauru a signatory to the Refugee  Convention so that’s a change from when we were in government under the Howard Pacific  Solution. So they’re now a signatory to the Convention. That means they have obligations for  resettlement.

DAVID SPEERS So have they agreed to actually resettle refugees? Have they agreed to this?

JULIE BISHOP I understand that that’s a discussion Scott’s been having with them, but also  we would be encouraging resettlement in other countries.

DAVID SPEERS I appreciate he’s had those discussions, but has he got the agreement from  Nauru to resettle refugees?

JULIE BISHOP I understand that Scott Morrison has had discussions, as is appropriate for an  opposition minister about agreement in principle to do this.

Of course we can’t sign an agreement or a treaty because we are in opposition but we want to  be in a position to be able to implement this immediately should we be trusted by the  Australian people to form Government and tackle this issue.

Kevin Rudd is not the person to try and solve the people smuggling problem. He started it.  He’s not the person to stop it.

DAVID SPEERS Is it your understanding that some of those who are found to be refugees  could end up back in Australia? Because the government says that’s the difference between  your plan and their PNG plan.

JULIE BISHOP Oh no but Kevin Rudd said that no people who go to PNG would end up in  Australia. That’s not what the agreement with PNG says at all. That’s not what it said.

DAVID SPEERS But can you say that about Nauru at all, or not?

JULIE BISHOP We would encourage resettlement in other countries but Kevin Rudd can’t  claim that no people can come to Australia. That’s certainly not what the agreement says and  that’s certainly not what PNG agreed.

DAVID SPEERS So you’d be willing to see refugees from both PNG and Nauru resettled in  Australia?

JULIE BISHOP We would encourage resettlement in third countries.

DAVID SPEERS But you would be willing to see some end up in Australia?

JULIE BISHOP We would encourage the resettlement of asylum seekers in third countries as  we did under the Howard Government.

We would adopt very similar practices to those that were proven to work, tried and proven  under the Howard Government that Kevin Rudd unpicked in 2008.

DAVID SPEERS Ok, deputy opposition leader Julie Bishop, thanks for joining us.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends



