THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT



3 July 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT - SKY NEWS

SUBJECT: Australian Government legal action against Japanese whaling in the  International Court of Justice; Indonesia; asylum seekers; ALP leadership; Better  Schools Plan.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

GILBERT: The Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus heads to The Hague this coming Friday to  wrap up Australia's case against Japan and he joins me live now from Melbourne.  Attorney-General, is Australia confident of winning the case?

DREYFUS: I'm not going to quote, Kieran, on whether or not we're going to win but we  put everything we can into this case and you've heard the arguments: we say it's just  not science what Japan's doing.

GILBERT: International law is complex of course, it's not about cultural norms, it's not  about sentiment, it's about law and that's what this judgement will be in the end isn't it?

DREYFUS: It is. We say you can't do science out of a heap of body parts and that's really  what the Japanese are doing. We say that you don't need to kill whales to do scientific  research and we've got fantastic scientists here in Australia that are showing just that.

Over the last summer for example our Antarctic division put satellite tracking devices on  Antarctic blue whales and minke whales; it's a world first showing that you don't need  to kill whales in order to do research.

GILBERT: What do you make of that quote from the lawyer for Japan who says that  Australia seeks to apply the international convention as if it was the anti-whaling  convention?

DREYFUS: We don't accept that. Japan is using what's called a special permit to kill  whales. That special permit's only for scientific research. We say that what Japan is  doing is just not science and that's what the case is about Kieran.

GILBERT: It's a strong legal team you've got there. Who is supporting you in this case? I  understand you'll be wrapping up the case there at The Hague but who else is  representing Australia in this case?

DREYFUS: We've got the Solicitor-General Justin Gleeson, Bill Campbell QC from the  Office of International Law, a very eminent international lawyer, Philippe Sands from the  English Bar and a French international lawyer as well as a support team from the  Australian Government Solicitor’s Office and my Department.

GILBERT: It's been a long time in the making, you know how much Australians oppose  whaling and you've said that we will be bound to the ruling here, so if it doesn't go well  this will lock in stone will it not, Japan's right to conduct the so called scientific whaling  each season.

DREYFUS: We'll have to wait and see what the court says in its judgement Kieran, but  this case comes off the back of 20 years of diplomatic effort which didn't get us the  result we want which is where we were trying to persuade our good friend Japan that  they should stop this so called scientific whaling in the Southern Ocean. If we are  unsuccessful in the case, we'll examine the court's reasons. There's no appeal from it  but of course we can resume that diplomatic effort, we can resume discussions and  negotiations in the International Whaling Convention and we…

GILBERT: I was about to ask you that. I was going to ask you are there any legal avenues  Australia can pursue if the case is not successful but you're saying there's no appeal, no  avenue of appeal.

DREYFUS: This is the world's highest court, Kieran. It's the International Court of Justice.  It stops there - but that's why we've brought the case - that we've run out of our  attempts to do it by diplomatic means.

GILBERT: Is there any risk of this flowing or spilling over into other areas of our bilateral  relationship with Japan? Obviously it's a big trading partner, we have security ties with  them as well.

DREYFUS: We have an immensely important and long standing relationship with Japan  and it's a feature of our relationship that we and our friend Japan have agreed to take  this dispute to the International Court of Justice and I'm very confident that it's not  going to affect our relationship in any other way or any other part of our relationship.

GILBERT: I want to turn our attention now to Kevin Rudd's visit to Jakarta. He departs  tomorrow for talks with President Yudhoyono. Now one of the big things on the agenda  will be the issue of asylum seekers as you know and Mr Rudd has raised the prospect of  diplomatic conflict with Indonesia under the tow back the boats policy of the Coalition.  But really under international law is there anything stopping Australia from towing  Indonesian flagged boats which left Indonesian ports, crewed by Indonesians back to  Indonesian waters?

DREYFUS: Yes there is and it's been rejected by Indonesia, that's the key to this. Mr  Rudd is resuming a very long standing relationship that he's had with President  Yudhoyono who he's known for a very long time. They spoke by phone on Mr Rudd's  first day in office and of course within his first week in office Kevin Rudd is going to go to  Indonesia for these talks with President Yudhoyono.

But one thing that's become clear, Kieran, in the last couple of months is that Indonesia  resoundingly rejects any idea that Australia can turn back boats. The whole thing is a  ridiculous proposition and the rudeness that Julie Bishop showed to the Indonesian  ambassador shows that the Liberal Party, Tony Abbott, they're just not up to it. They  don't have any feel for international relations and our Prime Minister is absolutely right,  with his wealth of experience in international relations, to express concern about the  way in which the Coalition have put forward their ridiculous policy of so called turn back  the boats.

GILBERT: What under international law stops this from happening given, as I say, a  number of the boats are Indonesian flagged and crewed by Indonesians and that they  left Indonesia in the first place?

DREYFUS: That's something the Houston Report looked at last year. This is Angus  Houston, former head of our Defence Forces, Michael L'Estrange, international affairs  expert, telling Australia in their report that you need the consent of Indonesia in order  for the so called turn back the boats policy to be implemented. And that's before you  even get to the problem of the danger to navy crews, the danger to the people on the  boat, the problems that would be caused.

As a matter of international law you need the consent of the nation from which the boat  comes and we don't have that.

GILBERT: The Indonesian Government though mustn't be that concerned. We saw in the  budget reply that Tony Abbott gave, the Indonesian Ambassador was there present to  what is - clearly there's not any great animosity between the Coalition and the  Indonesians. They've got a good working relationship.

DREYFUS: Indonesia is the most important of our closest neighbours to us and…

GILBERT: Scott Morrison has been there the last couple of days working on their ties  with that country.

DREYFUS: Yes, but what he didn't come back with was even the remotest suggestion  that the Indonesian Government is prepared to accept the ridiculous policy that's been  put forward by the Coalition in this area and that's what it comes down to.

The Coalition should actually just stop this nonsensical policy and try to understand that  this is a regional problem of people smuggling, a regional problem of flows of asylum  seekers which we need to engage with on a regional basis. Kevin Rudd, a very  experienced foreign affairs expert, someone who's been of course Foreign Affairs  Minister as well as Prime Minister for three years, he's the person to do it.

GILBERT: I want to look at the general political landscape at the moment. A number of  Western Sydney MPs are much more upbeat according to a story in the Daily Telegraph  this morning that's quoted them on the political mood in their electorate seats that  were seen as gone or at least under threat, the change of leader they believe many of  them that it's put them back in the game. Do you agree with that?

DREYFUS: Well, I think they're back in the game. I think that Labor can win the election,  but I think those sorts of responses that you're seeing there is just a reflection that  Australians are sick and tired of the negativity that we've had from the Coalition over  the last three years. They want to see positive ideas, a positive vision for Australia and  that's what they have from our Labor Government.

Those MPs in Western Sydney have been working hard, Kieran, over the past three  years on policies on health, policies on education, on the National Broadband Network,  on improving our kids' schools and on improving access to tertiary education for the kids  in Western Sydney.

GILBERT: But it's the change of leader that's prompted this change of mood. Have you  picked that up in your seat of Isaacs in Melbourne?

DREYFUS: I have and I can say that there is a real positive mood because there's a sense  that Labor can win this next election and a sense that finally we can get away from  those politics of negativity and get back to an actual discussion about policy and of  course the Liberals have barely got any policy.

How ridiculous is it, Kieran, that we've got an opposition leader that's going to go to the  next election without a policy on education, without a policy on health, with a second  rate broadband policy?

I'm very much hoping that over coming months we get to a discussion about policy  because Labor has a policy in every area of government administration and I am very

proud to compare any of our policies with the little or nothing that the Liberal Party are  putting forward.

GILBERT: You were a strong backer of Julia Gillard. Did you consider standing down and  have you spoken to her since?

DREYFUS: I have and I didn't consider standing down. I said before the vote both that I  was going to vote for Julia Gillard and I did, and that I would be proud to serve if asked  in any Labor Government no matter who became leader.

Kevin Rudd approached me in the caucus room, Kieran, within minutes of the vote and  showed tremendous goodwill and asked me to continue as Attorney-General and  keeping to my word from before the vote, I said of course I would be proud to serve in a  Labor Government and I am.

This is about a continuation of a very good Labor Government Kieran and…

GILBERT: Okay, well what's…

DREYFUS: Well I just wanted to say we've had tremendous goodwill shown by Kevin  Rudd since he became Prime Minister, an inclusive approach, a consultative approach  and that's going to continue.

GILBERT: On one of the key policy areas school funding, has the leadership change also  rebooted those negotiations? We see today that Mr Rudd has extended the negotiation  timeframe with the non-government schools by a month. Has that given a bit more  flexibility to get that deal across the line?

DREYFUS: It's given time for those conservative governments which haven't yet signed  on to do the right thing by the kids in their states. And we saw last week that Denis  Napthine, Premier of Victoria, was indicating that he was getting closer.

I'd call on Mr Napthine to get there and sign up to the Better Schools policy that we  have. More money for kids in Victorian schools is the right thing to do and he should put  the interest of Victorian school children ahead of his partisan political interest and I  think the Queensland Government should do the same. Barry O'Farrell has shown the  way.

GILBERT: Okay, one final question. Jason Clare, the Minister for Home Affairs, is going to  release a review at Customs today, apparently new measures to crack down on  corruption. Have you got any of the detail or can you indicate just how widespread this  might be today?

DREYFUS: I'm going to leave that for Jason Clare who works with me in the Justice  portfolio to outline the detail, but this has been worked on for a long time.

These are appropriate measures to deal with some of the corruption that has been  uncovered in Customs. We've got on with the job, Jason's done a terrific job in the  reorganisation that he's going to be unveiling later today.

GILBERT: Attorney-General, thanks for your time this morning.

DREYFUS: Thank you Kieran.

ENDS



