

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC INSIDERS  SUNDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2013  SYDNEY

SUBJECT/S: Australia’s damaged relationship with Indonesia, Coalition’s  secrecy on boats arrivals, UN vote

BARRIE CASSIDY, HOST: We're joined by the Shadow Foreign Minister Tanya  Plibersek. Welcome.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning,  Barrie.

CASSIDY: How do you think Tony Abbott is handling the diplomatic crisis with  Indonesia?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I don't know that it has been a terrific performance when it  comes to handling the diplomatic crisis. There were, I suppose, a few missteps  before this and then I think the two occasions when the PM's addressed the  Parliament were really a long way from helping settle things down. I don't think  really what he said to the Parliament has settled things down at all.

CASSIDY: In what way was that inappropriate?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I'm certainly not in a position to say word for word what the PM  or anyone else should be saying in these circumstances. The PM's got excellent  advisers in Indonesia. Greg Moriarty is an experienced diplomat, he's got other  experienced diplomats here in Australia that could advise him. But I think in  addressing the Parliament it would have been a good time to try and get our

relationship with Indonesia back onto its normal track and I'm disappointed that  that's not really what happened.

CASSIDY: But where did he go wrong and what should he have said?

PLIBERSEK: Well Barrie, I'm not going to script a speech for the PM. I don't think  that would be appropriate at all. As I say, he's got terrific advisers that are able to  help him. What I'm concerned about is making sure that this relationship that is such  an important one for Australia is back on track as soon as possible, that we don't  allow this dispute to fester.

CASSIDY: But you're critical of his performance in the Parliament without saying  why?

PLIBERSEK: Well, like I say Barrie, I don't think it's appropriate for me to be  scripting speeches for the PM, but I think that on each occasion there was an  opportunity there to smooth things over, to settle things down. That's not what  happened on either occasion.

CASSIDY: You talked about missteps leading up to this, what were you referring to  there?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think certainly the Indonesians were very disappointed to hear  during the election campaign the Coalition talking about stopping the boats, buying  back the boats, turning back the boats, things that were - policies that were to take  place on Indonesian soil or in Indonesian waters without having ever discussed that  with the Indonesians. And then of course when the PM was in Indonesia locking the  Indonesian press out of his press conference I don't think has disposed the  Indonesian media to be particularly interested in settling things down now either.  The thing about a relationship between two countries is it's never one event that,  you know, makes things go smoothly or diverts things from a smooth path. It's a  relationship over very many years and over very many years both sides of politics  have sought to improve our relationship with Indonesia. From the 1940s onwards  we've had a very good relationship that's built over time, certainly I give Prime  Minister Howard great credit for the swift way that he responded to the tsunami and  the billion dollar contribution then, certainly was a great thing for our relationship  with Indonesia. Just as Paul Keating's visits there in the '90s were very important for  establishing a strong diplomatic relationship and each government has done its best  to improve and strengthen the relationship. I think we need to get back onto that  track of growing friendship and growing trust as quickly as we can.

CASSIDY: But you're saying that Tony Abbott could have done better without  saying how, is that because Labor is embarrassed because all of this happened  under your watch?

PLIBERSEK: Well, you know that I'm not going to comment on security or  intelligence matters, but the diplomatic relationship between our two countries is a  separate thing. The diplomatic relationship, how we get on, is not determined by this

one event or any particular event, it's about trust and open communication and  relationships at all levels of government over a number of years. I'm sure that we  will get the relationship back on track but we need to do it quickly and that's why, I  guess, so much is hanging on this letter that the PM has sent to the Indonesian  President.

CASSIDY: You think we will ever know what's in it?

PLIBERSEK: I don't think we need to know what's in it. It's not for domestic  consumption. Its purpose is to assure the Indonesian President that we are friends  of Indonesia and that we are keen to re-establish normal relationships as quickly as  possible.

CASSIDY: But we will need to hear from the Indonesians to know whether or not  the letter worked?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we don't need to hear the contents of the letter. We need to see  whether they re-establish normal relationships. We've seen a number of areas of  cooperation under stress or suspended. I think the proof will obviously be in the  pudding, if that cooperation's restored to its normal settings then we will know that  the letter has been successful.

CASSIDY: Now your leader Bill Shorten talked of the precedent that Barack Obama  set with Angela Merkel on this. Is that still Labor's position, that there is something  to be learned from the way that Barack Obama handled it?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think there's certainly something to be learned from it. It's not  an exactly analogous situation, of course, but I think the President of the US was  very quick in reaching out to try and smooth things over, to settle things down and  certainly we can learn from that. He promised that it would never happen again.

CASSIDY: He called for a review, do you think either of those responses would be  appropriate?

PLIBSERSEK: Look, I don't think it's up to us in the Opposition to dictate the terms  of any move forward to the Government. They've got a heap of terrific advisers, as  I've said, that can advise them on what the next steps should be, but as much direct  communication at a time like this, as we can manage, I think, could be very  important.

CASSIDY: Julia Gillard called for a review, she thinks that might be appropriate, do  you agree with her?

PLIBERSEK: It's certainly something that we could examine. I'm not going to make  firm commitments, it's not our job from Opposition to do that.

CASSIDY: So is this part of a strategy that Julia Gillard calls for a review and those  in the Parliament just sit pat on it?



PLIBSERSEK: A number of people have called for a review. Julia Gillard has, Bob  Carr's made some suggestions. We've got foreign affairs advisers, academics and  others making suggestions about how we could smooth things over. There’s a lot of  smart people out there that can give the Government advice should they want it. We  need to re-establish a close working relationship as quickly as possible and that  might include the sort of measures that you're talking about. But we are not going to  dictate that from Opposition. We've made some suggestions, Bill Shorten's made  some suggestions. It's up to the Government now to take the relationship forward

and to get it back onto its normal working track.

CASSIDY: You won't confirm that all this happened under Labor's watch but that's  what the report suggests and Kevin Rudd was PM at the time. Is there a role for him  to play in this?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think any senior Australian, like Kevin Rudd as former PM and  former foreign minister, if they've got personal relationships with senior Indonesians,  it does no harm to be talking in that personal context to them. But it will really rely  now on what the PM has said to the Indonesian President and whether that's  sufficient to restore normal relations between us.

CASSIDY: Do you think Kevin Rudd will take that up and talk to the Indonesians  privately?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I couldn't tell you.

CASSIDY: This suggestion that there seems to be a strong community feeling on  this, that the Indonesians ought to be told to go jump, do you think that that is a  feeling in the community that they think the Indonesians are being too sensitive and  are overreacting to some of this?

PLIBERSEK: I think if you look at what's happening in both Australia and Indonesia  at the moment you see people engaging in the public debate that are not interested  in settling things down or sorting things out. We've seen commentary in Australia,  we've seen commentary in Indonesia that's not helpful when it comes to restoring  the relationship. I don't agree with those sentiments. I think that our relationship  with Indonesia is a very important one for Australia and for Indonesia. We've had  great cooperation in recent years on important things like counter-terrorism, like  people smuggling, our trade relationship is a good one, we see more and more good  educational links. I think that that benefits Australia and it benefits Indonesia and  this sort of talk on either side of getting into the corner and being very defensive or  aggressive, I don't think that helps anybody.

CASSIDY: So based on what you've just said then, what do you think would be the  immediate short-term consequence if this is not sorted out?

PLIBERSEK: We're already seeing the short-term consequences. I think the  medium and long-term consequences are the ones we need to be concerned about

as well. In the short term we're already seeing a suspension of cooperation on  people smuggling, for example. We've seen the suspension of military exercises. Of  course there's now talk about an effect on our trading relationship. In the longer  term, Indonesia's always been a good support to Australia for our involvement in  regional organisations like ASEAN. I think it's going to be very important that we  continue to be friends with Indonesia, not just because of our immediate relationship  with Indonesia but because of our interests across the region.

CASSIDY: Now on Middle East policy, since the election the Abbott Government has  changed its vote in the UN from yes to criticism of Israeli settlements to abstaining.  What do you think are the implications of that?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I found these reports very surprising, actually. We've had no  formal confirmation from the Government that this is indeed the case, but of course  we've heard from people at the UN that this occurred. I certainly didn't hear of any  community consultation beforehand. I haven't heard of any explanation from the  Government since. I will be speaking to the Foreign Minister again over the coming  weeks and I will ask her for an explanation of why the Australian Government's  changed its position.

CASSIDY: What's the argument behind it. Why has Australia over the last 5 or 6  years voted yes to this proposition and joined in the criticism?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we voted yes to a proposition that has suggested that the  unlimited building of settlements in land that is considered Palestinian land is not  helping with the peace process. If the Australian Government have a different  position now, I think it would be very important for them to explain to Australians  why that position's changed.

CASSIDY: But there are others who would say the West Bank has never been  sovereign Palestinian territory?

PLIBERSEK: You're taking us down a long historic debate here, Barrie, that I don't  think we're going to solve on a Sunday morning in the 5 minutes we've got.

CASSIDY: But it is central as to whether or not you support settlements or you  don't?

PLIBERSEK: The majority of countries in the world have voted the way Australia  was previously voting, which is that the building of these settlements wasn't  contributing to the peace process. If the Australian Government has a different view  on that now it would be up to them to explain why they've changed the view and  also why so secretly. It's quite extraordinary that they would make such a large  change without reporting back to Australians about that.

CASSIDY: Thanks for your time this morning.

PLIBERSEK: Thanks, Barrie.

