



Campaign Transcript



TRANSCRIPT OF DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER ANTHONY ALBANESE  DOORSTOP  PERTH  22 AUGUST 2013



E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________



Subjects: Labor’s investment in Perth’s public transport; Perth Gateway  project; Perth City Link; Second Leaders’ Debate; Community infrastructure.   _____________________________________________________________



ANTHONY ALBANESE: Today we have a number of comments to make about  Perth’s future in terms of ensuring that we keep infrastructure up to date here in  Perth. And what’s at stake at the election on 7 September.

Firstly in the Economic Statement we brought forward funding of $113 million from  the out years into the current financial year for the Gateway Project. This is a project  that is the largest ever infrastructure project in Perth’s history. $686 million is the  Commonwealth contribution for this project. It’s supporting jobs in construction now,  but will make an enormous difference to dealing with traffic congestion around the  airport precinct.

But you need more than just delivery of roads. What we know is you also need to  deal in a modern city such as Perth, with public transport. And it is only Labor that is  committed to delivering public transport here in Perth.

This consists of two projects. One, the Airport Rail Line, which will result in new  stations in the electorate of Hasluck and new facilities which will benefit the whole of  Perth.

We put, in our last budget, $500 million. In addition to that we have brought forward  $3 million from the Federal Government and from the Western Australian  Government to make sure that planning can be done on this project.

This follows the $4 million that we contributed for planning on light rail here in Perth  as well.

If congestion isn’t dealt with in Perth, the Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and  Regional Economics suggests that there will be a cost to economy of some $2  billion.

And yet Tony Abbott remains stubbornly opposed to funding any public transport  infrastructure anywhere in Australia. Indeed when he made that announcement he

said the Federal Government doesn’t do public transport except for one project that  is going ahead in Queensland.

He seemed blissfully ignorant of the Perth City Link project, which I was very proud  to be with Alannah at the opening when we went through the Fremantle tunnel just  weeks ago.

That project, an exciting urban renewal project for Perth, is one of the differences  between Federal Labor and our opponents. So I say this; if you want major  infrastructure projects, then you have got to vote Labor on 7 September.

It isn’t just the funding of what we’re doing in terms of the future, it’s also our record.  The Great Eastern Highway widening, for example. For everyone that’s their first  experience when they leave this airport. A project promised, funded, built and  opened on the Federal Labor Government’s watch.

We also had projects in regional Western Australia, the upgrades to the Great  Northern Highway, the North West Coastal Highway, the upgrades that we’re doing  around Port Hedland, all of which have been ignored by the Federal Coalition during  this campaign.

They come here and the sole ideas that they had were two projects that we’re  already funding, that the funding is already on the table for. Nothing new, just ripping  out $500 million for public transport.

And the WA Premier has said very clearly and explicitly: without federal funding  these projects won’t go ahead. So if you want public transport, you have got to vote  Labor. If you want major infrastructure projects, you have got to vote Labor.

If you want the National Broadband Network to continue to be rolled out, you vote  Labor. And if you want a better school plan, know that here in Western Australia  Colin Barnett has announced just this week 500 teachers’ aides being sacked. That’s  devastating for those 500 people and their families who will lose their jobs. But it is  even worse, even worse in the long term for what it will do to education here in WA.

For the life of me, I can’t understand why Colin Barnett didn’t accept Federal Labor’s  offer under the Better Schools plan. He should get on board with national reform  because it is important for Australia’s future.

So when it comes to building a better future for this country, it is only Labor on road  infrastructure, on rail infrastructure, on the National Broadband Network, on  supporting education that on each of these issues Federal Labor has put forward a  plan that is about building Australia’s future.

ADRIAN EVANS: Everywhere I go people talk about the traffic snarls we have in our  community and Anthony is quite right to say that infrastructure that we’ve built, that  Federal Labor has built, has made a big difference in the community.

He’s right to say that the community expects rail. And he’s right to say that if you  vote for Tony Abbott we won’t get that rail. So it’s very important that we do vote for  Labor because it’s the Labor Party that delivers on infrastructure projects in this  country.

ALANNAH MACTIERNAN: Mr Barnett has made it clear that the only way that we  are going to see this vital rail link to the airport and beyond is if there is federal  funding. And only Labor is prepared to commit that funding.

So our only chance of getting Mr Barnett to honour the election commitment to build  this critical link to the airport and beyond is if we have the Rudd Labor Government  returned.

It makes all of the difference.

JOURNALIST: What sort of federal funding can we expect from Labor for the train  line through here?

ALBANESE: Well, we’ve already put $500 million to show our commitment to  funding public transport infrastructure in Western Australia.

Of course we contributed hundreds of millions of dollars for the Perth City Link  project. So $500 million - of course we don’t know what the final costing is - on top of  that we’ve put forward that funding that’s available this year, right now.

We have an agreement between the Commonwealth and the Barnett Government to  spend $6 million - it’s $3 million from each level - to make sure that the study can be  done and the planning done.

When we receive a detailed submission from the WA Government, we would sit  down and negotiate out exactly what the funding arrangement would be.

But I think we’ve shown absolute good will by ensuring that $500 million is in the  budget that we had in May. So not an election commitment, something that is  consistent with our commitment since 2007.

We have committed more, invested more indeed, to urban public transport since  2007 than all previous governments combined for the 107 years since Federation  prior to our election.

We understand that if you are going to deal with cities and growth and congestion,  you need to invest in public transport.

JOURNALIST: The debate last night, what’s your assessment?

ALBANESE: Well I watched it having it taped it last night, so I watched it later than it  was on live.

I thought it was a very interesting forum. I thought Kevin Rudd put forward very  clearly his vision for building the nation’s future. Not just the issues that I’ve raised in  terms of infrastructure, but also issues such as Disability Care and health.

Tony Abbott had an opportunity - we’re now into the second half of the campaign -  he had an opportunity last night to actually outline what his plans are in terms of  where the cuts will be; to education, to health, to infrastructure.

Now we know one of those cuts is a $500 million cut from public transport here in  Western Australia. But we don’t know all of it.

I also thought it was rather extraordinary; his response on paid parental leave, and it  was extraordinary for two reasons. One, finally he accepted that half of the money is  going to come from somewhere else. From cuts. So he’s going to rip out money to  those who most need it, 1.3 million families, which over the life of an average family  of two kids means $15,000 ripped off them by abolishing the Schoolkids Bonus.

But some people will benefit to the tune of $75,000. It will also be paid for by every  Australian who has superannuation. Not just retirees today who are self-funded, but  retirees of tomorrow who are all of the workers in the workforce, so I thought that  was extraordinary.

And wasn’t it extraordinary how touchy Mr Abbott got. We know why they keep him  such a short rein and don’t like him doing interviews like Lateline or Q & A or any  forum which isn’t carefully scripted with a short little grab and then heading off.

And I thought there were two moments, both in terms of during the interview but also  his response to being interviewed after the debate, where he walked away from the  interviewer who was from Sky News. And his response though was aggressive, was  angry, and it reminded me of a leader we used to have, Mark Latham.

I thought his handshake during the first debate was his first Mark Latham moment,  and last night we saw his second Mark Latham moment. I think his Mark Riley  moment for Channel Seven where he looked like he wanted to biff Mark Riley.  People are right to be worried about this bloke, about whether he is up to the job.

And on 7 September, think about this. Australia has a place around the UN Security  Council. Australia has a place at the G20. Do you really think that this bloke is up to  it - you might want him in your rugby team, in the front row, fair enough - but is this  bloke up to representing our nation at the forums of the world with people like David  Cameron, President Obama and Angela Merkel and other world leaders?

I just don’t think he’s up to it and he showed last night yet again why he isn’t up to it.

JOURNALIST: The make-up artist for the two leaders last night said that she had a  bit of a run in with Mr Rudd, that she found him to be quite rude, obnoxious and that  Mr Abbott was -

ALBANESE: No she didn’t say that, now you are verballing her.

JOURNALIST: Well in those terms, but -

ALBANESE: No she didn’t say that, didn’t say that at all. And Mr Rudd has clearly  said that prior to the interview he was focused on the interview. He has explained  that. He has apologised if there was any misinterpretation of what was a focus about  the interview while he was in a make-up chair.

JOURNALIST: Is the old Kevin Rudd coming back?

ALBANESE: Kevin Rudd I think we saw last night in terms of someone who has a  vision for the future. Someone who is prepared to engage in debate.

No wonder Tony Abbott has been trying to hide from debates. I hope someone here  has sighted the National Party Leader and the alternative Deputy Prime Minister, to  Warren Truss, I say to Warren, I’m available. I’ll go anywhere to have a debate.

I’ve been waiting six years to debate infrastructure. Now Tony Abbott says he wants  to be an infrastructure prime minister. Yeah that’s right, except for public transport,  except for clean energy infrastructure, except for a whole range of roads in regional  Australia that he is not funding, except for ignoring the processes of Infrastructure  Australia and except for shutting down the National Broadband Network; the largest  infrastructure project that is in Australia’s history.

So I’m happy to debate Warren Truss. I’ve had a couple of debates already with  Malcolm Turnbull but I say to Warren Truss who is the alternative Deputy Prime  Minister and the alternative Infrastructure and Transport Minister; happy to have a  debate with you sometime in the next couple of weeks. And I hope that he agrees to  the urging that has occurred from the National Press Club and others.

JOURNALIST: Tony Abbott was here the other day meeting with Colin Barnett at the  site of Perth’s new billion dollar stadium at Burswood and mentioned that he would  be keen if he wins the election to put in some federal funding. What would federal  Labor do -

ALBANESE: Yeah, how much did he commit?

JOURNALIST: He’s committed to it.

ALBANESE: He didn’t commit anything. He didn’t commit anything when he was  here.

Have a look at our commitment to community infrastructure. We have the Regional  Australia Development Fund; that’s $1 billion that was opposed by the Abbott  Opposition.

When we had the economic stimulus plan we delivered $1.3 billion for 5,000  community infrastructure projects including many right here in Perth through every  local government area. That was opposed by the Opposition.

We have a record of funding community infrastructure. When we receive  submissions we would be more than pleased to give them proper scrutiny and give  them proper consideration.

JOURNALIST: So you talk about what you have delivered. What are you going to  deliver for Perth, Western Australia, if you win this election infrastructure-wise?

ALBANESE: What we are going to deliver is a rail line in partnership with the WA  Government.

JOURNALIST: How much do you reckon you’ll put in?

ALBANESE: We’ve put in the budget $500 million. Half a billion is in the budget  already.

What we do is we have proper submissions and processes. We don’t have a final  costing yet. So it is not reasonable to expect that you would have a final funding  commitment before the planning has been done and the submission’s done.

But that’s there as a sign of the commitment that we are prepared to make. We  already have $686 million in WA Gateway. We have the Perth-Darwin project. We  have Leach Highway. We have a range of other projects that we are rolling out here  in Perth. And we would also sit down and discuss with the WA Government the  support for further projects.

Can I say this; every single project that was put forward by the WA Government -  they put forward recently the Muchea to Wubin upgrade, the next section of that. The  sections in the North West Coastal Highway, the Perth to Darwin Highway, every  major project that they put forward we have funded. Every single one.

So our record is certainly there, including funding the largest ever road project, which  is the WA Gateway project, and support here for the rail projects. When they are  finally submitted we will come up with a final negotiation with the WA Government.

JOURNALIST: How long is that $500 million (inaudible)

ALBANESE: That’s the across the Nation Building 2 program. The Nation Building 2  program begins in 2014, that’s next year. So this year we’ve brought forward  additional money on top of that to get the planning work done. That’s the way you do  good infrastructure development.

JOURNALIST: How long does it go for?

ALBANESE: We’ve put $500 million in the budget. What we will do is sit down in  terms of the timeframe of the WA Government when they work it out, having been  funded by us to the tune of $3 million from each level of government.

JOURNALIST: Just on the five asylum seekers that escaped from Norman detention  centre. There has been a bit of confusion as to who has been searching for them  and that type of stuff. What will happen next time?

ALBANESE: Look I’m not in a position to comment. I’ve just got off a plane here at  the airport. So I’m not in a position to comment.



ENDS



