



Campaign Transcript





TRANSCRIPT OF PRIME MINISTER  Q&A  2 SEPTEMBER 2013

E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________



Subjects: Leadership; Carbon pricing; Labor Party values; Better Schools  Plan; Cost of living; Newstart allowance; Health; Coles and Woolworths;  Media ownership; Marriage equality; Superannuation; Election campaign.

_____________________________________________________________



QUESTIONER: Prime Minister. Good evening. Thank you for coming along. We  need leaders of vision, courage and grace. Last time you were Prime Minister  you started with vision and then you unravelled, lost the support of your peers  and then perniciously undermined the Government. Why should we entrust our  nation to you again?



PM: That's a good and easy one to start with. Firstly, you are right about the  question of vision because unless you can sketch out where you think the  country needs to go and the reasons for it, let me tell you, you will be guaranteed  never to arrive. So the vision is clear. I want to see an Australia where our  economy is strong but we never allow the fair go to disappear. It applies to  health, education, jobs and being fair to the people who come after us through  things like climate change as well and acting on that. In terms of your other part  of your question, which was about things going wrong, any government who is  being honest about it admits they make mistakes. We have. Mr Howard's  government made mistakes. That's just the nature of political life. I don't know  any government which could ever stand before you with hand on heart and say  they have never committed a mistake.

HOST: - So what was the big mistake you have made since you became Prime  Minister again?

PM: It has been too short a time to make another mistake, I think. What I'm  saying is anyone who pretends in political life that you can somehow go out there  and wave a magic wand and get everything right is just wrong. You are deluding  yourself and deluding the Australian people.

HOST: So you are seriously telling us you have made no mistakes since you  became Prime Minister again? People would say there has been a lot of  mistakes during the campaign for example.

PM: You know something Tony, what people here tonight I believe want to  discuss, and I go directly to the question asked before, is what's our vision for the  country's future, how do we think we will get there, what's the contrast point with  what Mr Abbott puts on offer.

What I find, to be blunt, is a lot of questions get asked to me and I'm sure Mr  Abbott in the media during the course of this campaign are about campaign  dynamics. What the polls are saying, what they’re not saying. What's happening  here in the campaign, what’s happening there in the campaign, as opposed to,  what does it mean for my school, what’s it mean for my hospital, what’s it mean  for my job, what it means for my penalty rates and overtime? - the basic  questions so I am all for engaging in that discussion and leaving it to the good  intelligence of everyone here to make their choice.

HOST: Sure, but with respect, you said yesterday, you said in your campaign  launch speech that you’ve made mistakes, you repeated it here tonight. What  were the mistakes Labor made in six years in power because you have never  actually spelled out in that speech what the mistakes were?

PM: Well, with respect Tony, on this program, you asked me that question some  time ago, and I said directly to your audience, the mistake that I made, and I think  it goes to your question as well, was about climate change and the decision to  defer the implementation of the Emissions Trading Scheme. I don't think I  adequately explained what was going on at the time and I think we got that  wrong. And you say about being up-front about it I remember speaking to an  audience, perhaps not quite this big, and perhaps it was your pad down in  Sydney, when we did Q&A down there. But I said that up-front to people I could  give you a thousand reasons as to why that decision was reached but in  retrospect, I think I got it wrong. So there you go, that's the answer.

HOST: And the carbon tax, was that another mistake?

PM: On the pricing of carbon, as we have said in these forums over and over  again, our policy is clear. There must be a price on carbon if you are going to act  on climate change. It is a lay down misere. Then there is a debate about a  carbon tax as opposed to a floating price. I have always supported a floating  price. The contrast point is Mr Abbott who thinks you can get away with acting on

climate change by not putting a price on carbon. I think that’s just wrong, it is  sticking your head in the sand and doesn't deal with the challenge in the future,  for your kids in the future, your grandkids - got to have a planet to inherit. Unless  you are acting on climate change, it won't happen.

(APPLAUSE)

HOST: The next question comes from Sophie Meixner.

QUESTIONER: Hi Prime Minister, welcome. I'm probably the closest thing  possible to a Labor Party faithful. I think my own values align closely with what  the Labor Party was built on -



PM: - I am worried about this before it starts. I sense a big but coming on.

QUESTIONER: Yes. Support for the working, for the ageing,  for the poor;  those  who need it the most. In 2007 as you were elected in a landslide over Labor  ideals I thought I'd be a Labor voter for my whole life but this time I'm not voting  for you. I see this election as a choice between two centre right wing parties. Mr  Rudd, I like you, I want to vote for you, convince me and the other disenchanted  voters that Labor is still the same party it was six years ago.



PM: I think your question, a lot of people get cynical about politics and politicians  and having been in the Parliament now for 15 years, I understand that. I really  do. As I said before in the question over here, you are not looking at Captain  Perfection here. But on the core question which actually animates us on our side  of politics in Australia, it goes down to one core principle which is preserving a  fair go for all. We can all have a debate about how you keep the economy strong  but it is about fairness. For me the question of fairness comes down to this; are  we providing a fair go for workers in the workplace if we are going to put under a  big question mark the future of penalty rates, of overtime and of fair and  independent umpire? We have a clear view on that. We have a very ambiguous  view on that from Mr Abbott in this campaign. On the fair go question our attitude  is that we should have needs-based funding for schools nationwide, all 9,500 of  them. So what we put together is a plan to do that called the Better Schools Plan  and it goes to the question of those schools who need it most wherever they are  because they deserve a fair go. Third one; broadband. We believe that  broadband is a universal right for this country for the 21st century. A right. Not on  option, not a privilege but a right. If you go to the history, you look at the postal  service in the 19th century, it arrived, it eventually became universal, you paid  different amounts for the stamp but the postal service was there. In the 20th  century it was the telephone. In the 21st century it is broadband. On fairness, let  me go to this - we want universal access for all Australians, doesn't matter  whether you are country, city, rich suburb, poor suburb, whatever. Secondly, it  should be connected to your home, like the telephone. Furthermore -

HOST: - We will go back to the questioner and find out whether she is convinced.

PM:- It is a question about fairness and it goes to the heart of our creed as a  political party so I have got to answer as directly as I can. I have gone to schools,  I have gone to the question of a fair go in the workplace and fair go for the  technology of the 21st century. I don't want a digital divide in Australia between  rich and poor people. So there are three illustrations, if you like, about why I say  to you this fair go principle is not just a bunch of hoo-ha, it is what we believe in  and what we seek to do.

HOST: Sophie, you wanted to be convinced, are you convinced?

QUESTIONER: For me it just seems like the Greens as a party are emerging as  a more mainstream left wing party. You and Tony Abbott to me seem like almost  the same person.



HOST: I am sure there would be quite a few people who would beg to differ,  including Tony Abbott but he is not here to make that case.

Our next question comes from Anthony Steinfort.   QUESTIONER: Good evening Prime Minister. Kevin, you stated previously on  climate change it was the biggest moral challenge of our time.   PM: -That's true   QUESTIONER: - Then you bragged about pulling back the carbon tax. In 2007,  you have stated you wouldn't lurch to the right with boat people. Now you are  promising you won't lurch to the left. You’ve even described yourself as an  economic conservative and now you are an economic nationalist. I'm struggling  to keep up. Kevin, besides the weathervane of public opinion, what do you  actually stand for?   PM: I stand for a fair go for all. I stand for a fair go for all Australians. Let me go  through the points you have just raised. Number one, you spoke about the  question of people smugglers and asylum seekers. This is a question which  faces every government in the world and there is no perfect landing point. So  what have we tried to do? Wrestle with two dilemmas. Number one is how do you  take people from around the world who are refugees languishing in camps and  provide them with safe haven in Australia? - through the humanitarian program  and how do you act to prevent more and more people drowning at sea? One in  13 people who come to this country on a boat end up drowning.   That is the dilemma. So what we have decided to do is try and deal with that  dilemma in the best way we can by upping our intake of refugees through the  normal system, from 12,000 to 20,000 and prospectively to 27, at the same time  sending an unambiguous message to people smugglers about their use of boats  because it drowns people. Is it perfect? No. Have I wrestled with it night and  day? You betcha. Have I found a better solution from anybody about how to stop  people drowning at sea? No, I haven't. That's why I have landed on that point.  Finally you raise the question of climate change. This is a test of consistency.

The point about climate change is this - how do you reduce greenhouse gas  emissions? I've done three things. One, ratified Kyoto, first action of the  Government. Number two, introduced a mandatory renewable energy target in  the first year that the Government was in. Result, our emissions are now 7 per  cent lower from the electricity generation sector than when we came to office.  Number three, a price on carbon, moving from a fixed price now to floating price.  There are three concrete actions, I believe on these questions there is a principle  of continued consistency. No decision is perfect. I’ve done the best I can.  HOST: The next question comes from Jen Ryan.   QUESTIONER: Prime Minister, as a Queensland state high school teacher, I see  every day how much the Gonski Better Schools program is needed within our  schools system. I am worried that if the current polls are correct Tony Abbott will  be elected as our next Prime Minister leaving a massive gap in the Gonski  funding and jeopardising Queensland's chance to sign up. However, if you are  elected as Prime Minister in the next election, how will you convince Campbell  Newman to sign up on to this plan and does this even seem likely as we haven't  signed up yet?   PM: Well, it is a really important question. It goes back to the question of the  young person over here on the principle of the fair go. Why have we done the  Better Schools plan based on the Gonski report, needs-based funding? You  know that. My deep view, as a person as a kid who grew up in a Queensland  country primary school where we had four teachers and not much and a high  school which hadn't seen much at all, and we only got a library properly in the  last year I was at school, is that every kid in this State of Queensland and right  across the country, wherever they come from, small towns, big towns, with  money, without, should have equal access to a first-class education. That's what  it gave me - a chance in life. That's what I believe can give every kid in this  country a proper chance. So on the specifics of the plan, two points. One, under  us, we have embraced the Better Schools plan so that by the time we get to  2019, we have a further $15 billion dollars of investment between the  Commonwealth and the States into the schools of Australia, all 9,500 of them  based on needs-based funding. Mr Abbott offers, in fact of the Commonwealth  contribution, only about $2 billion - $2.5 billion dollars of that. About $8 billion  dollars less than we do. On the question of the Queensland Government, I  cannot understand why Campbell Newman would say no to an investment by the  Commonwealth of a billion plus extra into the Queensland education system. I  would sit down with the guy if we were elected next Saturday, try and work it  through because I believe every Queensland parent would want me to try to do  that. I would hope if we had won, he'd realise that the game might be up.   HOST: Our next question. It is from Harry Meixner.   QUESTIONER: Last week saw a funding row between the two major parties with  Labor claiming a $10 billion dollar hole in the Coalition's costings. The accusation  collapsed completely when senior Treasury and Finance officials said they had  not costed the relevant Coalition policies. With many saying this claim was  completely fabricated, how can you justify it?

PM: Well, the bottom line is this - everything would be clear and on the table as  of today if Mr Abbott simply put it out there in black and white for the entire  nation. What are your costings? What are your cuts? Then we’d have a debate  whether they are good or bad. So what we have sought to do using all the  information available to us, on the bits that he has put out, is try and cost them.  My response to your question is - if we are going to have a serious debate in this  country about where Mr Abbott's $70 billion dollars’ worth of cuts would fall, Mr  Hockey's figure, Mr Robb's figure, he can satisfy that by putting it into the public  domain -  HOST: - Prime Minister I am going to have to pick you up on the $70 billion  dollar, you keep saying it, it has been fact checked by the ABC fact checkers by  Politifact, they have found that it is wrong and misleading to keep using that  figure of $70 billion dollars. Will you actually start accepting what the fact  checkers have said about this?   PM: I will start accepting the accurate figure for Coalition promises and cuts and  costings when Mr Abbott puts it all on the table as we did through the economic  statement prior to the election being called. (APPLAUSE) Because until that  point, what you are effectively asking the people of Australia to do is to take Mr  Abbott on trust. We have done that in Queensland with a guy called Campbell  Newman. What happened was, we have had 12,000 folks lose their jobs, it will  increase to 20,000 once the Federal election is out of the way. 4,000 health  workers and I sat down with sacked nurses today out in Redcliffe and heard what  it was like. So I will stand for him coming clean with where his cuts will fall, which  jobs will go, which hospitals will be cut, which school will be cut. People deserve  to know before they vote.   HOST: Ok, but come back to the question. When you made this allegation of  fraud and you used the figure of $10 billion dollars as the black hole and you  suggested these were figures checked by Treasury, that afternoon, Treasury and  Finance heads came out and said “no - we didn’t check those costings”. Was  that the worst moment of the campaign for you?  PM: With respect, what I said in that interview that you just referred to, that press  conference, was a direct challenge to Mr Abbott - come out and disprove these  statements about the costings we have put. If you go to the transcript, you will  see me say words virtually to that effect. Mr Abbott, because he believes he has  this election won, will simply go through to election eve, not tell everyone where  the cuts will fall because he is frightened the good folk out there then won't vote  for him. It is as cynical as that. We will keep the pressure up. The reverse  psychology used by Mr Abbott is to say "Oh terrible Labor Party for asking us  these questions".   HOST: If it was only him Prime Minister, that would be one thing. But it wasn't, it  was the heads of the Treasury and Finance and the head of the Parliamentary  Budget Office.   PM: What I said in the press conference which you have not quoted there, what I  said in the press conference that day, Tony, bluntly, to Mr Abbott is - you tell us  what the difference is between what we are putting out today and what you  believe to be true. There is a paragraph in my statement to that effect, people

seem to have overlooked it, but I'm going back to the point. Mr Abbott has not  responded so the focus of this election campaign on the economy, on jobs, on  schools, on hospitals, is frankly in the dark because it is not all out there. If you  live in Queensland, we scratch our heads a bit about this, because when Mr  Newman was elected, nothing was said. Then the axe fell. People here in this  room and across the country deserve to know whether the axe will fall on them.   HOST: This is a special Q&A with the Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. The next  question comes from Carol Prater.   QUESTIONER: Good evening Mr Rudd.   PM: Sorry, I couldn't see you up there.   QUESTIONER continued..: As the person who manages our household budget,  I understand when I have finances to spend and when I have to cut back. Your  party has been assaulting the LNP about suggesting that they'll cut back in such  a significant way that it will hurt everyday Australians. Based on our country's  current financial position, doesn't it make sense that whatever party is elected,  they will have to make significant changes? Realistically, even significant cut-backs?   PM: The question - I thank you for the question , because it goes to how you  ultimately balance your budget, whether it is a household or a country. There is a  couple of things I'd just say in response to it and then go to exactly what is  expected of us and the other side of politics post an election. Where we are  today is because of the product of what many economies around the world are  still going through. We call it the Global Financial Crisis several years ago. They  call it the continuing global economic recession. Because we decided to act and  then borrow temporarily to fill the gap left by private businesses not acting, we  actually managed to keep the economy from falling into recession.   We avoided mass unemployment like you see in Europe with double-digit plus  unemployment in most of those countries. Had we not done so, the topic for  debate here on Q&A is how do you get unemployment down from under 10 per  cent, Mr Rudd? That's where it would be. That's the debate in most of Europe  today and we did so also with interest rates being kept at a record low. On the  assumption about economic management, what I have seen through this  campaign is Mr Abbott's continued assertion there is a huge problem with debt  and deficit. How is it then that with debt levels and deficit levels among the lowest  in the developed world, if it was all so bad, why is it all three international credit  rating agencies have accorded this Australian government a AAA rating for  management of public finances, one of only seven countries in the world. This is  one of the greatest fabrications of this campaign. So I argue that for when we get  back into government if we are re-elected on Saturday, what we will do is track  back to surplus, consistent with what we up-front there in the economic  statement. If you were to do it quicker than that, I really fear if Mr Abbott  implements his $70 billion dollars’ worth of cuts, then you can run a risk of  running the economy into recession.   HOST: Ok, you have used the $70 billion dollar figure again. I’ll say to you again,  I believe that’s been fact checked and incorrect but to go to the question that was  asked there.

PM: And I would say to you Tony, why don't you have here Mr Abbott's full list of  costings and cuts upon which you can base that statement? You don't.  (APPLAUSE)

HOST: If we go back to the question that was just asked. What I think is being  asked there is how you are going to pay for all the giant reforms that are coming  down the track without either making spending cuts or raising new taxes?

PM: I seem to recall at the time of the economic statement just prior to the  election campaign commencing, we were attacked by groups right across the  country for various of the changes that we made including changes to the fringe  benefits tax. We have taken a series of decisions, not just now, but over the last  several years which add up to large sustained cuts in various parts of public  spending. We have done that. Therefore, we actually know where the big  blowout is coming. Let me give you one example about how you do this over  time. One of the reasons several years ago we took a decision to increase the  retirement age to 67, gradually over time, because we could see this huge cost  coming down to the Budget in 10, 20, 30 years' time as we live longer and as a  result it really pushes up the amount of money pushed back on to taxpayers and  workers in the workforce for having to shoulder that burden. We took that  decision. It has been unpopular. It was responsible for long-term budget  management.

HOST: The next question is from Mark Cridland.

QUESTIONER: Thank you Tony. I probably would have asked Tony Abbott this  question if he had the courage to show up. Anyway. Recent survey by the  University of Canberra found rises in average disposable incomes have far  outstripped cost of living increases since Labor took office. Over the last year the  cost of household goods, transport, clothing and food has risen by less than 1  per cent and interest rates at record lows. My question is simple - how have you  let Tony Abbott successfully perpetuate the myth that the Australian economy is  somehow on the edge of a cliff and we are all worse off than we were six years  ago?

PM: I think I sought to answer that question in part before when I explained to  our friend at the back there who asked the good question about the budgets, as  to why we have done what we have done. Every country and Prime Minister I  see in the world who looks at the Australian economy and compares it to their  own says "these are such strong economic fundamentals given what everyone  else is going through, that they question how Mr Abbott could be anywhere near  the truth. You have gone down to how it affects families as well. I watch that very  carefully because I know families are under financial pressure. That's why, for  example, we want to keep things in place like the Schoolkids Bonus. It provides  help with people buying uniforms and books, if you've got kids at primary school,  kids at high school. Mr Abbott wants to rip that away.

Your question is about has that message got through to the Australian public?  Part of the reason I'm on a program like this tonight is to actually argue it  forcefully, that people understand the central economic lie of this campaign is  that Australia is in some sort of debt and deficit crisis. If that was so, I go back to  the question which he has never answered - why is it that all three international  credit ratings who compare us with every developed economy in the world put us  at the absolute top level? Therefore, his justification for massive cuts as a matter  for economic management doesn't exist. That's a product of ideology. And that's  what I don't like.

HOST: If people are so much better off, why don't they feel like they are?

PM:  In the political debate of this country, I was responding to your earlier  comments about the conduct of the campaign, often what happens in politics is  the questions become purely about politics as opposed to -

HOST: Sorry, but does that mean people are imagining they are feeling stress  and strain financially?

PM: No, no, what I am saying is something a bit different to that. ‘Cause I have  actually run into enough families to know there are real pressures being borne  down on families. And it is very difficult, if you are sitting in Australia to compare  that with how anyone else is in the world. What I'm saying is our public debate  rarely, rarely - tonight is an exception - rarely focuses on frankly policy facts and  policy alternatives and how you get on with making a seasoned judgment on  what we will do and what they will do and whether you like that or the alternative  because there is so much hot air up the middle.

HOST: So briefly, are people better off than they think they are?

PM: What sort of question is that! People have different concepts.

HOST: It goes precisely to the questions being asked. If the economy is in good  shape, are people better off than they believe they are?

PM: Let me answer it in these terms, having spoken to stacks of small  businesses recently and people who watch the screen and watch what's going  on, they watch Bloomberg and everything else and they get quite transfixed on  the uncertain state of the global economy. And this worries people. That's why a  number of people, for example, in the economy aren't investing as much as they  could because they are worried about what lies around the corner. My concern  and my caution about Mr Abbott on this question is if you are going to take a  fiscal sledgehammer to the economy, it is delicate out there. It’s really delicate.  You don't want to take a step which tips this country into recession. Once you are  there, it is very hard to get out of it.

HOST: OK, we have two related questions on the same subject. We will take  them one after the other, before the Prime Minister answers. Our first one is from  Brittany Ralph.

QUESTIONER: Prime Minister, as a young woman who intends to have a well-paid career, a family and contribute to my community, I see paid parental leave  as a workplace entitlement that should align with my income like my other  entitlements do. A fair go if you will. Is this the first time in Labor leader history  that a Labor leader has turned their backs on workplace entitlements?

HOST: And the second one is from Jamie Cooper.

QUESTIONER:  Hi Mr Prime Minister. How can you continue to play on the  upper limits of Tony Abbott's paid parental leave system when in fact that's only a  small percentage? His scheme will help so many people on average and  minimum wage, for example my and wife I want to have a kid as we plan to. If we  go on to minimum wage like the current plan, we will struggle, whereas if we get  my wife's average wage, being a business owner, it will assist us to continue to  give our family what it needs.

(APPLAUSE).

PM:  Thank you for the questions. I will obviously take both of them together. On  the question of paid parental leave as a matter of basic fact, we introduced the  first scheme in Australia's history in 2010. It is a modest scheme. It is also an  affordable scheme for the overall budget of the country. We have had questions  about budget management as well. Our scheme is for 18 weeks at the basic  wage, about $620. Then there is an additional two weeks for paternal leave. And  so we believe that's affordable, it helps deal with some of the basic purchases  that you need to make when gotta go out and buy baby clothes and the sort of  stuff that you need - cots, pushers and the rest. These are large expenses. Of  course, you have someone who is now not bringing in an income. That's our  approach. The alternative, I have just got to say, in our judgment as the Labor  Party, is unaffordable for the budget. It is $22 billion. It is more than we spend for  the entire nation on childcare support for all those families out there with kids in  childcare. It is a bigger number than that. So we don't believe that we can afford  that in the overall context of the budget. The second thing is about fairness. I  don't believe in paying for something like that, it is right to abolish the Schoolkids  Bonus of only $1,200 a year for 1.3 million families right across the country to  pay for that paid parental leave scheme which provides some people $75,000 to  have a baby.

HOST: Do you accept the basic point that was being made there, particularly by  the second questioner, that even people on average incomes will earn more  under the Abbott scheme than they will under your scheme?

PM: It depends on what other payments they are receiving and whether their  workplace has entitlements of a different nature. If they are State Government  employees etc. So it is difficult to give a neat answer to that question,  circumstances differ. My overall point though to both of you, legitimately raising  the question about how do you afford to have kids in the 21st century, it is not  cheap, is for the perspective of the overall budget, I do not see a scheme which  provides $75,000 for someone on $150,000 or a million dollars or a billion dollars  cause it is uncapped this, in terms of how far it goes, to have a baby, when on  the other hand, Mr Abbott is saying "If you get 1200 bucks a year to help  buy some school books and a school uniform, I’m going to take that away from  you in order to pay for that". I don't think that's right.

(APPLAUSE).

HOST: Our next two questions are also related, they are video questions. Let's  take them together too. They’re from June Connell from Trafalgar, Victoria and  Tara McKenna in Wundowie, WA.

QUESTIONER: Each day sole parents who have been placed on Newstart from  parenting payment in January this year are becoming homeless. They are unable  to put food on the table and supply basic needs for their families. Work is really  difficult to find. I'm actually studying teaching. I'm doing that on $260 a week.  Newstart payments plus Family Tax Benefit for my 12-year-old. I rely on friends  buying us food. I'm bidding time until I become homeless while the ALP and  Liberals are continuing to push for middle income welfare. Have a heart and re-instate parenting payments.

QUESTIONER: Mr Rudd. Since being put on Newstart allowance, I have lost  nearly $230 per fortnight. I am not unemployed, I haven't been unemployed for  over four years. I can no longer afford to give the children the things they used to.  They are now going without. What is your answer to this? Single parents are not  dole bludgers.

HOST: Prime Minister -

PM: They are both right, they are not dole bludgers. These are folk who are out  there not just trying to make ends meet but deal with really difficult and  challenging circumstances in their life. I was asked this question I think in  Gladstone today. I was talking to some folk up there about apprenticeships. I was  asked why we haven't fixed this since I returned to the prime ministership and the  answer is budget pressures as of now.

What I have said is that if we are returned, it will be the first thing we address. I  said that earlier today. I mean it. I am not comfortable with where we are on this.  I believe as soon as the budget opens up that amount of space to deal with this  challenge, we should act.

HOST: Do you think the policy was not in line with Labor Party values?

PM: I was very uncomfortable with it then. I am very uncomfortable with where  we are with it now. I am just being up-front about it. As soon as the budget allows  us a bit of space to act on that, we will.

HOST: Our next question is from Nicole Shenko.

QUESTIONER: Good evening Prime Minister. I'd like to know as a registered  nurse what your plans are for the health system. In 30 years, 23 per cent of the  population will be over the age of 65. There is a decrease in post graduate  positions and at some nursing homes, it is a 1-120 nurse ratio. Who is going to  look after this system and what is your government's plan for the future  considering that 2.3 workers will be working for every person over the age of 65?

PM: That's a great question. Did you say two or one? Our response to that is in  2010 we negotiated finally an agreement called the Health and Hospitals Plan.  What is the Health and Hospitals Plan? What really worried me when I was first  elected Prime Minister was how the Commonwealth Government was exiting  backwards to the funding commitment from the public hospital system. It began  originally at 50 per cent and by the time it got to its lowest ebb under the previous  government it was down to 38. So you had, frankly, all the fractures really  beginning to appear in the public hospital system in the country. So you asked  what our plan is. It is now an agreement with the states and territories. That is  from the signing of that agreement through until 2019, you will see an additional  total of $19 billion investment by the Commonwealth into the hospital system of  Australia.

Why? We want to make sure there are enough doctors, enough nurses, enough  people in training, enough accident and emergency, enough early access for  elective surgery and enough operating theatres. If you look at the investments we  have made, we have made this much progress, the states are often sliding out  the door backwards. I mentioned before Campbell Neumann sacked 4,000 health  workers. But for us this a clear and absolute priority, not as a set of words, but a  funding stream that is coming like that through the states and territories. On aged  care, the Aged Care plan which is called ‘Living Better Living Longer’ was put out  by the then Minister Mark Butler some time ago, it provides a $3.2 billion  investment into the aged care sector. And one of its core reforms is how do we  make it better in two areas? A better pay deal, a better pay deal, for those who  are in nursing in the aged care sector? On the other hand, how do we provide a  large number, tens of thousands of extra home packages so that people can age  with better dignity at home and not go into an institution earlier.

HOST: The questioner please stand up, the questioner has her hand up.

QUESTIONER continued: - Sir, I respectfully decline your answer for that . A  level two nurse in aged care gets $25 less an hour than hospitals -

PM: - I know that.

QUESTIONER continued: - It is harder work, we have a one to 100 or 120 ratio  for one registered nurse. The hospitals have the luxury of one to four or one to  five. It is not a sustainable measure to expect a registered nurse to continue  down that road. It is dangerous. These are our old people that deserve respect  and good care, 23 per cent of the population.

(APPLAUSE)

PM: But I agree with you. This is a critical area of needed, continued funding and  reform. You can either turn your back on it, just wish it away, and allow your  funding contributions to slide into nothing in the hope no-one notices or you can  tackle it head-on as we have done with the hospital sector. There is more to be  done in the aged care sector. I simply pointed to what we have done.

HOST: The amount of money you pointed to, increased funding, is a drop in the  bucket when you consider the extent of the problem coming down the track. A  tsunami of people, the retiring baby boomers.

(APPLAUSE)

PM:  You are absolutely right which is why you tackle the problem head-on rather  than pretend it doesn't exist. On the hospital sector, which has been a huge focus  for us to turn that around, the health and hospitals plan, the extra $19 billion  worth of investment, is generally accepted as heading in the right direction. On  aged care, we have made one big first step, there are more steps to be taken.  But what I'm saying is I am not going to stand here in denial of a problem which  is the ageing of our population. I outlined one of the early responses to that in  terms of how it affects retirement income and the age. But in terms of the ageing  of the population, this will require further financial investment by the Australian  Government into the future with further reforms as well. One step. One step, is to  provide tens of thousands of additional packages to keep people at home longer.  To add one point to that, to add one point to that - this has only been announced  six, nine months ago, I am sure it is taking a while to flow through. One addition  to that is, for example, to make sure that we use the new and emerging  technologies provided by the National Broadband Network to make it easier for  people to have their medical measurements taken at home and then for those  consultations to occur down the line with family until it becomes necessary for a  person to go into a residential facility. We have more to do. Your criticism and  your passion for the sector is well placed. I accept it.

HOST: Ok, we’re going to change subjects. The next question is from Marjorie  Porter.

QUESTIONER: Good evening Prime Minister. You referred earlier this evening  to your country upbringing. Given your exposure to dairy farming in your early life  -

PM: - It is hard work.

QUESTIONER continued: - It is hard work. 365 days of the year.

PM: When the cows start talking back, you know you have been there too long.

QUESTIONER continued: - Do you think it is appropriate that while Coles and  Woolworths make record profits from unprecedented market power and they sell  their milk at $1 a litre, making dairy farmers two out of three dairy farmers  struggle to survive, to pay their monthly bills and many of them have to sell up  and leave the land, many politicians on both sides, not just the Labor Party, and it  seems to be both sides, seem too gutless to do anything about this issue. We  want to know where you stand. Dairy farmers would like to see a mandatory code  of conduct and what do you say about that? (APPLAUSE)

PM: Good, that was a great question. I think I was in a debate the other night  when this question arose. I can't quite remember where now. I expressed a  similar concern about the possible abuse of monopoly power or semi-monopoly  power by the big retailers. You mentioned Coles and Woolies. I still have friends  on the land. They tell me the same story that you tell me. You know in the dairy  industry, going back over the last 30 to 40 years you have seen one set of  rationalisations after another. When I was a kid growing up, everybody was on a  dairy farm, then there were none in the sunshine coast where I grew up or  virtually none anyway and so you have seen changes occur over a long period of  time but what really worries me is this. It is frankly the attack on the price which a  primary producer needs to generate an income in order to sustain the farm.

That's what worries me because the big retailers will say is "well our  responsibility is to make sure you have the cheapest prices on the shelves" and  you know what the other side of the argument they will use. But I worry about  pricing our farm sector out of business. In answer to your question on a code of  conduct, one of the reasons why this has been put before the ACCC, the  Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, by the Government, is  precisely to get to a landing point on this. I'm saying to you loud and clear tonight,  I share your concern, I have said it publicly before tonight. I said it within the last  week or two. I believe we have to take further action on this to defend our farm  sector.

HOST: So you would be perfectly happy to see strong federal intervention to  break the market power of these monopolies, Coles and Woolworths?

PM: The reason we have put it to the ACCC is to get the report. I am saying to  you in my predisposition as Prime Minister is I do not want them to have the  power to smash the farming sector to bits.

HOST: Let’s move to our next question it’s from Joey Vidakovic.

QUESTIONER: Good evening Prime Minister. My question is related to media  during this campaign and it’s with the Murdoch family having complete control of  main media across Australia, do you think it is hard for Australians to get an  honest, unbiased opinion of yourself and the Labor Party during this campaign?  (APPLAUSE)

PM: The great thing about democracy, it's a rough and tumble, people get out  there, express their view. Some of them love you, others will hate you. What's  nice about Australia is they will say both to you in the same sentence. It is a  marvellously disrespectful culture. When you have foreigners come here, they go  "good God, is it like that here?" But I really like it. So we have a free press and a  free media. Yes, it is clear Mr Murdoch prefers Mr Abbott. I don't think you have  to be a Rhode Scholar to work that one out. Particularly if you saw some of the  headlines in yesterday's paper?

HOST: Well, given those headlines was it a mistake to take on Murdoch at the  beginning of the campaign?

PM: You know something? The truth ain't a bad strategy. Just tell them the truth  which is calling it for what it is.

HOST: What is it actually?

PM: Well the truth is what I said at the time. You know as well as I, 70 per cent of  the nation's papers are controlled by Mr Murdoch or in Brisbane it’s a one  newspaper town. You buy the 'Courier Mail' is owned by Mr Murdoch, you buy  the 'Australian' is owned by Mr Murdoch. You get you Brisbane throw-away   newspaper, that’s owned by Mr Murdoch. So you can chose between Murdoch,  Murdoch and Murdoch.

HOST: Should that change?

PM: Let me answer this gentleman's question, which was about and I will come  back to yours in a minute. Well it’s true. I thought it was a forum for the people.  (LAUGHTER)

HOST: Oddly enough, I thought you had answered his question.

PM: No, no - no, no,  I hadn't. What I was going on to say, what I was going to  say very bluntly is that I have great confidence that the Australian people make  up their own mind. They see through what's going on. They make up their own  judgment. The intelligence of the Australian people, they know whether reporting  has been balanced and fair or whether it is a propaganda tribute and they will  sort that out themselves. I think the key element to the question the gentleman  asked is this is are both sides of politics been put under real scrutiny? Real  scrutiny.

We have had a robust debate here tonight about costings and cuts. The question  I think which people have to ask themselves tonight, is given where Mr Abbott  stands in the opinion polls, and given that he is the front-runner, and given that  he assumes by his public statements that he’s won, then has he been put under  scrutiny on the question of where this massive set of cuts will fall? Where? -And  that's the question of fair and balanced coverage. That's why, for example, I  believe passionately in the future of the independence and proper funding of the  ABC. Not because we are here, because it is an essential institution and free  media in this country.

HOST: OK, but I’ll just bring you to the question that  I asked, do you think there  should be intervention to- you talked about with Coles and Woolworths, what  about Murdoch?

PM: I said before, I said before - well hang on, you go to the media, and the  freedom of the media, that goes to the lifeblood of democracy. The abuse of  competition power in a sector of the economy is something you can respond to or  not respond to and I gave my response to the earlier question. On the media, I  think you have to be very, very careful about getting the Government directly  involved in regulation of the media. Where does the slippery slope stop? I'm not  quite sure. More broadly my point is just about proper scrutiny of both sides of  politics so you the good people of Australia make up your own mind.

HOST: OK, let’s move on, our next question is a video. It comes from Brad  Roden in Bundall, Queensland.

QUESTIONER: Mr Prime Minister. The most highly taxed few per cent of this  country pay for this country. We pay our fair share in taxes, employ people in our  small businesses and contribute to a wealthier nation yet we seem to always be  in the cross-hairs of the Labor Governments. Our private school choices relieve  the burden on the public school system and our private health choice does the  same. If we stop doing both of these, these public services would collapse. Why  are we the enemy of Labor? We are working families too. (APPLAUSE)

PM: Well let me just go to a fact which is in this election campaign, we have put  forward a tax benefit package for small business which runs out at about $5.4  billion dollars. Mr Abbott has ripped all that away. Where does that go to? Very

simple thing. If you are a small business with a turnover of less than $2 million,  what we provide is for you to have instant tax write-off of $10,000 worth of  equipment which you buy for your business. Mr Abbott has scrapped that all  together. On the question of the rhetorical position underpinning the question  which is that somehow we are anti-small business, if you look at the evidence on  the table right now the facts don't substantiate the proposition. Secondly on  private schools, in this country, what we are proud of is the fact that when it  comes to investments like new school libraries, new multi-purpose facilities, I can  point to my electorate here in Brisbane where I find all the private schools, the  Catholic schools, the Independent Christian schools and the rest have benefitted  massively from this investment and on top of that, under the Better Schools plan  it is also a whole bunch of Independent, Christian and Catholic schools which will  benefit enormously under a needs-based funding formula. So on those  questions, I think the facts also need to be tested. I don’t accept the underpinning  of the question.

HOST: Just quickly, do you accept Labor's class war rhetoric has actually  alienated a lot of voters?

PM: I don't think it was a right thing to do at all. That's not where I come from. I  don’t believe that the Labor Party comes from that direction either

HOST: - Some of your colleagues do.

PM: If you don't have an effective business community, an effective private  sector which is profitable, which is generating profits for itself then you don't have  jobs. You cannot redistribute wealth unless you generate wealth in the first case.  That's why we are running an agenda for small business which takes away a  range of regulatory burdens from them particularly in terms of GST compliance,  and on top of, and on top of that $5.4 billion worth of tax benefits to small  business which Mr Abbott has ripped away.

HOST: Ok, we have actually got another video question from a small business  owner from Chris Lehmann.

QUESTIONER: Mr Rudd, I'm a small business person and employer of  apprentices. I note with interest your announcement on incentive for small  businesses and incentives. I am struggling to get excited about this support and  incentives when it is weighed against the recently announced $100 per week pay  rises for first and second year apprentices. The reality is the majority of  apprentices are employed by small and not by big business. What I am asking  you is why do you give with one hand and take away with another? Wouldn't we  be better off just letting small business get on with it rather than putting burdens  on us and then trying to compensate us for the effects? I'd really like to know  because it really is tough out there.

PM: In the period the Government has been in, we have produced 40,000 to  50,000 more apprentices than we had when elected. The second point is this -  the retention rate for apprentices is about 30 per cent up on where it was. They  are the facts underpinning the discussion. On the affordability for small business,  or businesses in general, what our questioner didn't point to was the fact with  most category of apprentices, we also provide a subsidy to those apprentices  when taken on by businesses and furthermore on top of that, we help  apprentices with some of the cost. I announced yesterday we will increase the  tools for your trade grant of $6,000 so when you go out as a young kid of 16 or  17, pursuing a trade, you have got to buy your tools, your drills, your saws  whatever, but you have that as a cash grab up-front and I met a bunch of  apprentices today up in Gladstone who thanked me for that because that's how  they bought stuff and others have done the same. So I take the concern about  the costs associated with taking an apprentice on. Do you know something?  Apprentices deliver a whole lot back to businesses as well. As they acquire those  skills and incorporated into the work of the firm longer term. In Gladstone today,  there is a group up there who are a community-based organisation who provide  support for nearly 300 apprentices in Gladstone and what they do - we need to  support folks like this - is they organise their apprentices to have a bit of time with  that small business operator, so that the burden doesn’t fall with them, some with  this one, some with that one, some with that one, so it all adds up to enough on-work training but it’s all actually organised and partly subsidised by the  community organisation.

HOST: OK, we’ve got another question along these lines. It is about wages from  Susan Connolly.

QUESTIONER: Good evening Prime Minister. I've spent the last decade  witnessing unionised work forces particularly in the manufacturing industry drive  up wages to a point that businesses are requiring to either move offshore or  close completely obviously leading to job losses. I ask in your opinion or your  ability as the Prime Minister, what would you do to change this and do you think  Fair Work Australia is requiring a review?

PM: When I talk to businesses around the country, I'm not quite sure what your  own business background is, everyone's story is a bit different depending on  what sector you are in and who you are employing and what the conditions are  there. But in terms of the competitiveness of let's just say manufacturing, you  referred to that, the single biggest factor there has been the overpowering  strength of the Australian dollar for so long. That's been driven off the back of  such a dynamic and strong mining sector where everyone has seen the  profitability of that sector and brought investment into the country and pushed the  dollar up. That's the biggest hit on the competitiveness of Australian  manufacturing. Fortunately that is beginning to come off a bit. There is a second  big factor as well. And that's your power bills. Your electricity bills wherever you  are in manufacturing elsewhere have gone through the roof. Our opponents

blame the carbon price for that. Pigs might fly. It is not that. The dominant  contributing factor to the sky rocketing in power prices has been State utilities, be  they generators, distribution companies or transmission systems, gouging and  often pulling that money back into profit for the State Governments -

HOST: Surely you are not saying the carbon price has no effect on electricity  prices because it does?

PM: I didn't say that. I didn’t say that at all. I said -

HOST: What is the percentage?

PM: Somewhere between 10 and 20 of the increase of the overall carbon price.

HOST: That's a considerable addition to people’s electricity prices.

PM: That's true. But if you look at the gouge, the gouge, and I’ve looked this in  the distribution of an individual’s power bill recently, it is coming from State  utilities who think this is a fair cop to rake that money in the back door which is  why, going to your question of what you can do about is, we, through the  Australian electricity regulator are looking at how you can now better design the  rules for the regulator to make sure this sort of gouging can't happen in the  future.

HOST: Mr Rudd, the questioner has her hand up again. We’ll go back to that.

PM: And on wages, I will just come to that.

QUESTIONER: Getting to the point about Fair Work Australia, do you think that  particularly needs to be addressed?

PM: I think on the Fair Work Australia question, overall I believe we got the  balance right because we got the balance completely wrong with Work Choices  under Mr Howard where you threw frankly basic protections right out the door  altogether. Wage growth in the country, I think, and I stand to be corrected on  this, is running at about 3.5 to 4, 4.5, 5 per cent in that vicinity, but if you look at  the overall cost structure of a firm, depending on which sector you are in, it will  vary. All I’m saying is the big drivers for manufacturing in my experience and  talking to manufacturers across the country is the dollar has been killing folks.  One of the reason I wanted to put some downward pressure on the dollar by  bringing in a mining tax to take some of the heat out of the sector back then.

HOST: Very briefly, just to finish that, no possibility of any review of any aspect of  the Fair Work Australia?

PM: The Fair Work Act represents a reasonable balance. We will always take  submissions about how you can improve things but it has to be based on  evidence. There is no evidence in this country at this present time of a wages  explosion. There is no evidence. It is not statistically sustainable. What I can  point to is power prices doing that and the dollar doing that and put all that  together, it does affect the competitiveness.

HOST: OK, let’s go to our next question, it’s from Matt Prater.

QUESTIONER: Hi Prime Minister. I'm a pastor of a local church and work for a  national Christian radio network. Most of the listeners and callers we have had in  our radio station have been saying they won't be voting for you because they are  disillusioned because you seem to keep chopping and changing your beliefs just  to get a popular vote with regards to things like marriage. Why should we vote for  you?

PM: On the question of marriage equality, you are right. I took a position about  three, four, five months ago, well before coming back to the prime ministership,  because I concluded in my conscience, through an informed conscience and a  Christian conscience, it was the right thing to do. Let me tell you why. Number  one, I do not believe people when they are born choose their sexuality. They are  gay if they are born gay. You don't decide at some later stage in life to be one  thing or the other. It is how people are built. Therefore, the idea that this is  somehow an abnormal condition is wrong. I don't get that. I think it is a  completely ill-founded view. Secondly, if you accept it is natural and normal for  someone to be gay because that's the way they are, then it follows from that that  I don't think it is right to say that if these two folk here who are in love with each  other and are of the same gender should be denied the opportunity for legal  recognition of the duration of their relationship by having marriage equality. If you  accept - if your starting point is that homosexuality is abnormal - I don't know if  that's your view.

HOST: Well, we can go back and ask.

PM: I just need to know.

HOST: We’ll go back to our questioner just quickly to ask what it is that you  believe Christians in particular are upset about?

QUESTIONER: I think the thing is that every pastor, we do marriages between  husbands and wives, and you know Jesus said a man shall leave his father and  mother and be married, and that's the Biblical definition. I just believe in what the  Bible says. I'm just curious for you, Kevin, if you call yourself a Christian, why  don't you believe the words of Jesus in the Bible?

PM: Well mate if I was going to have that view, The Bible also says that slavery  is a natural condition.

(APPLAUSE)

Because St Paul said in the New Testament, slaves be obedient to your masters.  And therefore we should have all fought for the confederacy in the US Civil War. I  mean for goodness sake. The human condition and social conditions change.  What is the fundamental principle of the New Testament? It is one of universal  love. Loving your fellow man. And if we get obsessed with a particular definition  of that through a form of sexuality, then I think we are missing the centrality of  what the gospel, whether you call it a social gospel, a personal gospel or a  spiritual gospel, is all about. And therefore, I go back to my question, if you think  homosexuality is an unnatural condition, then frankly I cannot agree with you  based on any element of the science. And therefore, if a person's sexuality is as  they are made, then you’ve got to ask the second question. Should, therefore,  their loving relationships be legally recognised and the conclusion I have reached  is that they should. And on the question of chopping and changing, I wrote a  2,000 or 3,000 word essay, stuck it online, months and months and months ago  before returning to the prime ministership so everyone would know why I  changed my position, the reasons for it. And it was the product of some many  months and years of reflection in good Christian conscience.

(APPLAUSE)

HOST: Thank you. Thank you. OK. We have got to get through a few more  questions. We’ve got a video question from Gary Champion in Malvern, SA.

QUESTIONER: Mr Rudd, prior to the 2007 election, you promised not to touch  superannuation. Not a jot. Not a tittle. Then when you were in government, you  smashed concessional contributions. This particularly hurt people such as myself  who are self-employed. Subsequently we have to work longer so that we can  retire comfortably. Why did you lie and why did you hurt those who wish to help  themselves?

PM: Superannuation -

(APPLAUSE)

PM: Can I go back to a fundamental principle in terms of belief in superannuation  before I go to the change which the gentleman just referred to -

HOST: If you can brief about it because we have a few questions-

PM: Yeah, sure. But superannuation is - how brief?

HOST: Well, if you are going to describe -

PM: Well, superannuation, the Labor government brought it in, took it from  nothing to something, we have now increased the superannuation guarantee  level from 9 to 12. We are proud of that. We think superannuation should be  available for all people. When it comes to the super rich, we question whether  excessive tax concession should go to them rather than distributed more broadly  for tax concessions for all in a much broader superannuation scheme which  benefits all working Australians.

HOST: Well I think you’d agree, that questioner is very unlikely to be classified as  super rich. He asked you a very simple question. Did you promise not to touch  superannuation, not a jot, not a tittle and then change your mind?

PM: The quote is exactly right. I am not going to sit here and say I didn't say it. It  is there in black and white. What I am saying now - it is a bit like in response from  the previous questioner on another social matter, is that having looked at how  much tax income was going in the direction of providing superannuation tax  benefits for people who were at the much wealthier end of the spectrum, we  decided to take decisions to use that tax revenue more broadly across the  superannuation spectrum so that folk could be benefitted more broadly

HOST: How will people like that and others with superannuation -

PM: You said this was going to be brief and you have asked me three questions  about it.

HOST: Because people with superannuation actually want to know if their  superannuation is safe. That's why.

PM: Well let me tell you about building superannuation -

HOST: The big question is will you guarantee not to touch superannuation  anymore? And will that guarantee be worth anything since the last time you said  you wouldn't and you did?

PM: Can I say something? I find it always puzzling receiving a lecture from  anybody as leader of the Labor Party on superannuation. We brought in  universal superannuation for everybody. It wasn't around for normal working  people before. We brought it in for everybody. They said it would collapse the  economy. We have had a 9 per cent superannuation guarantee. It didn't. It has  turned this country into the fourth biggest funds management industry in the  world from which a whole bunch of people earn squillions of dollars as funds  advisers. We’ve now taken a decision as government to increase from 9-12,  we’re proud of that and when it comes to the rich and super rich, mate, if it

comes to how we actually handle that against equity and fairness considerations,  I will back equity and fairness any day.

HOST: Nice to see a bit of passion in an election campaign. The next question is  from Sam Pavouris.

QUESTIONER: Prime Minister. Welcome.

PM: G’day mate.

QUESTIONER: The people of Griffith need to know, if the Labor Party loses the  election on Saturday, will you step down as leader of the Labor Party and,  assuming you win your seat, will you resign as the member for Griffith?

PM: Well, I have been asked that question a few times and I'm not going to  engage in hypothetical land because as soon as I do, do you know what will  happen in this election campaign? They’ll say, oh well, he has conceded he has  lost the election. And I'm not in that frame of mind. We have a week to go in this  election campaign. My job is to put the argument up to the Australian people  about our plans for building the country's future. Mr Abbott's plans for cuts, cuts  and more cuts and their judgment will be made on Saturday. And that is what I  am engaged in doing as the Prime Minister of the country and the leader of the  Labor Party and that is the single frame within which I am operating between now  and election day.

Anything else actually constitutes an entire distraction from the central debate of  this campaign which is about jobs, schools, hospitals, NBN and whether you are  going to have those or whether they are going to be cut to pieces in the future.  That's what it is about. That's the focus of my campaign, both locally in Griffith,  where by the way, if Mr Abbott was to win the election, depending on which  suburb you live in, you may not get your broadband.

HOST: But just to finish with that, you won't guarantee to the people of Griffith if  you get elected you will stay?

PM: What I'm saying is I am fighting this election campaign as the Prime Minister  of the country and the leader of the Labor Party. My responsibility is to be up-front, direct with the Australian people about our priorities for this campaign and,  therefore, for people to make a seasoned judgment - seasoned judgment - come  election day about which side they want to back. I am not going to get into  hypothetical land against a proposition that we lose the election. I just won't.

HOST: That was actually about whether you won -

PM: I will not engage in a hypothetical discussion because that is a matter for the  people this coming Saturday.

HOST: We have time for one last question tonight, it comes from Carmel  Gardner.

QUESTIONER: Prime Minister. How do you believe history will remember your  time as Australia's Prime Minister if you don't win the election?

PM: How about we get a question which ends with "If you do win the election"?  No, thank you for the question. I understand the spirit within which it is offered.  What I have sought to do as Prime Minister of this country so far is to be as  energetic and passionate as possible about carving out a vision for Australia's  future. What I have tried to do is to make sure that when we are confronted with,  I think, an existential crisis on the economy several years ago, that when I look  back, I wouldn't have to answer the question "Did you do everything possible to  prevent this economy from rolling into recession like the rest of the world?" And  then look unemployment in Australia in the face with 10 per cent, 11 per cent, 12  per cent as being the number. That I believe is a deep social responsibility to the  Australian people. We talked before about a fair go for folks. There is nothing fair  about losing your job. Nothing at all. My responsibility as Prime Minister of the  country of which I am proud, was to have stepped in, stepped into the breach  and made that difference.

And top of that, to take the pretty, I’ve got to say, breathtaking decision, when it  was presented to me of signing off a guarantee for every single person's bank  deposit in this country, when the financial crisis was at its worst. When banks  were falling over around the world and people losing their deposits, we had to  step in, make a decision so that each one of your savings deposits was looked  after. The result? Confidence was maintained in Australia. We were able to build  to the future. What the next challenge lies - where the next challenge lies on the  economy, I think we are in for some rough times because of the slowing of the  China mining boom but I believe with the right policies to build for the future and  not cut for the future, I think we can actually have a decent and fair future for all  Australians. No job, no opportunities, and jobs are the number one priority.

HOST: OK Very briefly, your next challenge is Saturday and you said yesterday  "I have been in tougher spots than this one and come from behind before". When  was that?

PM: Last time I was on Q&A. (Laughter)

HOST: The only time I can think of is after you had the job taken away from you  by Julia Gillard.

PM: Look, what you learn -

HOST: Is that what you were referring to when you said you have been in  tougher spots before?

PM: It’s just a reflection. What is stunning is when you meet people out there in  the normal world and not this sort of political bubble in which we live, who go  through challenges in their life which are infinitely harder than I've ever had to  deal with. My dear departed mum always said if you think you are having a hard  time, Kev, she always called me Kev, as mothers are entitled to, there is always  someone who has got 10 times as many problems. So for me, I first ran for  political office, I lost. You’ve got to pick yourself up, dust yourself off, have a go.  Secondly, you know, I've had a surgeon's knife in me a couple of times. That’s  not a pleasant experience. You come through that, you become more resilient.  Then there was the experience of 2010 which was not pleasant. All I can say is,  you learn some resilience. And I think the Australian people, when I deal with  them in their individual challenges, always have something to inspire me with  when I see a person whose kid is dying of cancer, and I think "How do you  endure that?" Or someone who has just had a loved one smashed in an accident  somewhere, how do you get through that? I couldn't. So I take great, frankly,  strength and encouragement for the wonderful folks in the country I speak to  every day. And I entrust my future to their judgment.

HOST: Well thanks a lot Kev. Let's hope Tone comes on later in the week. Thank  you.  That’s all we have time for tonight. Please thank our special guest Prime  Minister Kevin Rudd.

(APPLAUSE)

Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111 www.alp.org.au

Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor Party, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600

