

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





ABC TV Insiders

7 July 2013

Subjects: Relationship with Indonesia, ‘Turn back the boats’ policy, Egyptian leadership  crisis, pink batts, AWU scandal, Labor Party leadership

E&OE…

BARRIE CASSIDY Now we go to Singapore where we're joined by the Shadow Foreign  Minister, Julie Bishop.

Good morning, welcome.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY Can we start on asylum seekers. Do you take on board the expressed  wishes now of the Indonesian President that countries not take unilateral action that could  jeopardise operations?

JULIE BISHOP I understand why Indonesia would want such a provision in a communique  with Kevin Rudd because when Kevin Rudd was prime minister, he unilaterally took action  to change Australia's laws that had worked to stop the boats and without referring to  Indonesia, without going through the Bali process, he weakened our border protection laws  and that has sparked this whole crisis.

Thousands and thousands of people later and 750 boats under Labor's watch. But what we  must never forget is that hundreds and hundreds of people have died at sea trying to make  this dangerous voyage to Australia.

So we have had policies in place for years, policies that worked and we believe that these  policies will work again. We won't take unilateral action. We have promised Indonesia that  we will have a 'no surprises' policy in relation to any matters that we introduce, should we be  in Government, that affect Indonesia's national interest..

There is absolutely no doubt that when Kevin Rudd changed the laws that attracted the  people smuggling trade once more and made Australia the destination, that impacted upon  Indonesia and he should not have done that without reference to Indonesia and most certainly  not through ignoring the Bali process.

BARRIE CASSIDY So you infer that the reference in the communique is to Kevin Rudd.  Surely you have to accept that it was at least in part, a direct reference to Tony Abbott's  policy of turning back the boats?

JULIE BISHOP We have no policy that would be unilateral action. In the past John Howard's  policies worked. They are the same policies that Indonesia was aware of in the past. We have  a very cooperative relationship with Indonesia. Tony Abbott has had three very cordial  meetings with president Yudhoyono. I have had a number of meetings with Indonesian  officials. They are aware of our policy and it won't be unilateral action.

We will continue to work through the Bali process. After all, the Bali process came into being  under John Howard. So it is only Kevin Rudd who has taken unilateral action when he  weakened our laws and sparked this crisis in 2008.

BARRIE CASSIDY You will not pursue a policy of turning back the boats unless you have  both the cooperation and the support of the Indonesian government?

JULIE BISHOP We will continue with our policies that worked when we were in  government. That includes turning back boats where it is safe to do so. In the same way it  was done under the Howard government it would be done under an Abbott-led government.

BARRIE CASSIDY Let me put it another way. Would you then really pursue the policy  against the expressed wishes of the Indonesian Government?

JULIE BISHOP Barrie, it is an inescapable fact that these are Indonesian boats, flagged and  registered in Indonesia with Indonesian crews leaving from Indonesian ports.

Australia is within its rights to turn the boats back in our waters, in international waters where  it is safe to do so. And retired Brigadier Gary Hogan and a former head of the navy in David  Richie (sic) both said this week that our policies can work.

BARRIE CASSIDY The answer to that is yes, you would pursue this policy no matter what  the Indonesian Government says?

JULIE BISHOP Our policies have been in place for many years, the Indonesians are well  aware of them and we will continue with our policies.

It took a change of laws in Australia under John Howard to stop the boats and dismantle the  people smuggling trade. It took a change of laws by Kevin Rudd, without reference to  Indonesia, without reference to the Bali process, that started the people smuggling trade up

again and it will once more take a change of laws in Australia to stop the boats and that is  what we intend to do.

The question we should be focusing on is what is Kevin Rudd's solution? It is all very well to  have an esoteric debate about policy. The fact is hundreds and hundreds of people have died  at sea and hundreds more will die unless Australia takes every possible step it can to  dismantle the people smuggling trade and stop the boats.

The question is Kevin Rudd says our policies won't work, even though they have, well what  are his policies? How will he stop the boats? How will he prevent people getting on boats and  putting their lives at risk?

BARRIE CASSIDY Isn't there also a risk that such an approach could be insulting and  offensive to the Indonesian Government?

JULIE BISHOP We have a very cordial relationship with Indonesia and we will continue to  do so. Both the former head of the navy and a retired Brigadier who has just finished a three-year stint in Jakarta has agreed our policies can work.

BARRIE CASSIDY I want to ask you about Egypt and given the overthrow of Egyptian  President Morsi. Given that he was a democratically elected leader, was his overthrow purely  and simply a military coup?

JULIE BISHOP It is always troubling when the military intervenes to remove a  democratically elected president but in this case, it appears that President Morsi has not been  able to maintain support and the violence that has broken out is deeply worrying. I understand  there is some discussion about an interim head of Government but that hasn't yet been agreed.

I think the only answer for Egypt at this stage is for there to be a new election as soon as  possible that is free and fair, that all Egyptians can participate in and that hopefully will  return some sort of stability, but it is troubling that an elected leader has been removed, but  he seems to have lost support of a large proportion of the population.

BARRIE CASSIDY What would you like the Americans to do at this point?

JULIE BISHOP I believe that the international community should urge for peace and an end  to the violence and urge for an election to be held as soon as possible, an election that is free  and fair. I understand that is President Obama's position. I certainly agree with that, that we  need an election in Egypt to restore some sort of stability and get the democratic process back  on track.

BARRIE CASSIDY Back home, on the insulation issue, the Government has accepted  blame, they have apologised for it, the Prime Minister has said that he is prepared to meet  with the families and they have talked about the mechanics for compensation. What else can  they do?

JULIE BISHOP The Queensland coroner's report is a damning indictment of the Rudd  Government's Home Insulation Program. It speaks of repeated warnings, of the risks to  human life, the possible damage to property and yet it appears that those warnings were  ignored by the Rudd Government. It also appears that there were direct warnings to Kevin

Rudd.

When Peter Garrett, as the relevant minister at the time, faced a barrage of questions from the  Coalition on this, he insisted that he had acted responsibly every time a warning was made to  him or he became aware of one and that he took action. We understand he wrote directly to  Mr Rudd and that Mr Rudd personally received these warnings, yet they appeared to have  been ignored.

What Mr Rudd must do, as Prime Minister, is release the warnings that he received, whether  they were from Peter Garrett or Peter Garrett's department or whomever. Conveniently, Mr  Rudd now says that they were 'cabinet in confidence'. He was the Prime Minister then and he  is the Prime Minister now. He should release those letters so that there can be clear  accountability and that we can see what occurred and why the government didn't act. There  must be a much deeper and better explanation for this tragedy.

BARRIE CASSIDY But, as you said, they are cabinet in confidence documents.  Traditionally governments don't release such material.

JULIE BISHOP Barrie, they are conveniently cabinet in confidence. The Prime Minister has  the authority to release those documents. What is he hiding? Why would he not want to clear  this matter up once and for all?

People have died. It is a terrible tragedy and the families of those who died under this  Government scheme need to have full disclosure. This is a scheme that the Queensland  coroner says was rushed out without regard to human life. I think the families who lost their  loved ones deserve full disclosure and the Prime Minister can authorise the release of those  documents.

BARRIE CASSIDY I want to ask you about a conversation that - well an interview that Julia  Gillard gave with Anne Summers. It said in a conversation with Hillary Clinton, Julia Gillard  talked about "The relentless Opposition questioning about events of 20 years ago" and of  course you had a major role in that.

Hillary Clinton said to her that she had seen this movie before, which is a reference to White  Water. Do you think there is something in that with both of them apparently having to take  questions from events that went to something a long time ago?

JULIE BISHOP I recall that the Labor Party were promoting stories about what Tony Abbott  did in his university days and they justified it on the basis that it went to character. Well, if  what you did at university goes to character, most certainly what you did as a professional  lawyer, in terms of honesty, integrity, judgement and ethics, is relevant to your role as prime  minister, particularly given the contemporary statements that Julia Gillard made about the  AWU (Australian Workers Union) slush fund affair that involved hundreds of thousands of  dollars of union funds going missing and the role of her then partner.

These were all matters that went to character. Julia Gillard said Tony Abbott's university days  were relevant, I think much more recent history of her professional career involving union  funds, particularly as she was a very compliant union prime minister, are relevant.

BARRIE CASSIDY Do you continue to pursue this matter as vigorously as you always have

or now that she is no longer prime minister and she is leaving politics, it is not as relevant?

JULIE BISHOP Last December, the Victorian police became involved in an investigation  into Julia Gillard and the AWU slush fund affair. I haven't asked questions this year in the  parliament since the Victorian Police investigation got underway.

I believe that investigation is still continuing. Witnesses are being - or potential witnesses are  being contacted and interviewed. Even media representatives who have interviewed Julia  Gillard are being interviewed by the Victorian Police. So I believe we should allow the  Victorian Police to continue and finalise their investigation.

BARRIE CASSIDY Just finally, for a very long time you put pressure on Julia Gillard, as  you would expect, but you also talked up the return of Kevin Rudd. Is this a case of be  careful what you wish for?

JULIE BISHOP I always anticipated that Labor would resort to its old tactic of dumping the  unpopular leader just before an election, in the hope that they can trick the Australian people  into thinking that Labor has changed. Well, nothing has changed. Kevin Rudd wants us to  believe that in the future, he will be a better prime minister. He wants us to believe that what  he says he will do is who he really is.

But of course we have got Kevin Rudd's record as prime minister to judge him on and that is  a record of debt and deficit, the pink batts scandal, the border protection crisis.

Andthere is nothing negative in the Coalition promising to put the books back in the black,  there is nothing negative about the Coalition promising to get rid of a tax on electricity, there  is nothing negative about the Coalition confirming that it has policies that will stop the boats  and dismantle the people smuggling trade.

BARRIE CASSIDY It is a fact though, isn't it that you helped to promote the idea that Kevin  Rudd should come back and now you have gone from a situation where it looked as if you  were cruising to an easy election victory to what is now very much a tight contest.

JULIE BISHOP Barrie, I wasn't promoting Kevin's return, that was all Kevin's work, I can  assure you. The Coalition picked up any rumours directly from the heart of the Labor Party.  We continue to do so. This is not unexpected. We knew that the Labor Party would dump one  unpopular leader and ask the Australian people "Don't look at our record, listen to what we  say we are going to do".

We have seen this story before, we have seen this old play. Kevin will have to be judged on  his reputation and his standing as a prime minister and that includes the pink batts scandal,  the border protection fiasco, the massive debt and deficit, the chaos and dysfunction, and  Labor is still a bitterly divided rabble.

BARRIE CASSIDY Julie Bishop thanks for your time this morning.

JULIE BISHOP My pleasure.

- Ends -



