

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORS  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  WEDNESDAY, 11 DECEMBER 2013

SUBJECT/S: Chaotic Parliament, Holden, Immigration, Abbot Point

TONY BURKE: Morning. Not a lot of you were here into the late hours of last  night but as you are aware we have a Government that promised to be calm,  methodical and adult. Last night the Parliament descended into chaos because of  a childish prank. Christopher Pyne decided to shut down debate on all things  infrastructure. The so called infrastructure Prime Minister, they decided they  needed to rush the bill through and shut down debate, denying their own  Assistant Minister Jamie Briggs a chance to speak on the bill. I know Jamie hasn’t  been doing too well lately so there could be a few reasons for that, but certainly  they shut down the debate, wanting to get it across to the Senate even though  the Senate can’t deal with the bill until March. So what then happened after the  childish prank from Christopher Pyne for no reason whatsoever, other than he  thought it might annoy members of the Labor Party, what followed were a series  of three suspensions of standing orders, eighteen divisions, a Parliament in chaos  and then for the third time in four weeks I found myself having to move dissent  in a ruling of the Speaker. The third time in four weeks I had to move dissent in  a ruling of the Speaker. We had again as you would have seen in Question Time  yesterday the Speaker actually participating in debate from the chair, and I don’t  think it’s too much to say that you shouldn’t have a situation where an umpire is  sledging the players. This couldn’t be further from an adult government and it  couldn’t have been a more chaotic Parliament. In everything we’ve seen this  Government is delivering the exact opposite of what it promised.

JOURNALIST: Does the Speaker need to be changed?

BURKE: I think at the moment, the behaviour of the Speaker is actually an  honest reflection of the behaviour of the Government. The Speaker at the  moment actually fits right in, in terms of how this Government is functioning, in  terms of how its responded to its own claims of being adult, and the sort of  chaos that’s ensued, that has ensued and followed.

JOURNALIST: How much of this do you think actually resonates with the  public, these chamber games that we’re seeing?

BURKE: I don’t think anyone is impressed when they see an umpire  participating in debate. I don’t think anyone is impressed when they see a  referee get involved in sledging players. I don’t think anyone is impressed by  that and last night would have gone through as a normal parliamentary sitting  night if people had been allowed to debate legislation. It’s really simple. There  was an infrastructure bill, their own Assistant Minister was denied speaking on it,  Labor Members were denied speaking on it, Anthony Albanese as our Shadow  Minister for Infrastructure was denied the chance to move any amendments to  the bill, to rush it through when the Senate can’t even deal with it until March.  This was a student prank that the Government ran last night and I don’t think  anyone would be impressed by it.

JOURNALIST: The Government’s letter to Holden, is that the appropriate  course of action, seeking clarification before Christmas?

BURKE: I think we all saw with Joe Hockey’s behaviour in the Parliament  yesterday that the chaos and the way this Government functions is something  that Holden’s starting to realise as well. Let’s not forget, it’s not that long ago  that the Government said that they would have a position after the Productivity  Commission had reported. That’s next year. Then yesterday the Treasurer gets a  rush of blood to the head, gets all angry in Parliament and says we need to know  now. It’s no wonder that big companies are saying how on earth do you deal  with a government that keeps changing the goal posts, that’s ripped 500 million  dollars out of support for the car industry and is changing the rules day by day.  The chaos that we see in the Parliament is the chaos we see in the way they run  policy and it’s not good for the country.

JOURNALIST: Regarding the approval of the Abbot Point developments, given  your role as Environment Minister in the last Government, should this  development have been approved, under those conditions that we’ve seen?

BURKE: I stand by the different approvals that I gave when I was Environment  Minister, but for anyone who has gone through the detail that you have to go  through as Environment Minister on specific approvals, without having read what  the brief is on this particular project, I’m not going to get engaged in either  supporting or being critical of it. I stand by the ones that, the decisions that I  made, but you know, people often want to get into slogans of good or bad on  individual conditions on environmental approvals, there’s a fair bit more  complexity to it than that.

JOURNALIST: Although Greg Hunt yesterday was saying that under the  previous Government’s proposal the dredging would have been 30 million cubic  metres or something like that, but under his proposal it would be 1.3 million  cubic metres, I mean do you stand by that?

BURKE: Look I haven’t gone through the specific reasons there so I can  probably get back to you on something on that, but without having gone through  the decision in detail and certainly without access to the full documentation that  the Minister would have, I don’t think there is a lot I can add.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of reports out today saying that people  smugglers are saying now is a good time to come to Australia given the spying  row?

BURKE: I just want the Government to fix this issue. There has been a lot said  about the number of boat arrivals. The truth is the single greatest impacts on  numbers of boat arrivals were two things that happened while we were in  government and they were Indonesian co-operation and the resettlement  arrangements. Indonesian co-operation came in a few forms. It happened on the  ground and it also happened with respect to the end of Iranian visas on arrival.  The resettlement arrangements were because of good relationships with both  Papua New Guinea and Nauru.

I want the Government to be successful on this issue. I don’t want them wreck  it, I don’t want them to muck it up. By the time of the last election it had got  down to two boat arrivals a week as an average, by the end there. We should be  in a situation where this trade is able to stop. There are lives at stake and I  genuinely hope the Government is able to get things back on track. All they need  to do is just implement the policies that were in place when they came to office.

JOURNALIST: Any thoughts on BMW winning the contract to have the new C1  car over Holden?

BURKE: Look, there are specifics about who tendered and who didn’t, I’ve had a  quick glance at the article there.

JOURNALIST: It’s not particularly, is it disappointing given that Holden didn’t  appear to actually put in a bid?

BURKE: Look there are two things, Joe Hockey the other day said if you want  Australian car industries you have to be willing to drive Australian cars and that’s  what Joe Hockey said to the Parliament, probably he should have said that to  Tony Abbott as well.

MEDIA CONTACT: RONALD MIZEN 0428 892 448

