



CHRIS BOWEN MP



Transcript  Interview with Peter Van Onselen and Paul Kelly, Australian Agenda, Sky  News  15 September 2013

SUBJECTS: Julia Gillard’s essay, Labor Leadership, Carbon Pricing, Labor Party reforms

PETER VAN ONSELEN: We are joined now by the interim Labor leader, Chris Bowen. Welcome  to the program.

CHRIS BOWEN:  Thanks Peter.

VAN ONSELEN: Let’s start on Julia Gillard’s essay if we can. You were one of the people that was  strongly involved in wanting to return Kevin Rudd to the leadership. Former Prime Minister,  Julia Gillard says that it was ‘weak cultural failing’ effectively to go down that path for  personality rather than policy reasons. What’s your response to that?

BOWEN: Well look, there’s no doubt that losing the Prime Ministership is a very painful thing  I’m sure for everybody who goes through it. It was painful for Julia Gillard and that has to be  acknowledged, it would have been painful for Kevin Rudd in 2010 and it would have been  painful for every Prime Minister regardless of circumstances to lose that high office, whether it  be after a party ballot or a general election. Every Prime Minister would feel that and of course  most Prime Ministerships do end involuntarily. And we should recognise the human element of  losing high office.

VAN ONSELEN: Does she have a point? Or is this -

BOWEN: - I think that party took the view that Kevin Rudd was the best placed person to put  the case for Labor. The party asked Kevin Rudd to return. It wasn’t in Kevin Rudd’s necessarily  personal best interest to return. He accepted the request to return to lead Labor. Now we had a  significant defeat that’s got to be acknowledged and we need to learn the lessons from that  defeat. But we also have the basis of a viable and fighting opposition going forward. No Cabinet  Ministers lost their seats, we have, if we win as many seats as we did in the 1998 election or the  2007 election then we can return to office in three years’ time.

And the Labor Party which believes that the Nation’s best interests are best served by us being  able to be a competitive fighting force to form a viable opposition and to potentially, potentially  form a government at the next election, that’s an achievement, that is worth fighting for.

VAN ONSELEN: Do you believe you would be sitting here as a re-elected member of Parliament  if you hadn’t changed leaders to Kevin Rudd?

BOWEN: There’s no doubt in my mind that Kevin Rudd’s return made it more viable for me and  for other colleagues to hold our seats and to make the Labor party a viable fighting force for the  next three years.

PAUL KELLY: How much difference did Kevin Rudd make?

BOWEN: I think clearly Kevin Rudd’s return to the leadership meant that a whole range of  people were then willing to consider voting Labor again at this election. Now obviously we fell  short in terms of forming office but I do think, as I say, Kevin Rudd’s return was not necessarily  in his own best interest. He could have said ‘oh look, I was available before, you didn’t want me  and now you’ll need” -

KELLY: - How many seats did he save though? I mean the election result is not good, so if he  saved seats how many did he save?

BOWEN: Well I think we won a considerable number of seats thanks to Kevin’s leadership; I’m  not going to go through. Frankly, I want to look forward, not past. We need to build up forwards  for the future and I’m not going to engage in a minute intersection of the events of the last  election or before that. But what I will say is that Kevin Rudd’s return made us viable in a whole  range of seats that may have not been viable prior to that.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I just get some context I suppose on that. We will look forward, you know  that we do have enough time on this program to do that. But looking back for a moment, he won  between 33-34 per cent of the primary vote, when Julia Gillard was removed the primary vote  was at 29 per cent. But her supporters say late last year she got back to the two-party vote 50-50 or 49-51 and if it hadn’t been for the undermining of her leadership or even just the mere  presence of Rudd as a factor of undermining her leadership then she would have been a more  viable force and could have done much better. How do you react to that?

BOWEN: Well look, as I say, I’m not going to go through a minute intersection, dissection of past  events but what I will say, that I think Kevin Rudd’s return was very important in making us a  viable political force. I saw that in my own electorate, I saw it in electorates I was campaigning  in and I think the party owes Kevin Rudd a debt of gratitude for making himself available. It  wouldn’t be in his own best interest to say ‘well look I was available, you didn’t want me  and  I’m not going to risk running in an election, being Prime Minister for a short time and then  losing’. He could have said that, he didn’t and I think the party does recognise that.

KELLY: One of Julia Gillard’s central arguments is that the change of leadership revealed a very  cynical and shallow culture inside the Labor party, a lack of real purpose, a focus simply on  popularity for the sake of popularity. Do you think there’s any validity in her argument at all?

BOWEN: Well let me say this. I think that again, Kevin Rudd was entitled to accept the request  of the party to return to the leadership, just as Julia Gillard was entitled in 2010 to put her case  forward that she was a better candidate to lead the Labor party in 2010, quite close to a federal  election but I do think going forward, and this moves to the next topic perhaps, going forward  the Labor Party needs to embrace a culture of legitimacy and stability for its leaders.

KELLY: Do you think there’s a problem with Labor culture then?

BOWEN: I do think there’s a problem with the way we’ve elected leaders in the past, yes. And  hence my strong support for the new system of electing the leader of the Labor party, opening  up the party, making us more inclusive, making us a more open, transparent and democratic  party, throwing open the doors, inviting 40,000 people to share with the members of caucus the   decision of who should lead the party is important. But then that leader, whoever that may be  will have more legitimacy having been elected by such a large group of people and will be able

to say to the Australian people that I will lead the Party to the next election, whoever that  candidate is.

KELLY: What about Gillard’s other critique because essentially she’s complaining very much  about the rule change which makes it more difficult to remove the Labor leader saying this is  only likely to sustain office a poor leader, what’s your response to that?

BOWEN: I think the new leader deserves the opportunity to take risks, to make difficult  decisions and to do so in the certainty and stability that they are safe in the leadership.

KELLY: So you reject that argument?

BOWEN: I think it’s important that the new leader has that sense of certainty now. When this  rule change was proposed by Kevin Rudd he knew that the most likely outcome would be he  would not be leading the party after the next election. He knew that the odds were long on  Labor winning the election and he knew that it would likely be someone else who benefits from  the extra stability that goes with this high threshold of changing a leader. But he made the point,  to several of us, that whoever led the party after the next election, whether it be Anthony or Bill  deserved the stability that goes with that rule change.

KELLY: You talk about stability and I think we all agree that more democracy is a good thing but  what about the potential risk in this system - that is that you could have a new leader who only  has minority support inside the parliamentary party, how much of a problem is that?

BOWEN: I think Paul, the new leader will have more legitimacy than any other political leader  in Australia’s history, having been elected by so many people, regardless of the makeup. Now it  will be impossible for either candidate to win the leadership without substantial support in the  caucus. It would be impossible to get very little support in the caucus and big support in the  branch membership and win it - that’s just not going to happen.

VAN ONSELEN: If it’s all published then we’re going to know potentially immediately that the  new labor leader only had minority of his parliamentary colleagues want him as the leader,  that’s a problem surely?

BOWEN: I think, as I say, the new leader will have more legitimacy than anybody else. Tony  Abbott won his leadership by one vote in a party room and he went on, good luck to him and  congratulations to him, to make it work and become Prime Minister of Australia.

VAN ONSELEN: But could you imagine if he had lost by one vote but then got over the line on  party members, I would have thought that would be an undermining start to his leadership.

BOWEN: Well you look around at political parties around the world; they’re all mature enough  to deal with this. And we have brought ourselves in line with most political parties around the  world. The British Labor Party has been doing this for more than 30 years having the colleagues  to elect its leaders. They take four months to do it, we’re going to do it in close to a month. And  since then the British Labor Party has been doing quite well in the polls. I think this is a good  process having Bill and Anthony go around the country putting their case, talking to ordinary  people, ordinary Labor supporters and putting the case as to why they can best be the  alternative Prime Minister of Australia. If they can put that case to Labor party members and  supporters then they can put the case to the Australian people over the next three years and it’s  a good process for them to go through.

VAN ONSELEN: I’ve got no problems with the month long process I think at the start of a period  in opposition that’s fine, I’m okay with that. But there is a contradiction isn’t there when you’re  saying on the one hand, it was worthwhile for us to go to Kevin Rudd and make that change but

it’s also now important that we provide a leader with the kind of stability that this new system  gives them where they can’t be removed. Those two things feel like a contradiction.

BOWEN: Look, I think that’s a reasonable point for you to raise, a reasonable question for you to  raise but I think that going forward it is right that we have a new culture around electing leaders  and a new way of deal with these issues. I think frankly, other political parties will be forced to  follow us in due course. The British Labour Party originally did this and then the British Tory  Party followed them later. I don’t think it’s sustainable to have one of Australia’s great political  parties throwing open its doors and the other one still doing these things behind closed doors,  in rooms electing leaders. I think eventually, won’t happen immediately but eventually other  political parties will follow us down this road and Labor party members having been given this  right will guard it very jealously going forward and insist on their continuing role correctly in  electing the leader of our party and our alternative Prime Minister.

The old rules are based on an old time, a time when joining and volunteerism were much more  common. The Australian Labor Party use to have 50,000 members in 1970. We’ve got less than  that now, even though the populations grown. The Liberal Party has a similar challenge on their  hands. We need to encourage more involvement in Australian politics and we don’t do that by  saying to people come and join Labor and we’ll do you the honour of handing out how to votes  on election day. You do that by saying come and join the Labor Party and will share with you our  big decisions and that’s exactly the process we’re going through now.

VAN ONSELEN: Mr Bowen mandates are an interesting thing because on the one hand Tony  Abbott won the election and abolishing the carbon tax was a key platform, on the other hand,  millions of people voted Labor and for other minor parties that may potentially be able to stifle  that. Would the best thing for the Labor party be, ironically enough, the micro parties in the  Senate getting the balance of power so the decision is no longer yours.

BOWEN: Well let me make a couple of points Peter. Firstly the Labor party went to the 2007  election with a clear policy of an emissions trading scheme, we had a mandate. Tony Abbott  became leader of the Liberal Party entirely to stop us implementing that mandate. That was his  entire policy platform for returning to the leadership, in effect he destroyed Brendan Nelson  and Malcolm Turnbull on that issue, all in order to stop the Labor Party implementing its policy  it had a clear mandate on. So we’ve not looking forward to receiving a lecture from Tony Abbott  on the issue of mandates when his entire rationale for returning to the leadership was to  provide an obstacle to the Labor party implementing its mandate in office.

VAN ONSELEN: You had a chance to go down to a double disillusion on that as Kevin Rudd as  leader and you didn’t take it and you removed Kevin Rudd -

BOWEN: - Well I’m making the point that Tony Abbott is in no position to lecture other people  about mandates. Now secondly, they’re asking us to vote, or to declare our voting intention on a  policy we haven’t seen, legislation that has not been written or at least made public, a policy  when it comes to Direct Action didn’t even get costed by one of the central agencies including  the Parliamentary Budget Office, they refused to put it in for costings. There’s great holes in  their policies so we all want to see a bit of rigour around that, in making our decisions. Look, I  agree that the Labor Party has made correctly the view publically that climate change is real,  that it’s happening, and that the governments should act and we need a bit of constraint on  carbon. That’s a pretty fundamental thing and I think we should stick by that view.

VAN ONSELEN: What about the pragmatic approach here, because the difficulty I have here is  there’s two parts to what Tony Abbott wants to do. One he wants to repel the carbon price as it  stands and Labor as the carbon price stand is it opposed to it, you want to move it to an  Emissions Trading Scheme early. That’s the first part of its legislation, the second part will be to  try and bring into effect Direct Action. Now, it’s one thing for you to try and block Direct Action

if you have a problem with that but can you really as a party vote against him repealing the  carbon tax that you yourselves also want to remove to replace with an ETS would you to have  won the election.

BOWEN: Well, I’m making the point here about principles. The principle that we believe on a  constraint on carbon, on a carbon price and a market based mechanism. The Liberal Party once  believed in that, they’ve flip flopped views over the last couple of years, we still believe in that  and we as an effective opposition should be making that case. Now obviously the new leader,  the new Shadow Cabinet will have a whole range of things to consider when we eventually see  their legislation which we see they’re in no rush to produce despite the fact we were told it was  an urgent priority. They appear to be in no rush to bring this forward to the parliament, we’ll  see their legislation when they bring it forward but I’m making the point that the Labor Party  will be standing by its principles that carbon pricing is an appropriate thing going forward.

KELLY: Presumably what that means is you would like to see Labor support carbon pricing  throughout the entire period of this parliament, throughout the three years of this parliament.

BOWEN: Well Paul, I’m making that point as a matter of principle. Now we’re yet to even see  this Government even be sworn in, we’re in the first week -

KELLY: - Of course, we are just talking about principle, is that your principle?

BOWEN: - I believe in carbon pricing, I believe that climate change is real and I believe we  should do something about it and I believe the Labor Party should continue to put that point of  view across.

KELLY: What are the political risks? Clearly Tony Abbott will attempt to discredit Labor in  Opposition if Labor doesn’t vote for his carbon repel legislation so what’s your assessment of  the political risk for Labor in this stance?

BOWEN: Oh look, this is a difficult issue politically. I mean its cause its fair share of grief for  political leaders on both sides of the political aisle. I certainly recognise that but you’ve got to  stand by some principles here. There’s a whole lot of detail as I say to go, we’re at week one of a  three year term. We haven’t even seen the new legislation, we haven’t seen their policies costed,  let’s take this step by step and you’ve pointed out to me several times over the years when I  pointed out failings in opposition policies that ‘yes, you’re the Government’, well guess what,  they’re the Government now so let’s have a little bit of focus on them as well.

KELLY: But don’t you think there is a political risk here for Labor in terms of the next election,  going into the next election after Abbott has repealed carbon pricing with Labor from  Opposition supporting the reintroduction of carbon pricing which Abbott as PM will clearly  depict as a new carbon tax.

BOWEN: There’s always political risks in any policy.

KELLY: And are you prepared to accept those risks?

BOWEN: There’s always political risks in any policy, the important thing is that we continue to  make the case that something needs to be done about climate change and that we need a  constraint on carbon.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I ask you about, you mentioned before about how that the new Government  hasn’t even been sworn in yet, Tony Abbott hasn’t been sworn in as Prime Minister. Do you  think he’s been too slow taking that long, should he have taken up the cudgels of Kevin Rudd’s  letter to the Governor General the day after the election and gotten straight in there even if he

didn’t know his full Cabinet yet, almost Whitlam style I suppose and got on with the job of  governing straight away?

BOWEN: Well I make this point. We allegedly had a Budget emergency, allegedly we had a  Budget crisis that needed to be fixed. Now we see on the front page of the Financial Review  yesterday, Mr Hockey talking about the need to stimulate the economy and spend more money  and we’re going to have a great Christmas he said, spend up big. So we had one view before the  election and miraculously after the election a different view.

Allegedly we have a crisis on our borders and he was going to go to Indonesia in his first week  as Prime Minister in first week taking office what have we seen since then? More boats arrive  and the Indonesian Government explicitly reject his policy as we warned they would. So we’re  seeing a big disconnect between the rhetoric before the election and the reality after the  election. They campaigned on emergencies and crisis’ that they confected that weren’t real and  now they’re acknowledging aren’t real. You saw Arthur Sinodinos on election night say ‘Yes, the  new Government is inheriting a good economy’, well it’s all very convenient to say that after the  election; we didn’t hear that before the election. I’ll be making this point -

VAN ONSELEN: Is that going to be a key message for Labor in the next few months I suppose  that things aren’t as bad as the Liberal party have been making out -

BOWEN: - We’ll be pointing out the inconsistencies and hypocrisies of various approaches. I’ll  be doing that as my time as interim leader and I’m sure the new leader will be taking that up  when they become leader after this process is complete. We have a role as Opposition to point  out constructively where they have mislead the Australian people before the election and where  their policies are inconsistent after the election.

KELLY: And what about after you cease being interim leader? Would you like to be Shadow  Treasurer?

BOWEN: I’ve indicated that I would be available to both leaders -

VAN ONSELEN: - Have both leaders indicating they want you?

BOWEN: Both potential leaders have indicated that they believe that would be a process.

KELLY: So it’s all stitched up?

BOWEN: I’ve said that I would be available publically. I’ve done this very publically, outgoing  Treasurer I’ll be available to be Shadow Treasurer.

VAN ONSELEN: But that’s interesting that both leadership candidates have told you that they  want you as their shadow Treasurer?

BOWEN: That’s correct.

KELLY: I’d like to ask you about another point Julia Gillard raised. That is the need for new  ideas. Candidates talk about the need for new ideas but it’s one thing to talk about them; it’s  another thing to actually produce the new ideas. To what extent do you think Labor does need  to push into new areas and come up with new policy concepts, how important is that?

BOWEN: It is important. I think that every Opposition should be doing that. We shouldn’t  spending the next three years complaining about the Government, we need to be embracing a  forward policy agenda and I’m looking forward to playing a role in that.

KELLY: Has anybody got any new ideas?

BOWEN: Well again Paul, we’re one week into a three year term, with all due respect, there’s a  period of contemplation to be gone through and a period of consultation and policy  development. I do agree with Julia Gillard very much that we need to respect and embrace the  legacy of the last six years, the policy achievements, learn where we got things wrong but never  walk away from the legacy, the great policy achievements of both the Gillard and Rudd  Governments, as we should also embrace and acknowledge and respect the achievements of the  Hawke and Keating years and build on those.

I agree on that very much but also you can’t be always looking back, you’ve got to be looking  forward, you do need a policy development process you do need to be thinking about the  challenges and changes in society, changes in the economy and have a process going forward. I  believe over the next three years or whenever the next election is we will have developed a  forward looking policy agenda which does embrace new ideas building on the success and  achievements of the past.

KELLY: Well that’s all about being positive but what a number of Labor people say is, they say  well, Tony Abbott gave us nothing, he was a very negative leader, he destroyed as much as he  could, all our policies, this is how we’ll retaliate against him. What’s your response to that sort of  argument?

BOWEN: Well I think we can be better than Tony Abbott. I think we can be a constructive  opposition which provides alternative ideas going forward just because Tony Abbott adopted  that approach, we can be better than that. Now that’s not to say that we shouldn’t be very strong  in our parliamentary -

KELLY: - but you won’t duplicate his tactics?

BOWEN: I think we owe it to the Australian people to be better than that. I think we owe it to  the Australian people to put forward positive plans, as well as being a strong and robust  opposition. We can do both of those things. We can point out where we think he’s going wrong,  we can point out where we don’t think he has a mandate, we can point out broken promises and  we can respond accordingly. But we can also put forward positive ideas - that’s what we’ll be  doing.

VAN ONSELEN: What about the personnel to do that. Because when you go into opposition  sometimes for an outgoing government the worst thing that can happen is you become the  government in exile. Regenerating the front bench - some of the talent that has entered the  Parliament or perhaps hasn’t been turned to previously that’s on the back bench, would you be  encouraging of any new leader after this interim period to look to rejuvenate as much as  possible rather than just rely on the people that were there in the previous government?

BOWEN: I think we can strike a balance here, a good balance we do have a talented team. We  have experienced people, we lost no Cabinet Ministers in the election, that’s an achievement -

VAN ONSELEN: And draw on all of them in the same role in an opposition -

BOWEN: - Of course there will be changes. There will be people of their own volition that make  a decision to change one way or another. And we do have considerable talents to draw on, both  the people that have been in the parliament a little while, not as long as others, people have  been on the back bench and made a good contribution and you’ve got people as you say, very  talented people who have just come into the Parliament, whether it be Jim Chalmers or Clare  O'Neil, Alannah MacTiernan and all the others with some great things to bring to the Parliament.  There are many ways you can make a contribution you don’t necessarily have to be on the front  bench when you come to Parliament. When I first came to Parliament I was asked if I wanted to

be on the front bench and I said no I would rather make my contribution on the back bench to  start with because it is a big change.

VAN ONSELEN: What about the process, how do you make sure it’s just not factional bosses  now that the powers been returned to the caucus, making that decision for the caucus and  putting their mates in rather than picking out talent that doesn’t necessarily include people who  are well connected in the party.

BOWEN: Well look, I think a ballot is a good way of doing it and people can put their name  forward and you will see talented people going on to the front bench in one way or another.

KELLY: In you recent book you made it very clear that you are a strong advocate of internal  party reform and we’ve seen the first signs of this in the election of the leader. Would you like to  see this go further reasonably soon in terms of changes to the National Conference or expansion  in the size of the National Conference and as a consequence see a reduction in the union  representation?

BOWEN: Well I made my views clear in my book which you’ve kindly referred to Paul, I do  suggest an expansion of the National Conference to include more rank and file representatives  that’s a debate for the party to have, my views are out there I’m not the depositary of all wisdom  when it comes to those matters but when I do have views. I’ll be putting these views forward  internally through the party about what we can do going forward and I do think you’ll see the  new leader again, whoever that is putting forward their views.

KELLY: Can I just ask you a general question, given the experience of the Rudd/Gillard years is  one of the lessons that the party need to rethink its ties with the union movement?

BOWEN: I think we need to build on them Paul. I don’t think we should ever walk away from  our Industrial heritage; unions play an important role in protecting vulnerable people and  providing a balance in the workplace. So we should never walk away from that but we should  build on it -

KELLY: What do you mean build on it?

BOWEN: Well, it means being a party open and inclusive of small business, its means being the  party open and inclusive of farmers, it means being the party open and inclusive of students -

KELLY: - So what you’re saying is you want to reduce union influence -

BOWEN: - Well my words are to say we build on it, we use it as a base and we invite other  groups, other individuals to make a contribution as well. Unions will, in my view always play an  important role in the Labor Party. But we’re not exclusively a trade union party, we’re a party  for Australia, for all Australians and we should be constantly reviewing our internal processes  to ensure that they are as open and as inclusive as possible. We want to grow, we want to be the  party that can represent the regions, the suburbs, the bush, the inner cities, the industrial wing  of the Labor party  -

KELLY: - Well it’s a pretty big challenge, I mean you look at this recent result, you look at where  the seats are, I mean what you are just talking about is an enormous challenge.

BOWEN: But it’s a challenge we’re up for, Paul. We do need to rebuild. We’re in opposition. But  opposition as well as being an enormous challenge is an opportunity. If you take that  opportunity, embrace it, grow as a party, as well as being as I say, a robust Opposition but  embracing new ideas and new challenges I think the Labor party can come out of these three  years all the stronger for it.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I ask you one finally question before I let you go, a pragmatic one I suppose.  During this period while you’re interim leader, I understand that you’ve said that former  Ministers will hold their portfolios and yes, everyone in Cabinet was returned but not everyone  from outside the Cabinet was returned, David Bradbury the Assistant Treasurer for example.  You as the Treasurer are now the interim leader, so there will need to be some people over the  next month or so taking up the cudgels in the economic space in particular, there’s no Treasurer  in the role because you are now leader and you’ve lost your Assistant Treasurer.

BOWEN: Well we had one position I needed to temporarily fill and so I asked Richard Marles to  be acting Shadow Minister for Defence because Stephen Smith has retired from the Parliament,  he’s accepted that request, he’s Shadow Minister for Trade and acting Shadow Minister for  Defence. And when it comes to the economic space I’ll continue as shadow Treasurer while  being interim leader I think I can do that for a month. We have Penny Wong as Shadow Minister  for Finance and we’ll continue to make the case for Labor with defending our economic legacy  over the next month. No doubt there will be debates about that, there will be some key points  and the economic debate will come back to the forefront over the next month and Penny and I  will be making that case very strongly.

VAN ONSELEN: No chance you get a taste for the leadership and come the end of the month  you’d rather another ballot?

BOWEN: Ah no.

(laughs)

BOWEN: I had my chance Peter, I had my opportunity to put my name forward and I considered  it and decided not to. I decided that the best contribution I could make was to make myself  available as Shadow Treasurer, the new leader whoever they are and I’m on very good terms  with both of them, will have my full respect and support.

VAN ONSELEN: You don’t want to quickly put your weight in behind one of them?

BOWEN: No as interim leader, I won’t be doing that, it’s for the party to decide and it would be  wrong for me as interim leader to be endorsing either candidate. They both have a lot to offer,  they both have a lot of talents and they both made can I say really good contributions in the  caucus meeting, really positive and strong contributions and I’m looking forward to the process  of them making those contributions to the party membership across the county over the next  month putting the case and I think the party will be all the stronger for it.

VAN ONSELEN: Chris Bowen, thanks for your company on Australian Agenda, much  appreciated.

BOWEN: Thank you.

ENDS



