



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND DEREGULATION  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE

TRANSCRIPT





Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 Australia    y  Tel: (02) 6277 7400 Fax: (02) 6273 4110

PW 283/13 07 March 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF DOORSTOP INTERVIEW - MELBOURNE

SUBJECTS: PETER COSTELLO COMMISSION OF AUDIT; CLIMATE CHANGE; ASIAN  CENTURY; SKILLED MIGRATION; BEN ZYGIER; BAILLIEU RESIGNATION;

E & O E - PROOF ONLY



WONG: There are reports today in the media that a complaint has been made to the Crime  and Misconduct Commission in Queensland which references Mr Costello. And there are  suggestions in the media that Mr Costello or his clients might benefit from some of the  recommendations contained in his (Commission of) Audit Report.

This does raise some questions - questions for Premier Newman and Mr Costello,  obviously. The first is: Is there a conflict of interest, and, if so, was it dealt with in the  Report? Was it disclosed in the Report? Obviously, the only people who can answer that  are the people who have access to that Report because it hasn’t been released.

The second question is whether or not Mr Costello and his clients could in fact benefit from  the recommendations in the Report being acted upon. I think these are legitimate questions  for Mr Costello and Mr Newman. I am happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Senator, there’s a report out today about AiGroup calling for an ETS to  come in straight away or very quickly. Any thoughts on that?

WONG: I think Minister Combet has put out a statement on that but I’d make a couple of  points about the AiGroup’s comments. First, the AiGroup reflects the views of many people  in the business community who know that Tony Abbott’s policy will be more expensive for  the economy and for their firms. That’s why AiGroup supports an emissions trading scheme  rather than the expensive, highly regulated policy that Mr Abbott’s proposing.

JOURNALIST: But just in comparison to what is initially outlined in terms of fixed price.

WONG: That’s passed the Parliament and that is already the law of the land - that period of  a fixed price until it moves to a floating price.

JOURNALIST: Can I just ask - there was a question raised in [the luncheon] about 457  visas and the Asian Century. It does seem to be a bit of a conflict in terms of the message;  cracking down on skilled migration from the region that we’re supposed to be engaging  with?

WONG: I don’t agree. The crackdown, to use your term, is on businesses which are  seeking to use 457s to fill positions where it is not positions generated through a genuine  absence of skilled Australians to do that job. I think the issue is how the visa system is  used. This Government has done more than any government really for a very long time in  bringing debate and discussion about Australia’s future being in this region to the core of  public policy.

JOURNALIST: But any program like that is going to have some level of abuse. Is it really  worthwhile to, you know, get out the megaphone in a case like this and jeopardise the  message that you’re trying to get out there?

WONG: As I said, the policy issue is a sound one. The policy issue is that the visa class  should be used for genuine skills shortages and not for other reasons and that’s the  position of the Government.

JOURNALIST: Just on that issue still - isn’t it the same kind of language used in a  completely different debate. You know, “putting Aussies at the front of the jobs queue”; it’s  the same kind of language that was used in the asylum seeker issue.

WONG: I think you’re asking me to get into some commentary there, and I’ll leave that to  you. I can tell you what is the sensible policy position and that’s the answer I gave earlier.

JOURNALIST: Just elaborating on the Peter Costello situation. What do you think - should  he come forward and clear up these allegations?

WONG: I think Mr Costello should respond to the suggestions in the public reports and  think the two questions I outlined at the start are the questions he should address.

JOURNALIST: There was just a bit of a call by Julie Bishop in relation to Ben Zygier - what  was known, what needs to be said ...

WONG: I’ll leave that Minister Carr to respond. He gave a very long press conference  yesterday and I understand released or indicated what was in the report to him. I don’t have  anything to add to that.

JOURNALIST:  Any thoughts on events last night over there (points to Spring Street), or  there ... wherever I am? (laughs)

WONG: I watched it unfold on Twitter, as I think a number of people did. I’m not privy to  what has happened inside the Liberal Party - you might be, or maybe you are, but I’m not.

All I can say to you is that, as a Federal politician, when I come to Victoria there’s certainly  been a lot of concern raised about some of the Baillieu Government’s cuts to health and  education. It’s certainly been an issue raised with me. But in terms of the internals of the  Liberal Party situation, you’d have to ask them.

2



3





JOURNALIST: Does it give you a sense of de ja vu at all?

WONG: (laughs) According to Tony Abbott this was “an orderly transition”, wasn’t it?

ENDS

