

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



Today Show with Ben Fordham, Lisa Wilkinson & Jason  Clare  26 July 2013

Subjects: Border protection policy

E&OE…

BEN FORDHAM It’s time now for ‘In The House’ with the Minister for Home Affairs Jason Clare and  the Deputy Leader of the Opposition Julie Bishop.

Welcome to both of you. Thanks very much for being here.

First up let’s have a look at what Tony Abbott had to say on this issue just yesterday:

TONY ABBOTT: The operational control of Operation Sovereign Borders will be in the hands of a 3  Star Military Commander who will be reporting directly to the Minister for Immigration under the overall  supervision of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet.

Ok Jason, to you first of all, what’s wrong with the Coalition’s idea? JASON CLARE Well it’s an  organisations structure rather than a solution. I’ve got a 2 Star Admiral that reports to me, the Prime  Minister’s got a 4 Star General that reports to him.

You can have different organisational structures but ultimately you’re going to need something that’s  going to remove the incentive for people to get onto a boat. That’s what the decision to make an  agreement with PNG’s all about. If you come to Australia by boat, you’ll be transferred and resettled in  PNG.

KARL STEFANOVIC Just trying to understand though - what’s wrong with what Tony Abbott said  yesterday?

JASON CLARE You can have whatever organisational structure you like. I think it’s a distraction from  the main question which is - what’s going to stop people drowning? Ultimately that’s what all policy  needs to be designed around. It’s as simple as that.

LISA WILKINSON Julie Bishop, what’s your response to that?

JULIE BISHOP We have a 4000 word policy on how to stop the boats and dismantle the people  smuggling trade. We took it to the 2010 election. On top of that, we believe because we’re seeing  these tragic deaths at sea, we have got to have flexible and rapid deployment capability.

Currently a number of our assets, whether they be border protection or defence, report to different  people. The Federal Police report to the Attorney-General, ASIS the offshore intelligence report to  Foreign Affairs, ASIO onshore report to the Attorney-General, Defence reports to Defence, Customs  reports to Home Affairs. What we want to do is bring it under one chain of command so we can have  flexible and rapid response.

There’s a long history of military leadership in civilian emergencies, whether it’s the NT intervention,  the Queensland floods, or in this case border protection.

BEN FORDHAM Let me ask you the same question that I just asked Jason. What’s wrong with the  government’s policy on this? Because you’re both presenting different plans. What’s wrong with the  PNG plan and the broader policy of the Labor Government?

JULIE BISHOP Well first Labor have to admit that they got it wrong. Kevin Rudd got it wrong,  tragically, terribly got it wrong in 2008. Once they can admit that they got it wrong then they can see  that the Howard Government solutions will work and that’s what should have been implemented six  years ago.

We have a proven history of success in this area. Labor has a proven history of failure and we don’t  believe that Labor has got the commitment, the competence or the will to properly implement this.

It’s not right to say, and put out ads that say, that no one that comes by boat will end up in Australia.  Already this announcement is starting to unravel, as it has on so many occasions in the past.

We just don’t believe Labor has got the will or the competence to implement a policy like this. The  logistics of it is so incredibly complex and detailed and it hasn’t been thought through.

LISA WILKINSON Your response Jason?

JASON CLARE First things first, with the point I made about the Pacific Solution. Both sides of  politics, Labor and Liberal, decided to get rid of the Pacific Solution because circumstances had  changed.

JULIE BISHOP There was no one in detention that’s why!

JASON CLARE The decision was made by Labor and Liberal.

JULIE BISHOP When we left office there were only four people in detention!

JASON CLARE Circumstances have changed now and to be honest I’ve changed my mind as well.  When you get reports about people dying and you see photographs of people that have died you  know you’ve got to take action and unfortunately we’ve been denied the powers we think we need to  take action.

On this point here, the government’s policy is that people will be resettled in PNG. It’s the only policy  that means people will be resettled overseas.

Julie’s policy says you’ll have a temporary protection visa. Those people will ultimately be settled in  Australia. Turning back boats, we know what happens there. The boat is sabotaged and sinks, you  can’t turn it back.

So there’s only one policy here where people are settled overseas. The Liberal Party supported it last  week. Now it looks like they’re opposing it. We need to work together on this if we’re going to stop  people drowning.

LISA WILKINSON You sound like you’re approaching it from a humanitarian standpoint. But the  people who are settled in Papua New Guinea, they have no freedom of movement and they really  have no hope for a future.

We have a history in Australia of refugees being assimilated into the community and building lives and  not being on the welfare system. Does that sit comfortably with you?

JASON CLARE Well two points. There’s nothing compassionate about people drowning and over the  last week or so I’ve had to tell Australia about two young women in their 20s and 30s as well as  children.

They will have freedom of movement Lisa. They’ll have all of the rights that you would expect - the  ability to work, to be able to get accommodation, access to education and to health. But we need to  make this point. There is nothing compassionate about people drowning.

The latest reports I’ve got are that people smugglers are telling people in Indonesia now, and  remember you’ve got thousands of people in Indonesia who’ve bought tickets already, they’re saying  get onto a boat now before the first plan goes to PNG. Or this won’t go through the Parliament. It  won’t survive the High Court - every lie you can think of is now being told to encourage people to get  onto boats.

That’s why you can expect more boats to come over the course of the next few weeks. Just like boats  came after Tampa, they are pushing people onto boats because they make $1 million a boat,  sometimes more.

BEN FORDHAM Ok can I just ask you Julie about something Jason’s raised about pushing back  boats as you say ‘where safe to do so’. How does it sit with you, the concern that there may be cases  where you’re pushing back a boat and that boat starts sinking and people die?

JULIE BISHOP The Coalition plan is to stop people getting on boats in the first place. The plan is to  work with countries like Indonesia, Malaysia to stop them getting on boats in the first place….

BEN FORDHAM Sure but let’s just use that scenario - when we’re at sea and there’s a leaky boat  and you’re pushing it back. In the event that that sinks and people die, how is that going to sit with  you?

JULIE BISHOP This is the point I’m trying to make - that we will dismantle the people smuggling  trade. This is the first point, you’ve got to dismantle the people smuggling trade to stop them getting  on boats in the first place. Stop them making that terrible journey.

LISA WILKINSON But how will you do that?

JULIE BISHOP Well I’m not going to go into the operational aspects of it and give the people  smugglers a handbook on we’ll do it.

LISA WILKINSON This has become such a hot issue if you don’t give detail..

JULIE BISHOP Well I’m not going to give the people smugglers a handbook, but what we will do is  get our military assets used in a way that turns back boats when it’s safe to do so….

BEN FORDHAM I’m sorry to do this to you Julie if you can just wait one second because there’s  something quite serious happening and we have to go straight to Georgie Gardner.

Breaking news clip.

BEN FORDHAM Look I know it’s a shorter version of our conversation today. So I hope you don’t  mind us wrapping it up.

Is there any prospect, just lastly, is there any prospect of both of your sides, considering we’re talking  about life and death here, coming together and working out a solution together? Or is it beyond that?

JULIE BISHOP Well first we need to know a lot more about the announcement that Kevin Rudd made  in relation to PNG. We need the detail. How much it’s going to cost? For how long are people going to  be supported by the Australian taxpayers as they try and live in PNG?

BEN FORDHAM Would you be open to that? Would the opposition be open to getting together?

JULIE BISHOP We want to hear the details, absolutely.

BEN FORDHAM Would the government be willing to get together with the opposition and sort  something out.

JASON CLARE The Labor Party and the Liberal Party in reality aren’t that far apart on this issue. The  problem is it’s been poisoned by politics and people wanting to win votes on this issue. If we work  together we can stop people drowning.

- Ends -



