

THE HON MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR

MULTICULTURALISM   MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: Indonesia Relationship, Public Service Cuts, Debt Ceiling

Kieran Gilbert: Matt you’ve seen the response from the Prime Minister and the  Government, I suppose from your perspective it’s a pretty reasonable response  or do you think he needs to go further Mr Abbott in trying to show contrition to  Jakarta?

Matt Thistlethwaite: I think it is a reasonable response and what we need to  do now is focus on cooperation with Indonesia. The ties that bind us are the  important thing moving into the future, so if I was the Foreign Minister Julie  Bishop I’d prioritise getting up to Indonesia to see Marty Natalegawa and to work  on cooperation and areas where we can cooperate be it in security intelligence  gathering, in trade, in investment and in other areas. I think ours is an enduring  relationship with Indonesia, we will be able to get over this, but the focus now  needs to be on cooperation.

Gilbert: Will the Prime Minister have to go further on this? We spoke to Andrew  Wilkie about this, about Obama making an express commitment to the Germans  that they would stop that practice of tapping the leadership’s phone as we saw  with the Merkel incident.

Scott Ryan: We heard from the Prime Minister yesterday and you played a clip  from him just earlier this morning where he made it clear again the priority he  places on this most critical relationship in our region, and also that he won’t say,  and this Government won’t say or do anything that causes any harm to that  relationship, but it’s long standing practice that these matters are not  commented on publically by governments of both persuasions in Australia, and  that is a practice that he and this Government will be sticking to.

Gilbert: It was a bit of an understatement though from Tony Abbott when he  said we’ve got a really good relationship with Indonesia but today is not a good  day in that relationship… that is quite an understatement isn’t it?

Ryan: I think he qualified it slightly but I think he was being honest.

Gilbert: It’s a really bad day isn’t it? It’s potentially catastrophic according to the  former Foreign Minister Bob Carr.

Ryan: Well Bob Carr is known to hyperbole, that’s your characterisation Kieran  and the Prime Minister was stating as you…

Gilbert: Alexander Downer had similar sentiments though.

Ryan: Well Alexander Downer is a private citizen now and Alexander Downer  stood by this long standing tradition that these matters were not commented  upon publically by the Government of the day. I note that yesterday John  Faulkner, one of Labor’s Defence Ministers also did not comment, and that is a  tradition that is a long standing practice to which the Prime Minister has  recommitted himself.

Gilbert: Do you think Prime Minister Abbott is going to have to go further and  give a commitment to end this sort of practice as Obama did with the Chancellor  Merkel case?

Thistlethwaite: I think what the Prime Minister needs to do is emphasise  cooperation. As I said I think he should seriously consider going to Indonesia  meeting with the President and emphasising the ties that bind us. We’ve had an  enduring relationship with Indonesia, it’s capable of getting over this. There’s no  point sugar coating it, this has been a difficult day for the relationship, but we  can overcome it and that’s through cooperation. We proved in government that  we can overcome issues cooperatively with Indonesia. The visa on arrival issue  with Iranians that were becoming a problem in boat arrivals, Bob Carr got on a  plane went to Indonesia and managed to negotiate a workable agreement with

the Indonesians. There’s proof there that we can repair this relationship and it  will endure into the future.

Gilbert: Well Tony Abbott has been making that a big priority as you know. He  said he wants a Jakarta focused foreign policy, unfortunately at the moment, it’s  for all the wrong reasons but you can hardly question his commitment to this  relationship, it was his first visit, he’s been there a few times already, it’s hard to  make it any more of a priority and this was under the Labor Government watch  wasn’t it?

Thistlethwaite: But the megaphone diplomacy during the election campaign,  the rhetoric and the sloganeering particularly around the boat policy and the  problems that that resulted in for the Government when they came to office  can’t be underestimated.

Gilbert: This is a problem that emanated from the Labor Government watch  though, is that a point that needs to be factored in here?

Thistlethwaite: What’s important is cooperation and under Labor in  Government we emphasised cooperation and I’ve given you the example of Bob  Carr going to Indonesia and working cooperatively with the Indonesian  Government and that’s what the future has got to be about.

Gilbert: I want to ask Scott Ryan about this point because that suggestion has  been made to me buy various people including Nick Xenophon… he was saying  the Government needs to try and put some distance between it and this row  over spying and highlight that it was the Rudd Labor Government back in ’09.

Ryan: One of the ways we show respect for friendships with our critical  neighbours is by actually not conducting them through the media. Now Matt  there was trying to get a bit of partisan advantage out of this, but let’s go right  back to the first Kevin Rudd Prime Ministership, we had the saga over the  Oceanic Viking, we had the live cattle exports disaster which was a real problem  for our relationship with Indonesia. Prime Minister Abbott made it clear all along  that this was his priority, he went there, it was his first visit, it was his first  meeting, and we are showing respect for that relationship and we are continuing  to strengthen that relationship as the Prime Minister has said and we will  continue to do that by conducting diplomacy in the way it should be…

Gilbert: I want to turn my attention and our viewers’ attention now to the public  service cuts. The Coalition had promised 12,000 through natural attrition.

Reports today in the Financial Review suggesting that you will review that  number given that various previous commitments from Labor will probably see a  number exceeding 14,000 removed from the public service… is this something  you will have to backflip on?

Ryan: Well this is something the Finance Minister Mathias Cormann outlined  yesterday Labor’s secret plan to sack 14,500 public servants but not fund the  redundancies has left a lot of agencies in a bit of a financial hole, they didn’t  have the resources, but at the same time Labor was being so hypocritical  running around accusing the Coalition of its plans, yet its secret plans were even  greater.

Gilbert: So will you scrap this 12,000 cut because that would mean well over  20,000 public servants cut, how will you fulfil your promises if you don’t have a  public service?

Ryan: I think Senator Cormann said that they’ve become aware of this and this  is an issue that they are actually having to work through. It’s one of the mini  financial messes that Labor left for the incoming Coalition Government.

Gilbert: Is this some hypocrisy from Labor that you’ve been critical of public  service cuts from the Coalition and yet as the Government’s pointed out from  your previous commitment some 14,000 plus public servants to go.

Thistlethwaite: Well this was all disclosed prior to the election. We announced  efficiency dividends over the last couple of years and they were announced in  the proper course, they were disclosed to the public through the budget through  the mid-year economic fiscal update and through the pre-election fiscal update.  What’s incumbent on the Government now is to release the figures to release the  mid-year economic fiscal update so we all know the true state and nature of the  budget. You’ve undertaken further tax breaks for the rich through the super  system, again going to have a big impost on the budget, it’s going to make it  much more difficult for them to meet their commitments prior to the election.  You need to come clean Scott with the Australian people, what’s the delay,  MYEFO is due to be released, just release it, come clean with the Australian  public.

Ryan: This is the problem with Labor. They made announcements about  efficiency dividids, they were never achieved…

Thistlethwaite: At least they were all announced… they were all announced  there in the budget for everyone to see you’re hiding things.

Ryan: Matt’s just summed up Labor’s problem, we make announcements but we  don’t actually achieve them.

Gilbert: In terms of the economic update, why is Labor so hell-bent on having  this week? I remember Peter Costello over many years would have it well into  December on occasions, it’s not always in November. Why has Labor got this bee  in your bonnet over when the mid-year update is?

Thistlethwaite: Because the parliament is being asked to make an important  decision on lifting the debt ceiling, that’s a decision that affects not only this  generation of Australians, but potentially future generations, and when important  fiscal decisions like that are being made it is incumbent on the Government to  release all of the relevant information so that MPs can make an informed  decision. That’s all we’re asking the Government to release the information so  that MPs can represent their constituencies and make an informed decision.

Ryan: The Treasury comes before Senate Estimates Committees tomorrow and  Thursday and the Treasury can be asked questions in the full glare of the public  spotlight. For Matt to be talking about raising the debt ceiling as being a problem  is the ultimate in hypocrisy given we are cleaning up Labor’s debt mess.

Thistlethwaite: Well what’s the problem with the Treasurer releasing it to the  parliament? He is accountable to the parliament through the people.

Gilbert: If the Treasury Secretary is going to do it anyway through a different  forum, why not release it to the parliament?

Ryan: The doc that’s released by the Treasurer and the Finance Minister, the  mid-year economic and fiscal outlook has got a timetable to be released and it  will be released according to that timetable, that’s the law we passed to clean up  Labor’s last budget mess.

Gilbert: Gentlemen, We’ve got to go.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK MONCRIEFF-HILL 0408 687 497



