

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT



28 June 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH SALLY WARHAFT - ABC MELBOURNE

SUBJECT: ALP Leadership; Election date; Australian Government legal action against  Japanese whaling in the International Court of Justice; marriage equality.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

WARHAFT: And it was like Back to the Future yesterday when Kevin Rudd walked to the  centre of the House of Representatives instead of the back benches and resumed his role as  Prime Minister, take two. Joining me now is Mark Dreyfus QC, the Attorney-General in the  Rudd Government. Good morning.

DREYFUS: Good morning, Sally.

WARHAFT: Well, tell us about yesterday and how it feels to be now the Attorney-General in  a Rudd Government?

DREYFUS: It feels very similar to being Attorney-General in the Gillard Government, because  I'm the Attorney-General of Australia. I've got responsibilities that I'm continuing with, and  government continues, and that was I think the message yesterday in the House of  Representatives.

We had minister after minister standing up explaining to the people of Australia what  they've been doing, talking about policies, talking about business in their ministries and, as  usual, an Opposition that was mired in negativity.

It was, in fact, an extraordinary day as to how little the Opposition were prepared, even  now, to talk about policy, and that's probably because they don't have any.

WARHAFT: You voted for Julia Gillard but kept your job. Did you offer to resign?

DREYFUS: No. What I said, very clearly, before the vote among my party colleagues on  Wednesday night was that I was prepared to serve and would be proud to serve in a Labor  Government, no matter who was the leader, and that is my position. That's always been my  position.

WARHAFT: Have you spoken to Prime Minister Rudd since the change?

DREYFUS: Of course, on a number of occasions.

WARHAFT: There's a lot of people he has to talk to, so...

DREYFUS: There are a lot of people he has to talk to, but I've spoken to him on a number of  occasions. I've met with him on a number of occasions since Wednesday evening, through  the course of yesterday. There's a lot to get done, a lot of organisation to do, and he has  asked me to continue as his Attorney-General, and I've very proudly accepted.

WARHAFT: It's a long list of people who are leaving the Parliament or going to the back  bench. I mean, even before the leadership spill there was Martin Ferguson, Robert  McClelland, Harry Jenkins, Nicola Roxon, and now the latest round. Has Labor's talent pool  just been hollowed out?

DREYFUS: Well, I think you'll see what depth there is in the Labor caucus when the new  ministry is announced, which will be shortly, and I've got no doubt that we have ample  depth to provide a ministry to serve Australia very, very well. Some of those resignations, of  course, are retirements, and Nicola Roxon's a good example...

WARHAFT: Martin Ferguson?

DREYFUS: Martin Ferguson's another. There comes a time in everyone's political career  when it's the right time for them to resign, and looked at through a particular political prism  you can say there's no right time to resign. I remember there was criticism of Lindsay Tanner  when he resigned on the day that Kevin Rudd ceased to be Prime Minister back in 2010, and  there was criticism of that, but for him, for his family, for himself after the time he'd been in  Parliament it was the right time. And so too for Stephen Smith, who's going to continue to  serve as Defence Minister through to the election but then will not be re-contesting the  election, because for him, after 20 years as Member for Perth, has decided that it's time.

WARHAFT: Who are you going to miss the most? Who's the biggest loss, do you think, for  this front bench and beyond?

DREYFUS: I've enjoyed working with all of my colleagues, and I'll miss them all. It would be  invidious to single out any one of them, and I've enjoyed working with all of my Cabinet  colleagues and I enjoy working with my caucus colleagues, and I'm looking forward to  working, right now through to the election, on our Labor policies and making sure that we  are re-elected.

WARHAFT: Your seat of Isaacs was once a very, very safe seat. It did look challenged under  the polls, at least reflecting that under a Gillard leadership. It's now very much more  contestable. How much time are you going to have to spend in your own seat now? I mean,  you voted for Julia Gillard, and yet Rudd's win has made your seat much safer, it would  seem.

DREYFUS: All seats are contestable, and I don't take anything for granted. I think one of the  things we've seen in Australian politics in recent years is much greater volatility between  elections, and I work on that basis. I'll be campaigning very hard in my electorate, right  through to the election, whenever that is.

WARHAFT: It's an extraordinary situation. I mean, we've gone from having a 14 September  election date set to uncertainty now about that, about key policies, asylum seekers, climate  change are two of the obvious ones, but even the education reforms which were voted on  the day before yesterday but with other states yet to come on board. How do you deal with  this uncertainty in almost every area of government so close to an election? We know it'll  be close to 14 September.

DREYFUS: Well, I don't accept for a moment, Sally, that there's uncertainty in almost every  area of government. Far from it. Just on climate change, there is such a clear contrast  between us and the Opposition. We are committed to continuing to take action on climate  change, to bringing down Australia's emissions and working with the rest of the world to  bring down emissions.

By contrast, there's a policy that has been completely discredited put forward by the  Opposition, and their promise to repeal carbon pricing, which has been an excellent reform,  and is the right way in which to reduce Australia's emissions, least cost, most effective,  and...

WARHAFT: There’s a lot of talk though, Mark Dreyfus, that one of the first things Kevin Rudd  may do is to change the Labor Party climate change policy.

DREYFUS: And as Kevin Rudd has made clear, that is a matter for consultation with Cabinet.

When the new Ministry’s sworn in, which we’re expecting to take place on Monday, there’ll  be the first Cabinet meeting of the Rudd Government and, at that Cabinet meeting or at  some subsequent Cabinet meeting, there may be some discussion about the emissions  trading scheme that we have.

WARHAFT: And there’s the uncertainty. And consultation too, you say, which is obviously  not something that Kevin Russ had his highest degree of reputation in. So what about a…

DREYFUS: And I think if you’d been listening to Kevin Rudd yesterday you would have heard  him say on a number of occasions about his intention to consult. And I have no doubt that  that’s what we’re going to see from this Government and from Kevin Rudd as Prime  Minister, that he will be consulting with his Cabinet colleagues, with caucus colleagues, and  with the community.



WARHAFT: Let’s talk about the whaling issue, which is before The Hague at the moment.  Australia has taken its great trading ally and friend, Japan, to court. It’s a high stakes  gamble, there’s no appeal. This is to stop whaling in the Southern Ocean. Why do we take  our friends to court when, if we lose, it would be an incredible loss for Australia?

DREYFUS: It’s a dispute that we have with our friend Japan. Our nations have agreed, having  failed to resolve that dispute through long years of diplomatic effort, that we should have  that dispute heard by the International Court of Justice. It started in The Hague, we’ve had a  couple of days of the case so far and it will be resolved by the International Court of Justice,

I’m very much hoping that Australia will be able to bring an end to commercial whaling in  the Southern Ocean, that’s what our objective is and I don’t have any fears for the  continuing friendship with Japan. This is exactly what nations should be able to do, to take  disputes to the International Court of Justice, or other international tribunals, and have  them resolved in a civilised manner.

WARHAFT: Do you feel confident that if Australia wins that, you know, Japan ignore the  ruling and just continue to hunt for whales in the Southern Ocean?

DREYFUS: Of course. Japan is a very good international citizen and I don’t think there’s any  doubt that Japan will abide the result.

WARHAFT: How did the opening presentations go?

DREYFUS: Well we start because we’re bringing the claim in the International Court of  Justice, and you would have seen from the reporting that we’ve put our legal arguments,  we’ve now been allowed to release the written argument that we’ve filed with the court.  And we’ve called one of our witnesses who has been explaining to the court that what Japan  is doing is not science. And that’s essentially our case.

But this has to be judged objectively, you can’t just bring your assertion along which is what  Japan is doing in saying ‘it’s science because we say it’s science’. We say this is to be judged  objectively and what the Japanese are doing in the Southern Ocean in killing hundreds and  hundreds of whales each year is not science.

WARHAFT: Finally, Mark Dreyfus, Kevin Rudd announced - oh a few weeks ago now I think -  that he’s had a change of mind and is now a supporter of gay marriage. Is there any drafting  going on in the Attorney-General’s Office at the moment on that issue? Can we expect that  to be a prominent election issue?

DREYFUS: I don’t know whether it will be a prominent election issue. I’ve made my position  clear now for a long time that I support marriage equality in Australia. And it remains the  position for the Labor Party that it’s a conscience vote. What we need is for the Liberal Party  also to make it a conscience vote and if that were so, I think you might find a different  outcome the next time that Parliament sits and a bill for marriage equality is presented to  the Australian Parliament.



WARHAFT: Alright, well I appreciate you giving up your time this morning to talk to us Mark  Dreyfus. I suppose there was no constitutional crisis that they would have need to have  drawn on your expertise as a QC for yesterday, but we’ll see how smoothly things hold  together in the coming weeks and months as the election draws nearer.

DREYFUS: I think you’ll find very smoothly, Sally, and you’re quite right to point out that in a  finely balanced Parliament with a minority government Australia has here produced again -  it’s something that shows the value of our system, that we can have a change of Prime  Minister without the slightest hint of any constitutional difficulty. A seamless transition,  that’s what you’ll see.

ENDS





-----------------------------

To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au





If you have received this transmission in error please  notify us immediately by return e-mail and delete all  copies. If this e-mail or any attachments have been sent  to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver  of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect  of information in the e-mail or attachments.

