The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Operation Sovereign Borders  Tuesday, 01 October 2013

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB The Ray Hadley Morning Show

Ray Hadley: When Immigration Minister Scott Morrison joined me in the studio last  week, he said he'd come on the program regularly following our weekly briefing to  the media. I'm pleased to say he's in the studio. Minister, good morning again to you.

Scott Morrison: G'day, Ray.

Ray Hadley: We've had three boats arrive since your last briefing, not including the  latest one picked up yesterday, I think with 78 on board.

Scott Morrison: Correct.

Ray Hadley: Take me through the ones that have arrived one by one please.

Scott Morrison: Well, there were the 18 Indian nationals that turned up on 24  September. They are now in Darwin and they are having access to their consular  officials and they will be going back to India. There were seven West Papuans who  arrived at Boigu Island and they were transferred within 24 hours back to Papua New  Guinea under an arrangement we have with Papua New Guinea going back to 2003.  And I extracted a - well, we had an agreement that they could go back under the  terms of that arrangement when I met with the Papua New Guinean Attorney-General last week when I was in PNG. And then there were - so those seven went  home. And there were 70 who arrived on 26 September and the vast majority of  those have all been sent to Nauru and Manus Island. There was the vessel that you  referred to that wasn't reported on yesterday...

Ray Hadley: Yes.

Scott Morrison: ...because it was outside the reporting period, but we did say and  confirm that that had arrived and we'll go through the details of that. We've already  moved some of those to Nauru - sorry, we will be moving some of those to Nauru  and Manus, I should stress, but we'll report on that later.

Ray Hadley: So you're sending families to Nauru and sending single adult males to  Manus, is that correct?

Scott Morrison: That's basically what we're doing at the moment. There is capacity  to also send single adult males to Nauru but we'll make operational decisions about  where they're going. But the point is this; they're going, they're not settling in on

Christmas Island as they were under the previous government. They are sent  directly. And when I was in Manus Island last week I addressed a group that literally  had just got off the plane and had been taken into the centre and they were one of  the first to be subject to our 48 hour rapid transit. And I delivered them the message  that they wouldn't be getting what they came for and they'd be staying there until  they went home or were settled in a country other than Australia, that Australia was  not an option and we were just not putting up with it anymore.

Ray Hadley: Okay. If I take the West Papuans and the Indians out of it, that's 25 in  total. I'm left with - and not including yesterday's who you say will go - I'm left with  103 people on a boat with 33 and 70, do you have any clarification on whether those  103 have already left Christmas Island or are they still there?

Scott Morrison: Overwhelmingly, the vast majority have all gone to Nauru and  Manus Island.

Ray Hadley: Okay. Alright, now, if I can come to and I'm a bit confused and so are  my listeners. You have a policy of turning back the boats, which hasn't been enacted  yet, and the Prime Minister in discussions and a speech he made overnight hasn't  touched on that. We are led to believe, and I guess you will when you get over there  and talk to their Immigration Minister about what you'll do, but we had two boats, 46  last Thursday, 46 people, and 34 last Friday that the Australian Navy was involved,  along with Customs vessels, in picking up and transferring them directly to  Indonesians. It sounds like turning them back but you're saying it's not. So how does  that work?

Scott Morrison: Well, Ray, we'll do this every week, and it's very important that  when I talk about these matters that I don't prejudice current or future operations.

Ray Hadley: Right.

Scott Morrison: I know there's been those reports and I'm not confirming them one  way or the other.

Ray Hadley: Right.

Scott Morrison: But we are working very closely with the Indonesians and I thought  the meeting that took place yesterday between the Prime Minister and the President  has set a very strong platform for continued cooperation. Now that cooperation  works best where we just get on with the job and don't put a running commentary  around it, which is not something we intend to do. But I'm very encouraged by the  start we've got off to, working closely together, respecting Indonesian sovereignty,  which has always been the Coalition's position. That has never changed. And we  also respect Australia's sovereignty and that's the basis of the cooperation that we  have in place.

Ray Hadley: But you must have done - I know you don't want to talk about it but I'm  going to try and make you talk about it - you must have done something, because  previously when an Australian Navy or Customs vessel picked these people they  turned around and putt putt putt, off to Christmas Island. Something must have

happened for all of a sudden for you to be offloading 46 and 34 people when they're  on board an Australian vessel, either Navy or Customs, to a corresponding  Indonesian - something must have happened for that to take place.

Scott Morrison: Well, let me put it this way...

Ray Hadley: Did they not ask the previous mob whether it could happen?

Scott Morrison: Well, all I know is under the previous government, that level of  cooperation didn't seem to occur that frequently and the previous government's  policy was just to run a water taxi service to Christmas Island. What we're working  constructively with Indonesia on is - and this was part of our policy before the  election - is we want to work to assist, improve the capability of their search and  rescue response. When we had this terrible incident last Friday which, at our best  information occurred about eight nautical miles off the West Javan coast, and initially  our understanding was it was about 25 nautical miles off the Indonesian coast. Now  that's a long way from Christmas Island. And the response from our team was as  good as it always was, which is excellent, and they acted with haste, they acted with  urgency, they acted with professionalism and the suggestion, particularly in  Australia, by advocates and others who want to take a shot at Australians who are  protecting people's lives, protecting Australia's borders and putting themselves at  harm's way to rescue people a long way from Australia - to have a crack at them I  thought was disgraceful and they should be ashamed of themselves.

Ray Hadley: Okay. Well, you did come out of the bunker to have a talk about that,  momentarily. But let me go through, for the benefit of our listeners, what the Acting  Commander of Operation Sovereign Borders, Air Marshal Mark Binskin, said  yesterday, and it's very informative. This is exactly what he said. The times are  Australian Eastern Standard Time:

At 7:57 am Friday - so three minutes to eight - the AFP on Christmas Island receive  a phone call from a person in Melbourne, reporting they had friends on a vessel that  had departed Jakarta four days ago with 80 people on board. The caller reported  they'd received a phone call from the vessel requesting assistance. The caller  reported the vessel had broken down, no food, no water, was sinking and a number  of unconscious people on board.

So that's three minutes to eight. At 12 minutes past eight, after about a 12 minute  phone call - so there's a two minute window there - the AFP advised the Australian  Maritime Safety Authority in Canberra. They make contact with the person in  Melbourne at 8:26 after he made the call at three minutes to eight. They gained a  significant amount of information on the status of the vessel but the person was  unable to provide the vessel's location.

At five past nine, the person assisted with a contact mobile aboard the vessel. At  9:11, the regional, or I should say, the Rescue Coordination Centre established  communication with a male person on board the vessel unable to provide the  location of the boat. So then they get the - at 9:44 the Indonesians become involved.  Then between 9:46 and 9:55, the Rescue Coordination people are able to coach the  person on the vessel, in an SMS text exchange, to provide a map reference. And

that's when they discover that they're 100 nautical miles north north-east of  Christmas Island and 25 nautical miles south of Indonesia, West Java.

At 10:07 again, they broadcast an alert to shipping requesting assistance. At 10:10,  the RCC contact Border Protection Command to request assistance. And then all of  a sudden, they start to get an airplane into the air. By the time they go from  Christmas Island, the Indonesians have been contacted. So all this nonsense about  you had 48 day - well not you - but our Defence Force had 48 hours' notice that this  was happening is nonsense.

Scott Morrison: It's absolute bunkum and, as I said, our people responded, as they  always would, with the sense of urgency and professionalism you would expect. The  engagement with the Indonesian authorities is exactly as it should occur. And there's  one chilling fact in all of this; you put your life in the hand of criminals and this is what  can happen. And, you know, expecting things to happen instantaneously on a phone  call to Australia 190 nautical miles away from Christmas Island and expect  Australians to be able to be there in a heartbeat is not going to happen. So that's the  risk that is being taken and that's why we're trying to stop all this Ray, we've been  talking about it for absolute years. The way you stop it is by doing the things that  we've been talking about and are now in the process of implementing and working  closely with the Indonesians as we've already demonstrated we are and as the  meeting between the President and the Prime Minister last night indicated we're off  to a very good start.

Ray Hadley: OK the next level of cooperation has to be this key figure, a Lebanese  man held in an Indonesian jail for killing someone apparently who's running people  smuggling operations out of the jail. Now what's been portrayed in this morning's  press has been these poor beggars who came from Lebanon on a flight, had Syrian  passports because they knew they wouldn't get in on Lebanese passports. They had  Syrian passports, they're coming via Indonesia, organised by a bloke allegedly in jail  for killing someone and then we've got - I mean, you know, I have many friends of  Australian Lebanese heritage -

Scott Morrison: Yes, as do I.

Ray Hadley: And many of them are waiting for family reunions and for people to  come out you know brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts who want to come to this  wonderful country and they're crankier than anyone about queue jumpers -

Scott Morrison: Absolutely.

Ray Hadley: Because it doesn't facilitate the arrival of their people along legal lines.  But surely to goodness, surely to goodness, the people bleating from Melbourne, you  know - there was a girl coming here to marry, you know, this bloke, and there's  children - I mean, do they not accept the fact that when you came to Government,  the Coalition, that they have no hope of getting here anyway?

Scott Morrison: Well that's a fact that they will learn firsthand and when I spoke to  those on Manus Island, and delivered the message in person to those who were  there about what they were now facing, a Government that had the resolve to back

up the policy and to follow through, I could see it in their faces that they now  understood that they were dealing with a Government who is going to follow through  and -

Ray Hadley: And what was the reaction to those words?

Scott Morrison: Well there was immediately a reaction in people wanting to talk to  the IOM about going home, and we'll see how that plays out over the next few  weeks. We'll be increasing, hopefully, the number of people we have up there to deal  with those requests to ensure that we can move people out quickly and facilitate that  wherever we can. But Ray, people who are going to try and use the Syrian conflict,  which is a dreadful and horrible tragedy that is unfolding before us there, as some  sort of cover to come to Australia for economic migration, we're just not going to cop  it. It's an insult to the real tragedy that's occurring in Syria and it's also an insult, as  you say, to the thousands of Lebanese Australians who came out from Lebanon, of  all faiths and backgrounds, and have made such a wonderful contribution to our  county, they shouldn't have to put up with that stigma by those trying this on as well.  Now, Australia is going to do its bit in terms of what's happening in Syria and there's  meetings going on in Europe at the moment about how we're going to support the  UNHCR in providing places under our humanitarian programme to take those who  are genuine refugees in Syria but no one should take from that that there will be any  sympathy for anyone who comes on a boat and seeks to come in claiming to be  affected by the Syrian conflict. They will face the same process as everyone else,  you're off to Nauru and Manus, and you're not coming to Australia.

Ray Hadley: Ahmad has sent me a note, while I'm talking to you, he says I'm  Australian Lebanese, I want to read what the Lebanese newspaper wrote about the  boat, it's in Arabic, but I can translate it for you, so he does. He says this bloke Abu  Saleh that you've spoken to the Minister about, organising travel for Lebanese and  other people to Australia, the funny thing he's in jail. He's got the internet, he's got  mobile phones, he's organising everything while in prison. And his contact numbers  are in the newspaper for anyone wanting to ring the bloke. I mean, surely that's  worth a phone call to Indonesia and say can we please make sure this fellow in jail  can stop ringing people in northern Lebanon to arrange them coming out here?

Scott Morrison: Sure and that raises a good point about the breadth of Operation  Sovereign Borders. It isn't just about processing on Manus Island, it isn't just about  what happens at sea, it is also about the significant work that is done by the  Australian Federal Police in cooperation, in joint operations, with POLRI, the  Indonesian National Police, to deal with disrupting up in the region. Now, that is a big  part of the programme, we haven't spoken as much about that, but that is certainly  something that will be progressed, and has already commenced, frankly, with the  discussions that took place last night. Now, I will obviously be going up to Indonesia  in the not too distant future to follow on from the meetings with the President and the  Prime Minister, our officials will be engaging at an operational level as well before  those meetings and we'll get on with the quiet and hard work of cooperation. I mean,  whether people are interested in a running commentary on this, well I'm happy to  come, as you know, Ray, and go through these details on your programme…

Ray Hadley: Well as I said, the invitation…

Scott Morrison: …and other places. But what matters is the work getting done.

Ray Hadley: Okay.

Scott Morrison: And talking about the work is good; doing the work is more  important.

Ray Hadley: Okay, here's a positive one from Stephen at Bellevue Hill, he's phoned  through and says what about the Minister give us, in the future, an update on  legitimate refugees we're settling here?

Scott Morrison: Good point.

Ray Hadley: So people know exactly who we are bringing here, and who are  arriving here, who are most welcome to come to our country and eventually be I  guess permanent residents.

Scott Morrison: Look, I would be very happy to do that Ray, I think that's an  excellent point because let's not forget that under this Government we're going to  take 13 750 legitimate Refugees and Special Humanitarian entrants. Many of those  are family members of those who came under the programme before because, as I  said yesterday, now no longer will it be the case that anyone who has come on a  boat under Labor, those 32 000 that are waiting here in the processing arrangements  we have here - not one of them will take the place of someone who is legitimately  coming through our offshore process. And so I was very pleased to announce that  yesterday, it was a core part of our platform and Australia will continue to do its  share of the heavy lifting on the world refugee issue but we're not going to cop  people coming by boat.

Ray Hadley: Okay, one final thing before you leave. I've spoken about this until I'm  blue in the face. There's another alleged indecent assault of a 15 year old girl by a  21 year old man on a bridging visa, having arrived here by boat. Now I believe he's  back in detention now but you've spoken here in Opposition about a lack of  cooperation between the Department of Immigration - your department now - and  New South Wales, Victorian, Queensland, South Australian Police. What are you  doing to make it easier for Andrew Scipione and his deputy commissioners to find  out when they have someone in custody whether they're on a bridging visa or not?

Scott Morrison: Well, the Secretary at my department has written to all the  commissioners, they're given the contact details for the person they need to ring in  the Department when they have someone in their custody who they believe might be  on a bridging visa. When that occurs, we'll get our people down there to ensure that  if those charges are laid, then they'll be taken back straight into detention. Now,  we've already done that on quite a number of cases. When our department doesn't  know about it, they obviously can't be there to take them back into detention. There  was the case that was raised on your programme and we ensured that within 24  hours or thereabouts, we had that person back in detention using a process we had  to manage carefully to ensure we could achieve that. But all the Commissioners  know that now and I'm also working on the police having access to all the residential  address details of those on bridging visas as soon as we can, that will also assist this

process. If you act up on a bridging visa - those bridging visas are given out of  courtesy of the Australian Government. It is a courtesy to be allowed to live in the  community while you're awaiting your processing and if you act up, you're coming  back into detention under this Government.

Ray Hadley: Okay, just one final question. Chris from Condell Park says the 13 750  to which you refer, who are accepted under the refugee programme, they're entitled  to the normal benefits of anyone living in this country, is that correct?

Scott Morrison: They are.

Ray Hadley: Yeah, which is the way it should be.

Scott Morrison: Which is - I mean, these are the people we're trying to help. These  are the people we're trying to make good citizens. If I can make one last point, Ray,  and that's this, when I was in Papua New Guinea this week I found out that the  details of how people have resettled in Papua New Guinea, which the Government  made much fanfare of before the election, is a complete blank file. Nothing was done  to confirm any of the resettlement arrangements in Papua New Guinea. All of that  hard work now falls to the new Government, which we will get on and do. But  whether it was the fact that I mentioned last week, that they hadn't put any money in  the bank to cover the funding of offshore processing from 1 January, now we find out  that they hadn't even got past go on the issue of detailing resettlement. Now, we'll  get that done but they haven't left us much to work with.

Ray Hadley: There'll be a new expression in the Macquarie Dictionary beyond 2013  when you talk about ad hoc arrangements, it'll be Kevin on a coaster.

Scott Morrison: Yeah, well that's right.

Ray Hadley: That's what we'll talk about. Anyway look, we'll stop talking about this  when the boats stop coming, but what we'll do, will it be every Monday that you'll  make an announcement? Or will that be determined by the department?

Scott Morrison: That's our plan to do it on Mondays or Fridays.

Ray Hadley: Okay.

Scott Morrison: Depending, I mean - some Mondays or Fridays I may be  somewhere else, Ray, so we'll have to maybe come to an arrangement about  whether I can do that on the phone from then, which I'm sure we can do. But if I'm  reporting in from Nauru or Jakarta, or somewhere else, I'm happy to do that because  I think this is a good way for your listeners to know what's going on and people more  broadly.

Ray Hadley: So once a week until the boats stop we talk?

Scott Morrison: Happy to.

Ray Hadley: Okay, thanks very much for your time.

Scott Morrison: Thanks, Ray.

Ray Hadley: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm208392.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 01 October 2013 at 17:35 AEST



