

ABC AM  Transcript, E&OE, proof only

10 July 2013

TONY EASTLEY: The Foreign Affairs Minister Bob Carr says Australia won't use foreign aid as a  bargaining tool, despite being apprehensive about the future of the minority Rohingya Muslims in  Myanmar.

Senator Carr has raised the plight of the Rohingyas in talks with Myanmar's government as well as  opposition figures. He's also ruled out accepting large numbers of the minority group as refugees,  even though the 800,000 strong Rohingyas aren't considered to be Burmese citizens and are often  the subject of violent attacks.

From Myanmar, the Foreign Affairs Minister Bob Carr spoke to AM's Naomi Woodley.

BOB CARR: Australia takes a keen interest in their plight and in the need for reconciliation and  harmony within this part of Myanmar.

NAOMI WOODLEY: How was that message received by the different political groups in Myanmar?

BOB CARR: Well, the representatives of the government pointed to the efforts they had made to  bring communities back together and promote tolerance. They emphasised that education and the  development of opportunities across all the ethnic groups in Rakhine state would be vital to longer  term success.

We, for our part, are able to talk about the humanitarian assistance we provided in that state. I've  announced an increase of $3.2 million going towards the emergency accommodation required but I've  got to say, after spending the day in Yangon talking to our representatives of the Rohingya people  and to representatives of a group at odds with them, the Arakan League for Democracy and the  Rakhine Nationalities Development Party that I'm pretty apprehensive.

NAOMI WOODLEY: Given Aung San Suu Kyi's special status across the world as really a symbol of  peaceful struggle and the pursuit of democracy and rights, are you disappointed that she hasn't taken  a more aggressive stance on this?

BOB CARR: I wouldn't criticise any of the political leadership of Myanmar. I'd simply highlight that this  is an extraordinarily difficult problem. It goes back to colonial times and earlier. As the minister for  reconciliation said to me, he said we've got 11 armed ethnic groups and we've got 135 recognised  ethnic groups.

NAOMI WOODLEY: Australia is one of the largest contributors of aid towards Myanmar. How quickly  are we going to get to a point where the Australian Government would start to look at aid or make aid  contingent on some action being taken towards resolving this particular tension?

BOB CARR: Yeah, this is such a wretchedly poor country, we couldn't do that. Our simple  humanitarian instincts require that we go on giving aid while, with the credibility that gives us and  being seen as something of a champion of Myanmar, we will continue to press with the government  and with opposition leadership the plight of the Rohingya.

NAOMI WOODLEY: But then how do you make that message effective because this is a problem that  has been growing in seriousness. It is a deep seated problem. So if you're not going to use the sharp  end of aid, how does Australia adequately convey this message in a way that will see some action  taken?

BOB CARR: Well, Myanmar does care about the way the world perceives it. It does desperately need  an inflow of investment dollars to lift the living standards of its people, to see more people move into  employment and to see more people liberated from rural poverty.

I think it does care that the headlines around the world these days about ethnic and sectarian  tensions in Rakhine province and not about the fact that the government has concluded peace  agreements, ceasefires with 11 armed ethnic groups, which is an awe inspiring achievement and one  the country can truly be proud of.

TONY EASTLEY: That's the Foreign Affairs Minister Bob Carr, who's been in Myanmar for the last  couple of days. He was speaking to AM's Naomi Woodley.

Media enquiries  Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 155



