PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE  CANBERRA  2 FEBRUARY 2013



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Chris Evans; Nicola Roxon; Changes to Cabinet

PM: I'm here with Senator Chris Evans and with Nicola Roxon, two of my most  senior and most valued colleagues.

I'm here with them to announce that they are stepping down from their ministerial  roles, and in the case of Chris Evans, from the Senate leadership as well.

Around 12 months ago, Nicola and Chris both came to me to talk about what they  wanted to do with the rest of their lives.

We agreed that at the right time they would relinquish their ministerial roles and I  would make new appointments to the ministry.

They'll have the opportunity shortly to say a few things themselves about the  decisions they've made.

Both Chris and Nicola have done amazing things for this Government, for the nation,  and for the Labor Party.

They certainly go with my thanks and they will be able to reflect on a proud track  record of achievement.

In Chris's case, Chris has served as Senate Leader for eight years now. It is not an  easy job.

He came into the Parliament in 1993. He has served in various portfolios, including  importantly now in the portfolio that is at the centre of making us a smarter notion, at  the centre of Australians getting the skills they need to have a real opportunity for the  future.

Under Chris Evans' leadership we have seen 190,000 additional students getting  opportunities at university.

He has been implementing our higher education reforms. And it is not too much to  say that because of the work of Chris Evans, kids of poorer families are finally  getting a chance to go to university and get skills and opportunity for the future.

At the same time, Chris Evans has driven major reform of our training system,  including creating the National Workforce Development Fund and putting an

employer-led partnership for the first time at the centre of how people acquire skills,  so that they are getting skills for a job, not just training for training's sake; a very  major reform.

Chris Evans also served in the very difficult portfolio of immigration. He shaped  changes to our temporary and permanent skilled migration streams.

He made sure that that was serving our economy and he played a major role in  cracking down on the rorts in 457 visas, the temporary visas which were bringing  people into the country who were being exploited once they got here.

He abolished Temporary Protection Visas and detention debt and introduced Labor's  detention values for the treatment of asylum seekers.

Chris Evans has made a major contribution to the Government. He was a leading  force for us in Opposition. He's proudly served the people of Western Australia, his  much loved state too and certainly from me, thank you very much Chris for  everything you've done.

Nicola Roxon, too, has had a very proud career in federal politics.

We entered the Parliament in the same time, in 1998. So Nicola has been in the  Parliament for a while with me.

She has had a very distinguished ministerial career. She's served as the first female  Attorney-General this nation has ever had.

And I certainly want to express today my gratitude to her for the work she's  undertaken as Attorney-General, and none of it more important than the work we did  together to establish the Royal Commission into child sexual abuse which we  announced a little bit earlier this year. That is a major development for our nation and  for people who have been survivors of such ill treatment.

Nicola in both her health portfolio and as Attorney-General has fiercely taken on the  power of big tobacco and she has won, and has an international reputation for taking  on big tobacco and winning.

And it's not too much to say that our nation will be a healthier nation, and indeed the  laws of many nations around the world will be changed because of Nicola’s work  against big tobacco.

As the Minister for Emergency Management, she's also been a guiding hand during  many of the natural disasters that our nation has had to face.

As Minister for Health, she oversaw real change and reform at all levels of the health  system: a focus on preventative health, a focus on bringing healthcare into the  community, a focus on reforming hospitals and our agreements with state  governments to that ensure hospitals are properly funded into the future.

Indeed, there would be many who said at the time it wasn't possible to get a new  healthcare agreement with State and Territories, and under Nicola’s leadership this  got done.

So to Nicola Roxon, I want to say a big thank you too.

We have served together in Melbourne's west. Nicola is a very proud representative  of her electorate of Gellibrand and I know a lot of people in that local community will  be very sorry to see her go because of the great advocacy she has provided for  Melbourne's west and for Gellibrand.

I'll turn now to Chris Evans for some comments.

EVANS: Thank you very much Prime Minister. You were so generous I thought I  mightn’t go now.

Thank you for your very kind remarks.

I wanted to announce today that I’m stepping down as Labor Senate Leader, Leader  of the Government in the Senate, also resigning from the Cabinet and indicate that in  the next couple of months I’ll resign from the Senate.

I’ll stay until such time as a replacement can be selected in Western Australia.

I want to thank the Prime Minister for her support. She indicated that we had a  conversation a fair while ago now about a planned departure, but I indicated I would  go at the time of her convenience as she reshaped the team for the coming election.

I indicated that I didn’t want to serve following the next election and, quite frankly, my  focus has been that as eight years as Senate Leader it was time for someone else to  take on that role.

I’ve done that role in Opposition and Government. It is taxing; it is hard to say to the  troops after eight years that what you’re saying is fresh and new and I think it’s time  for someone else to have an opportunity.

I decided that I would make a clean break at that stage and while I’ve really enjoyed  the role, it’s time to allow the Government to put in place a new team.

It’s been a tremendous privilege to serve in the Parliament of Australia. It’s been a  great honour to be a member of a Labor Government, and I cherish the opportunities  that I’ve been given.

As a less famous migrant of Welsh parents, I came to this when I was nine years old  and was part of the Welsh takeover of the government of this country

PM: But can you sing?

Evans: We are the two that can’t sing.

But to come as a migrant and be able to be elected to the Parliament I think says a  great thing about this country and the opportunities it provides.

We came to this country because my father got the chance of an education and to  get out of the coalmines of Wales.

And again I think that speaks to the empowerment of education.

Can I say I also had the great opportunity to be Acting Prime Minister for a few days  and it was a tremendous honour and I also was very pleased to know that nothing  went terribly wrong when I did that role. No one was more relieved than the Prime  Minister.

It was a tremendous privilege and, as I say, I had enormous opportunities and got to  meet many great Australians, and engage with them, and I’m forever grateful for  those opportunities.

It is the case that there are many people around the Parliament and who are outside  the Parliament now who I have provided advice to. And that advice has always been  - make your contribution, never believe you are indispensable and go out while you  are on top; never become bitter, never stay too long.

And it is about time I took my own advice.

I have enjoyed the speculation of the last 18 hours or so. I see yesterday it was a  shock that I was going and today it is old news and apparently it was expected.

I notice that some of you in the room have made both of those remarks in the last 18  hours.

Luckily Nicola is now the new story.

I want to make it very clear, I am not leaving tired, sick or bitter.

I am leaving fit, healthy and confident of the future of the Government.

I was most annoyed to see the file footage of me - it had me looking a little on the  heavy side.

I made a decision that I would try to leave as I looked when I arrived. I found that  impossible so I thought the least I could leave at the same weight I was when I  arrived.

But as I say it has been a tremendous honour to serve the Government and be part  of a Labor Government.

I enjoyed the challenges of immigration - it is a challenging portfolio but bringing  humanity back to the portfolio and reform of skilled migration were issues that I took  on and am very proud of.

In workplace relations, along with the Prime Minister, I was able to be part of the  decision to bring equal pay to female workers in the community services area among  the many other workplace relations reforms of which I, and the rest of the  Government, are proud.

In tertiary education, as the Prime Minister referred to, implementing the Bradley  reforms started under the Prime Minister - opening up access to tertiary education  for working class kids, for Indigenous people, for children of migrants who, quite  frankly, have been denied it in the past.

Too much of tertiary education participation had been determined by postcode and  now that opportunity is much more broadly available for those who have got the  ability and commitment to take it up.

The work in tertiary education and skills has been very rewarding. It’s one of the  reasons I got into politics so to get a chance to be part of that in a Labor Government  has been great.

In terms of the science portfolio, I just wanted to make a point that is often  overlooked in Australia.

We have some of the best scientists in the world, we do world class science and  research here, and while I am a sports fan, it would be nice to see more focus on our  achievement there and the people who are providing for that.

I was very pleased to be part of the decision when we won the bid to host the Square  Kilometre Array. I don’t think people understand the importance of that project and  what it’s going to do for Australia over the next 40 to 50 years.

So, I’d like to finish by; I’m mindful that I don’t want to do a Rob Oakeshott, I’m a big  fan of Rob’s but I’d like to thank my colleagues for the great support I’ve had as  Senate Leader. I can’t complain about the support I’ve had from any of my  colleagues.

I particularly want to thank my staff. In this game you’re only as good as your staff;  I’ve had great support from my staff - tremendously talented and loyal people.

I know Steve Lewis will write his column again about turnover, but one of my staff  has been with me for 14 years, through the good times and the tough times, and I  thank him and the rest of the team for that.

Finally, I’d like to thank my family. They pay an enormous price for your participation  in federal politics, particularly from Western Australia, and I can’t deny that their  support’s been critical, but that we have paid a price for me being allowed to pursue  my career.

Can I also just thank the PM for her support, and I’ve actually been someone who  has believed for many years that the Prime Minister is the outstanding politician of  her generation.

I’m pleased to see her as Prime Minister of this country and I leave knowing that the  Government is in good shape. I would not have left if it wasn’t; I would not have left if  I thought it would do harm to the Party or the Government.

I am very confident of our chances of success at the next federal election.

Thank you very much.

ROXON: Thank you Julia. Well today I also announce that I am not intending to  contest the next election, and accordingly have offered my resignation to the Prime  Minister as Attorney-General and the Minister for Emergency Management.

Like the Prime Minister has mentioned, and like Chris, it's been an absolute honour  and privilege to have this job, to have the opportunity to deliver to the community, to  be able to deliver on Labor values.

And I'm very proud of what I've been able to be part of as a Labor Government in  delivering on those things that matter to Australians, and let me say right up front  Prime Minister, how much I admire what you have made our Government do for  Australian families and I really appreciate that you understand the needs of mine.

I promised that I would hold it together.

Of course these are extremely exciting, important and very demanding jobs, and I  have always believed, like Chris, that they're jobs that you do at 200 per cent, and if  you ever get to the point where you don't think you can do it at 200 per cent - even if  your 190 per cent might be pretty good - it's time to move on; and I have reached  that point.

I've been in Parliament since 1998, and a lot for me has changed personally in that  time.

I hadn't even met my husband. My daughter was a long way from being thought  about, and if I did contest this next election and run for a sixth term in Parliament she  would be starting high school before I might retire.

And all of us need to make decisions about the right time to leave, and I believe the  right time is now. And I must say, Prime Minister, what was a very difficult decision  was made a lot easier by the fact that the Labor Party does bat so deep.

The Prime Minister has a wealth of talent and ability and enthusiasm to choose from  in replacing me and in replacing Chris, and I feel very confident that she is spoilt for  choice really on people that can fill this role and take us to the election and  successfully contest the next election.

Like Chris, I believe that we can win the next election. I believe that we will win the  next election, and Prime Minister, I believe that the community needs us to win the  next election.

For all those people who rely on Labor Governments to provide the protection of the  NDIS, to make sure that kids can get a proper education, to make sure that they get  the help into jobs, that they get dental care that's needed.

Your Government is the only Government, the only team that is offering that; and  that's why I believe under your very tough and very wise leadership, we will win the  next election, and I will certainly be working very hard to make sure that that can  happen.

I am proud of what I've been able to be part of in the last five years.

I've only been the Attorney for 12 months. I've had the wonderful opportunity to make  some very significant changes - and the Prime Minister mentioned one of them, the  establishment of the Royal Commission.

I've also had the great honour of being able appoint two High Court judges. Some  people are Attorneys for a lot longer than that and never have an opportunity to do  something that is so important, something that really gets little attention but is part of  good governing, and I believe that the Prime Minister and our government has been  governing well in making those and many other decisions.

I'm also very proud of the work that I've done in the health portfolio. I held that  portfolio for four years and we under-saw reforms that touched every part of the  health system, whether it was getting more focus on patients in front-line care,  whether it was investing in infrastructure, whether it was putting more focus onto  preventative health, the tobacco battle being only one of those - but a focus that's an  important one - whether it's doubling hospital funding, these are things that make a  difference to people's lives each and every day, and some of them will make a  difference for decades to come.

The sort of backroom fixing that needed to be done in health in terms of how we  finance health, not really sexy for reporting but fundamental for good government,  and I'm very proud of being able to deliver that.

My only regret I have to say, as Health Minister, is the inordinate amount of time we  took fixing many of the problems that Mr Abbott left from his time as Health Minister -  a lot of my time, a lot of the Government's time, a lot of staff and bureaucratic time  fixing issues that were simply neglected for the nearly four years that he was the  Health Minister.

As a local MP, I'm really proud of the work that I've been able to deliver, and Prime  Minister because our electorates are so close to each other, you know the sorts of  areas that I'm talking about.

But when Julia and I were first elected, if you were a keen young, bright student in  the western suburbs and wanted to become a doctor, you could not stay in the  western suburbs and do that.

Now, at the time of my resignation, you can do all your training to become a doctor  right in the western suburbs, where the population needs you.



And those investments, whether they're in child care, primary school, high school,  TAFE, university are things that have really been a signature of the Prime Minister's  leadership both as the Minister for Education and now as Prime Minister, and the  sorts of things that I think as Labor people we can be proud of across the country.

And whilst it's time for me to retire from politics, I do want to say to the next  generation that they should think about public service.

It is an enormously rewarding opportunity to fight for things that you believe in, and  particularly for women I want to say that they should think about it. They can do it. It's  been proved, and we need you, and I hope that people will see this as an opportunity  to think about moving into politics, not to think that it's too difficult for them to do.

I've found constant inspiration from those goals that we've been working towards,  and whether it is the sorts of examples I used of being able to train as a doctor,  whether it's regional kids and families being able to get cancer treatment closer to  home, whether it's the training opportunities in all sorts of areas that we've now  invested in across the country, whether it's dealing with the ravages of natural  disasters, which are all too frequent, these are all issues that as Labor Governments  we deal with each and every day.

And I have to say I have one frustration that delivery is often reported on as a  slogan, when actually almost every day that I have been in Parliament in the last 15  years, I've seen the difference that delivery makes to people on the ground, and our  Government's been very focused on that.

As I've said, Prime Minister, I think the mission that we have as a Labor Government  is a very good one and a very strong one, and I never cease to be amazed that we  seem to have a Prime Minister made from titanium, really, with the strength and  vision and leadership that as a minister you can only dream of.

So in resigning today, although it's personally a difficult decision, I am very confident  that we are leaving the Government, as Chris said, in extremely good hands and in a  good position, and with a great story and plan to tell to offer to the people at the next  election, and I for one will still be handing out busily on election day - not only  campaigning up until that time - to make sure the good that our Government under  your leadership can do is understood by the public. And I am sure that in September  it will be rewarded.

Finally, let me thank Julia of course, Kevin, my Cabinet colleagues, my caucus  colleagues, my wonderful staff, particularly Chris Picton, Narelle, Angela and Hamdi.

Chris I have to owe you a belated apology.

When I became the Shadow Health Minister, I rang Chris Evans and said: Look, I  believe you've got someone that knows a little bit about health in your office, could I  borrow her for a couple of days?

Five years later, when she finished with me I said to Chris that I was happy for her to  return to Chris's service. And it just goes to show I think that amongst the Labor staff  we have very capable, very talented people, many of them who've been with us for  very long periods of time. And like everyone else up here at the front are determined  to make sure that we can win the next election.

I want to thank the people of Gellibrand for their confidence in me and their support  and for their endless politeness at the supermarket, always saying we're a bit  surprised to see you here, but we're glad that Julia gives you time to do this.

I would have been quite glad if she didn't give me time to do the supermarket  shopping actually.

And can I also particularly thank the Labor Party and my family, the incredibly  steadfast Michael and my amazing mum, not to mention my sister and others who've  made this possible for me.

Thank you.

PM: We've got more to do before we get to questions so if you'll just excuse me for a  moment.

What I want to do now is announce who is going to fill these incredibly big shoes and  incredibly big shoes they are as you've just heard.

But there are some incredibly big shoes to fill and it does give me an opportunity now  to promote some fresh talent, with fresh ideas into the Government's Executive and  I'm very pleased to do so.

It means that we will be able to present to the Australian people a rejuvenated team  as we move into the Parliamentary year in 2013.

I've been able to select a number of my colleagues for promotion and I thank them  for their preparedness to serve.

So first, Chris Bowen will replace Senator Evans as Minister for Tertiary Education,  Skills, Science and Research. He will also have responsibility for Small Business,  acquitting my promise that small business would always be a Cabinet portfolio.

This is a promotion for Chris, a significant new challenge.

As you've heard from the words I've said and Chris has said today, this work is at the  heart of Labor's agenda for our nation's future and there is nothing more important to  Labor values and Labor ideals than making sure that Australians gets the best of  opportunity for the future, and to do that they've got to have the best of skills.

So, Chris Bowen will take that responsibility.

Chris as Minister for Immigration and Citizenship has never shied away from what is  hard work in one of the Government’s most challenging portfolios. And Senator  Evans also knows what that is like.

I know Chris Evans is going to bring his same drive and determination to this new  challenge.

Mark Dreyfus will replace Nicola Roxon as Attorney-General and Minister for  Emergency Management.

Mark Dreyfus is known to everybody in this room, I believe, he came to Parliament  as a senior barrister, indeed as a Queens Counsel and will have the skills and  attributes necessary to perform as Attorney-General and as Minister for Emergency  Management.

I have promoted Jason Clare, he will take the role of Cabinet Secretary, sit in  Cabinet, and he will take with him his Home Affairs and Justice portfolio.

As I’ve indicated earlier this year, we’ve got a lot of work to do in the Home Affairs  and Justice portfolio.

There are concerns around the nation, including in western Sydney on questions of  community safety and community cohesion and Jason Clare will lead our effort on  that.

Brendan O’Connor has been promoted to take the job of Minister for Immigration and  Citizenship.

Mark Butler has also been promoted, taking on new responsibilities. I have added  the Housing and Homelessness portfolio to his current responsibilities.

There are clear linkages with the work that he does in mental health and indeed and  in aged care and his general work in social inclusion.

Mike Kelly is being promoted into the ministry and into the ministry as the Minister for  Defence Materiel.

Mike Kelly is someone who served in the ADF and brings that wealth of experience  with him, as well as a wide range of talents and abilities.

I’m promoting today a number of people into the Parliamentary Secretary ranks.  Yvette D’Ath will take on the role as Parliamentary Secretary for Climate Change and  Energy Efficiency.

Kelvin Thomson will take on the role of Trade. Melissa Parke will take on the role of  Mental Health, Homelessness and Social Housing.

Three Parliamentary Secretary positions are available because Justine Elliot has  approached me to relinquish her Parliamentary Secretary job.

Justine is an incredibly fierce advocate for her local community. She is spearheading  a campaign about community concerns relating to coal seam gas.

She has grown increasingly uncomfortable having the Parliamentary Secretary for  Trade obligations given that’s a job where we get out and spruik all of our export  industries, including the coal seam gas industry.

And so she wants to resolve that conundrum by relinquishing the Parliamentary  Secretary role and focusing on her obligations as local member and particularly this  local campaign.

In terms of the Senate Leadership, that is not for me to decide, that is for Labor  caucus to decide. I respect that my caucus colleagues will come together on Monday  and make a decision about the future Senate Leadership.

So that is for caucus and I won’t engage in any speculation about that ballot, but the  decision will be made on Monday.

The swearing in for the new ministers will also occur on Monday.

That suits the Governor-General’s convenience. She does have some commitments  next week including going to Antarctica. Not something that can be moved around  given she’s there for commemorations related to Mawson. So we will get on with the  swearing in on Monday.

So, that’s enough from me apart from saying I will miss my colleagues very much in  the future but I know I will continue to see them as human beings for a long, long  time to come.

JOURNALIST: Nicola Roxon and Senator Evans you said 12 months ago, can I ask  you about the timing of this announcement, why you didn’t do it before Christmas?  Can you appreciate that outside today’s announcement looks very chaotic after  what’s been a tumultuous couple of weeks for you this year?

PM: I don’t agree with that analysis at all. This is precisely the right time because  Parliament will resume next week, which gives my caucus colleagues an opportunity  to deliver their judgment on who should be the next Senate Leader in a timely way  so that we can get on with the job as Parliament comes together.

I’ve always had in my mind that this was the appropriate time to announce new  arrangements as we move back into the Parliamentary session.

PM: Have any other MPs had conversations with you, Prime Minister, about leaving  and are you expecting more resignations before the election?

PM: Colleagues come to me from time to time, as Nicola and Chris Evans did. I don’t  have before me at the moment anybody who is saying that they want to leave at the  next election other than people who have already publically stated.

JOURNALIST: Did you ring other ministers to sound them out about their futures and  did you consider a wider Cabinet reshuffle?

PM: No, my view was always that this should be a limited reshuffle, so just the  necessary arrangements to replace Chris Evans and Nicola Roxon.

And then once you do so, obviously there’s a set of consequential and changes.

JOURNALIST: What do you say to people who are saying this looks like a  Government in chaos? The events of the last three days have just created this  impression of total turmoil.

PM: Well why on earth would anybody say that?

Number one, I’ve named the election date giving people more stability and certainty  than they’ve ever had before.

Number two, I’m here today making what is a very long-planned announcement  having had the opportunity to discuss with both Chris and Nicola their views about  their futures in the course of last year.

JOURNALIST: But even that order, with respect Prime Minister, seems rather odd.  You announce the election date on Wednesday of last week and you said that it was  going to allow you to get on with the serious business of governing, you could  remove politics from the equation and get on with the serious business of governing.

And now we find that you are having a major personnel change.

PM: Well this is governing. This is the real world. People make decisions about their  own lives and their families and their futures. Chris and Nicola came to some  decisions about that.

This is the right time to announce this change, moving as we are into the  Parliamentary week and a caucus ballot to fill Senate Leadership.

I decided this is the right time to do it, it’s the right way around.

JOURNALIST: There’s a lot of speculation that one of the reasons why you  announced the election so far out was because in the event of by-elections arising  you can delay them.

Should for example, Robert McClelland take up a new job, we learned today that  he’s been applying for jobs with the New South Wales Government, and leave  before the election, how far do you plan to delay by-elections if that occurs.

Will you hold by-elections in the next couple of months if they arise or will you  attempt to delay them?

PM: All of this is not a decision for me; it’s a decision for the Speaker if the occasion  should arise in which a by-election would be held.



So it’s a decision for the Speaker.

Common sense will tell you when, indeed history tells you, that when you are close  in to the normal time for an election, it might well suit the convenience of the people  to not be required to go out and vote twice, and to have a vote for their electorate at  the normal election time. But these are decisions for the Speaker.

On the story about Robert McClelland, I read it this morning and I must admit it  struck me as a speculation upon speculation.

I don’t think it’s any mystery to anyone that Robert McClelland is a very senior  lawyer, and that he may have an aspiration post his time in politics to use his legal  skills again.

JOURNALIST: There’s a suggestion around today that some lawyers are saying that  there may be a sort-of faux caretaker principle that applies because of the  announcement of the election date so far in advance.

And there may be some requirements for the Opposition Leader to be given equal  billing ahead of the official election campaign.

Can you tell us what legal advice if any you’ve taken on whether or not any kinds of  caretaker principles will apply ahead of the August dissolution of Parliament?

PM: Well the technical caretaker period is once the Parliament is dissolved and the  writs are issued, and I haven’t done anything to change any of those arrangements  other than give people certainty and transparency about the date.

I note that there’s some speculation today about obligations about balanced  coverage. Well frankly balanced coverage I think is a very good thing.

I would quite like to see around the nation an outbreak of balanced coverage. So if  we do see that outbreak around the nation that will get a big tick from me.

What I would say about balanced coverage is it ought to bring to the Australian  people the facts and the details that they need.

The Australian people are now in the situation where they don’t have to walk into a  polling booth wondering.

There is a sufficient time and sufficient space for them to have every detail that they  need, every policy detail, every costing detail, and the obligation is on every  participant in the 2013 election to put people in that position.

And if they refuse to put people in that position, then I think people will be very, very  suspicious why they are refusing.

JOURNALIST: Have you taken any legal advice though on this issue?

PM: No, I haven’t taken legal advice.

JOURNALIST: You’ve elevated Mike Kelly and Justine Elliot has left. But you’ve got  three new Parl Secs-

PM: That’s because Mark Dreyfus has been promoted, so his Parliamentary  Secretary is vacant, Mike Kelly’s been promoted and Justine Elliot has chosen  (inaudible).

JOURNALIST: Is this the team you are taking to the next election now? Is this the  team for the next election, the front bench team?

PM: I believe this is the team for the next election.

Look, we live in a real world and you can never wholly discount that someone has a  family circumstance, has an illness present. These are the things of real life, the real  world.

Of course, I don’t want to see that happen to anybody in the Parliament regardless of  which political party they’re in or whether they serve in anybody’s Executive or don’t  serve in anybody’s Executive.

But I’ve been here long enough to see colleagues announce that they’ve got breast  cancer, to see colleagues announce that they’re facing other major health issues.

So I can’t wish away the real world, whether it’s for us, whether it’s for you or  anybody else, but this is the team that I intend to take to the election.

JOURNALIST: Did Chris Bowen express a desire to be removed, or had he  requested a move from immigration?

PM: Chris Bowen is very enthusiastic and welcoming of this move. He believes it’s  the right time for a new challenge and so I’ve been able to meet that desire for a new  challenge.

JOURNALIST: Did he express a desire to move from immigration?

PM: He wanted a new challenge, so that necessarily means he was looking for a  change of responsibilities. He served as Minister for Immigration for a long time now,  it’s a difficult portfolio, very demanding portfolio.

He’s looking forward to the opportunity to do something else.

JOURNALIST: Senator Evans, you said you welcome the fact you brought humanity  back to the immigration portfolio.

But just about everything you did has been rolled back. Nauru is open again, and  we’re looking at Manus Island. Are you comfortable with those policies? Do you think  that you made a mistake as Minister?

EVANS: No look, I think the main change we made under my leadership in the  portfolio was to try and treat people as human beings.

You have to make difficult public policy choices all along.

When people debate these issues they don’t necessarily apply much balance. I’m  the Minister that abolished TPVs, I’m very proud of that. I’m also the Minister that  opened Christmas Island, the facility at Christmas Island.

When one tries to write the story it’s always one-dimensional.

I always believed we needed stronger border security, always believed that we were  going to face this challenge of unauthorised arrivals throughout time.

Unauthorised migration is going to be a huge issue this century. All countries are  dealing with it. And you have to keep responding with public policy responses.

But I am proud of the changes I made. We did things like abolish detention debt for  people who are found to be owed protection they weren’t then saddled with paying  debt when they were in detention.

So there were a lot of things we did that remain. But we always have to make public  policy adjustments to deal with this huge issue.

So I do remain proud of the changes about the way we deal with people, that was a  major change we made.

We got rid of the cynicism that saw an Immigration Minister refer to a child as ‘it’ and  brought back, I thought what was a much more, a policy that reflected Australian  values.

And I think that’s continued under Minister Bowen.

JOURNALIST: And Ms Roxon, you thanked Kevin just a few minutes ago, but you  launched an absolutely savage attack on him during the leadership dispute on behalf  of Julia Gillard.

Do you regret that, do you think you went too far?

ROXON: No I don’t. But I think it’s appropriate to thank, and in fact the list could also  be a lot longer, to thank the leaders that you serve under as a Minister; the great  opportunities and the confidence that people put in you when they chose you for  those roles.

And I’ve always been very public about the good work that Kevin led in the health  department and despite comments and differences that we had, I’ve been quite open  about the strengths of that work.

And it’s something that as Prime Minister, he will always be able to be proud of his  time as Prime Minister.



I could just as much - in fact I will take the opportunity too since you asked - to  thank Simon Crean, the leader who first gave me the opportunity to be on the front  bench to be the Shadow Minister for Children and Youth Affairs.

I think it’s the one time I seriously have embarrassed myself in thinking Shakira was  a cocktail. So my youth portfolio work was perhaps not as strong as some of my  other work.

I am very pleased though for example that that time went right back to when we  wanted in Opposition to have a Children’s Commissioner, something that shortly the  Government will be able to announce the first appointment of the first Children’s  Commissioner.

A lot of good work that we get to do that comes from time in Opposition and time in  Government, and I don’t think there’s any reason that people shouldn’t be properly  thanked for showing confidence (inaudible).

JOURNALIST: Who do you think will replace you in Gellibrand and would you be  happy for it to be Senator Feeney - is that a possibility?

ROXON: Preselection fights will no doubt go with all the enthusiasm they always do  in Gellibrand.

Part of the importance of being able to make this announcement now is that there is  the opportunity for the preselection to go ahead.

There isn’t somebody who already in the wings or been anointed - that process will  be undertaken by the state.

I haven’t got any immediate plans post-politics. My immediate plans are to spend the  next six months here in Parliament as part of Government, and make sure that I do  my bit to ensure that Julia and the Labor team are re-elected, because I believe  we’ve got a lot of good work to keep doing.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has shown a lot of confidence in you, promoting  you and making history in doing so. How torn were you in making this decision, and  can you give us some idea of when you started thinking about it given that you were  only promoted fairly recently.

ROXON: Well I was very torn because it’s a huge privilege, it’s a great opportunity,  and it’s an opportunity to make a difference to the community.

But the good thing about the Labor Party is actually we’re full of people who want to  make a difference for the community. And I do truly believe that everyone has a  different personal capacity.

Some of us can only work at 200 per cent for a certain amount of time. Others can  keep going for longer.

So it was a difficult decision, but it is also one that I can make with some pride. I’m  very satisfied with work that I’ve been able to be part of, as part of the Government.  And I have no sense as Chris Evans said that any of us are ever indispensable.

And I think Mark will make a fantastic Attorney, he’s got years and years of  experience, he’s very well-regarded, he will step into that role seamlessly. And I wish  him all the best and will work closely with him to assist him in any way that he needs  me to.

JOURNALIST: Any updates on Morris Iemma for the seat of Barton? Have you  spoken to him? And lastly can you confirm there is a meeting tomorrow for Labor?

PM: On matters associated with New South Wales, you need to speak to the New  South Wales branch.

About the preselection in Barton, I’ve said everything I’ve got to say on that. I’ve  made it clear that it’s not my intention to involve myself in that preselection when I  announced Nova Peris for the Senate.

I said I would only use my capacity as Leader rarely and I was content to leave  preselections to party processes, and so the process in Barton will be a New South  Wales branch process.

JOURNALIST: Senator, you’re replacement as Senate Leader, given the right tend  to win most ballots in the ALP, will it go to Senator Conroy or is there a deal that it  goes to the left?

EVANS: You know how our party processes work, having observed it many times.  Reality is that it’s an election by the full Labor Party caucus.

We have no shortage of people could serve in that role, five Cabinet Ministers and a  couple of junior Ministers.

I expect the successful candidate to come from that group.

Senator Conroy’s been my deputy for eight years, he’s very experienced. But we  also have people like Senator Wong, Senator Carr, Senator Ludwig, I think they all  have to make their decisions about those things.

I’ve never been one for predicting Labor Party ballots, if there is to be one. But  there’ll be a strong field of candidates if they were to choose to run.

No doubt we’ll see how it moves over the next couple of days and the Prime Minister  indicated there will be nominations on Monday in full caucus.

JOURNALIST: How demanding is that particular job?

PM: How long have you got?

EVANS: It is a challenging job, it does take a lot of time. But as I say, we’ve got a  very good team in the Senate with a lot of cooperation and discipline.

And we were a very effective I think in Opposition during the time of the Howard  absolute majority in the Senate Parliament.

And I think since then we’ve been a very successful team for the Government in the  Senate.

The fact that you haven’t been writing a lot about the Government in the Senate  means we must be going okay.

PM: Okay, we will complete it there. Can I just say two things.

Number one, we don’t normally hear applause at press conferences and I think we  did hear applause because members of Chris and Nicola’s staff are here, so thank  you to you.

And number two, I hope you spend part of the day saying a final farewell, which may  or may not involve the drinking of Shakira.

Thanks very much.

[ENDS]



