







Transcript

Senator Mathias Cormann  Shadow Assistant Treasurer  Shadow Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation  Coalition Campaign Spokesman





Tuesday 20 August 2013

Fairfax Online - Breaking Politics

Subjects: 2013 election, paid parental leave scheme, border protection

EO&E.....................................................................................................................................

......



PRESENTER:   To our feature interview this morning, much of the attention of the campaign at the  moment has been on the Opposition’s, the Coalition’s paid parental leave scheme  considered by many to be overly generous given that it would return a full salary for six  months to a mother on $150,000. Is it too rich, that seems to be a key campaign  question? One of those with many of the answers is the Shadow Assistant Treasurer,  Mathias Cormann, who comes into Breaking Politics regularly through the campaign,  and he was in here a short time ago.

Mathias welcome to Breaking Politics.

MATHIAS CORMANN:   Good to be back.

PRESENTER:   The Financial Review this morning says that a new Prime Minister, Tony Abbott, would  face a post-election revolt over his paid parental leave scheme.  I don’t expect you to  confirm that that is likely to happen but Liberals and Nationals are worried about the  cost of this scheme, aren’t they?

MATHIAS CORMANN:   That is not what is going to happen. The Coalition is united behind the policy to  implement a fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme. That is the policy which we took to  the last election. It is a policy that we confirmed in this election. We consider this to be a  very important economic reform for Australia. It is an important measure to boost  population growth, to boost productivity growth and to boost workforce participation by  women.  It is a good policy for families and it is a good policy for our economy.

PRESENTER:  Why if Liberals and Nationals are united on this isn’t Colin Barnett, the Liberal Premier  of Western Australia, singing from the Coalition’s song sheet on this and saying he won’t  contribute to the scheme.  And Jeff Kennett, former Liberal Premier in Victoria, saying  it’s an extraordinary extravagance?

MATHIAS CORMANN:

Well, what Colin Barnett has said is that he would work with an Abbot-led Coalition  Government to implement the scheme. He is not going to be required to make additional  contributions. What is on offer for the states is, for state governments to be able to offer  additional workplace benefits to their employees, to their expecting mothers working for  state governments, without having to incur the additional cost. All that is expected from

state governments is for them to continue to make their existing contribution. We’re very  confident that between now and 1 July 2015 when the scheme is due to come into effect  these sorts of transitional arrangements will be able to be sorted out with all state and  territory governments.

PRESENTER:  What percentage of the cost of the scheme will be covered by the levy on big business  that’s always been slated as the way that you would pay for it?

MATHIAS CORMANN:  We’ve been very clear in our policy about the costing. There are different elements to  this.  Firstly, we would be discontinuing Labor’s current inferior scheme. There is a  saving that comes with that. There will be some automatic and associated flow-on  savings and increases in revenue as a result of the higher benefit being paid with a more  generous paid parental leave scheme. There also under our scheme would not be the  opportunity to double dip. Under Labor’s current scheme, federal public servants are able  to access not one but two fully taxpayer funded paid parental leave schemes. Labor is  saying that other working mothers are not allowed to access even one fair dinkum paid  parental leave scheme. So we will scrap the capacity for public servants in particular to

double dip.  And then of course, the most significant part of what is funding the net  additional cost of our scheme is the paid parental leave levy which is a 1.5 per cent levy  imposed on Australia’s largest businesses.  That is one out of 200 companies across  Australia will end up paying a 1.5 per cent levy which means that overall those  companies are not going to be any worse off than under Labor. Because Labor is not  promising any cuts to the company tax rate.  Under Labor the company tax rate will  remain at 30 per cent.

PRESENTER:  Ok, the most significant element you are saying in covering the cost is the big business  levy as announced by Tony Abbott when he first flagged this scheme but that doesn’t put  a percentage on the cost of the scheme that will be covered by the levy, do you know  that?

MATHIAS CORMANN:  What we’ve said very clearly is that our scheme is fully costed by the Parliamentary  Budget Office and it is fully funded. We have identified the net additional cost in our  policy released the other day, $6.1 billion over the forward estimates and $5.5 billion a  year overall once it is fully in train per year moving forward. But of course we will be  releasing all of the detail and all of our detailed costings with all of the detail that you are  asking about in good time before the next election as part of the release of all of the costs  of all of our policies and all of the savings measures that we will put in place to make  sure that our policies are properly funded.

PRESENTER:  So just to be clear do you know the percentage number at issue here.  The percentage that  the levy will cover of the total cost and you are simply not saying or is it something you  don’t know yet?

MATHIAS CORMANN:  Of course I know how much according to our costings the paid parental leave levy will  raise and in good time before the election we will be releasing all of the detailed costings  and all of the detailed savings measures. The information is out there for all to see, that  the additional cost from our fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme is $6.1 billion over  the forward estimates. Most of the funding for that comes from the 1.5 per cent paid  parental leave levy imposed on Australia’s largest companies.  There are some other  savings and revenue implications that are a direct consequence of our additional benefits  paid to working mothers. That is of course the same as would be the case under Labor’s  original scheme. When they introduced their original scheme there were the same  associated automatic savings and increases in revenue. But the point to make here is a  very important point. Contrary to what Labor is asserting there will be no cuts, absolutely  no cuts, in any other programs to fund our paid parental leave scheme. Our paid parental  leave scheme is fully funded on the basis of the four elements that I’ve just outlined to  you.

PRESENTER:

But the full funding, we need to wait to the last week of the campaign and the release of  the costings details to understand.

MATHIAS CORMANN:  It will be released in the normal course of events, in the course of this campaign, as part  of our full release of all of our costings and all of our savings. And may I remind you that  once we release that information, what it will show is that the Budget bottom line will be  better off under the Coalition than it would be under Labor.

PRESENTER:  And on the question of Budgets, you have long and vigorously argued the debt and deficit  problems under the current government, under the Labor government.

MATHIAS CORMANN:  Indeed.

PRESENTER:  You and others have highlighted that.  Can you seriously argue that and not at least be a  little bit worried about fully reimbursing women on $150,000 a year for six months after  they have had a baby?

MATHIAS CORMANN:  Our policy is fully costed and fully funded. It is not having a negative impact on the  Budget bottom line whatsoever. It is fully funded without the need for any cuts in other  areas, so I’m not really quite sure where that question fits in to that scheme of things.

PRESENTER:  It is a cost. It is a cost on our community at a time that you highlight costs on our  community and costs on our government’s Budget as being almost sinful, so it does fly in  the face of your Budget debt and deficit arguments.

MATHIAS CORMANN:  Our plan is very much a plan for stronger economic growth.  We have a plan for stronger  growth and more jobs. That is why we’re scrapping the Carbon Tax, we’re scrapping the  Mining Tax, we are going to deliver a 1.5 per cent cut in the company tax rate. All of that  in order to create more jobs. Part of our economic plan is to boost population growth,  boost productivity growth and boost workforce participation by women. It is all part of  our plan to grow our economy more strongly, because ultimately stronger growth is not  only good for our prosperity as a nation, not only good for superannuation returns for  retirees across Australia, it is also good for government revenue. Because when it is all  said and done, stronger growth means more revenue for government to fund the  important services of government without the need to introduce all these new or  increased taxes that we’ve been getting under the Labor party over the last six years.

PRESENTER:

What does it say that the Rudd government’s PNG solution is already under legal  assault?  Already challenged by an asylum seeker?

MATHIAS CORMANN:  The Labor party has a very bad track record on border protection. Kevin Rudd of course  was the Prime Minister that dismantled the successful border protection policies of the  Howard Government.  He is the Prime Minister that started the boats coming again. Ever  since, Labor has been scrambling to try and fix up the mess that Kevin Rudd created  when he was first Prime Minister and of course the Labor party has a very bad track  record in the courts. Their Malaysian people swap deal was thrown out by the courts. We  know that they didn’t really think things through very well in relation to this latest  attempt to fix Kevin Rudd’s mess. We are committed to policies that will stop the boats  and will protect our borders, that will get us back to the sort of strong border protection  framework that we had in place in the past. We are not confident that Labor will ever be  able to deliver on it. They don’t believe in it. They have a history of incompetence and  not thinking things through. So let’s see where this will lead us.

PRESENTER:  To close though, isn’t the problem with the legal challenge against the Papua New  Guinea solution that it indicates the likelihood that the even tougher in many respects  solutions offered by the Coaltion are almost certainly going to come under legal assault  as soon as you are in government, if you are?

MATHIAS CORMANN:  That’s not right, because the policy framework, the strong robust border protection policy  framework that we put in place in the past, that we are committed to restoring, has never  been successfully challenged. It is the Labor party that dismantled a successful system. It  is Kevin Rudd who started the boats coming again. It is the Labor party that has  scrambled unsuccessfully ever since to try and stop them. And of course it is the Labor  party that has got into trouble in the courts before because they didn’t dot their ‘I’s and  they didn’t cross their ‘T’s.  That is the problem with this Labor Government.

PRESENTER:  Mathias Cormann, as always we’re very grateful for the time to talk to you.

MATHIAS CORMANN  Always good to talk to you.



[ENDS]







