



THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  Member for Maribyrnong  Shadow Minister for Education and Workplace Relations

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   SKY NEWS CHANNEL   INTERVIEW WITH LAURA JAYS  THURSDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2013

SUBJECT/S: Labor Leadership Ballot

LAURA JAYES:  Joining me is one of the men vying for the leadership and that  is Bill Shorten.  Thanks so much for joining us from Melbourne this morning.

BILL SHORTEN:  Good morning, Laura.

LAURA JAYES:      Now, firstly I want to ask you- early on in the piece you were  pretty confident that Caucus was going to back you in.  Are you still confident?

BILL SHORTEN:  Yes, I am. This leadership ballot is really about answering the  question: how does Labor make ensure that it’s relevant to the future lives of  Australians?

I’ve spoken to all of our Caucus members, and I think many of them have  responded positively to the proposition that whilst we’ve got to learn the lessons  of the past, what we need to do is be able to explain to Australians how the Labor  Party can best make sure that Australia’s future is the best possible future that  we can hope for.

LAURA JAYES:  Now, the rank and file ballot- now, there’s a poll out this  morning that shows that Anthony Albanese is way ahead when it comes to voters  in Victoria and New South Wales. If that’s reflective amongst branch members  today, is that a bit of a concern for you?

BILL SHORTEN:  I believe that I’ve got strong support from my parliamentary  colleagues, the people I work alongside every day.  I’ve done 46 membership  forums, talking to people all around Australia - Sydney, Melbourne and  everywhere else too. I believe I’ve got strong support among ALP members. I  believe over the next three years, if I’m given the privilege of leading Labor, I can  bring strong support among Australians based upon a positive vision for the  future.

It’s really important that the Opposition - Labor - doesn’t just define ourselves as  being against the Coalition, but rather that Australian politics is a competition  between Liberal and Labor as to who offers the best future for Australians.

LAURA JAYES:  Now, there hasn’t been a huge amount of policy difference  between you and Anthony Albanese.  Does this show that, particularly in Caucus,  it will be a vote that will go very much down factional lines besides, perhaps, a  few leaked votes that go to either side?  Do you agree?

BILL SHORTEN:  I think that one shouldn’t underestimate the elected members  of the Parliamentary Labor Party. They take their obligations very seriously. They  will pick the candidate who they believe in good conscience is in the best  interests of Australia and the Labor Party. So I believe that factional  considerations are secondary.

What I also know is that in this ballot, whoever gets elected, what unites us all is  our interest to do the best thing by the party and by the nation. When you talk  about policy differences and ideas; I’ve used this last four weeks to help create a  mandate for change in Australia and the Labor Party about ideas in the  future. I’ve specifically articulated the need for Labor to be the party of science,  research, and innovation.  I’ve specifically articulated the need for Labor to reach  out to new constituencies including small business and in the regions. And I’ve  also specifically articulated the need for Labor to be a brave party, to tackle  issues such as domestic violence, and making sure that people on the disability  pension aren’t treated as forgotten citizens in our own country. So it has been a  contest of ideas.

LAURA JAYES:  You have made a fair few policy announcements - but have  you avoided some of the, perhaps, more prickly issues?  As I’ve travelled around  the country with you and Anthony Albanese and seen some of these debates,  what has always come up is this asylum seeker issue. How are you going to  reconcile Labor’s tough approach with the left, who are concerned about that  tough approach?  What are you going to do there if you become leader?

BILL SHORTEN:  I think the debate about refugees and immigration went off  track during the Howard years when Pauline Hanson raised her point of view,  then John Howard got distracted by that.  Australia is an immigrant nation. So, if  I’m Labor leader, what you will have is someone who firmly believes in the  benefits of immigration to Australia. We are, all of us, other than Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islanders, we are boat people or plane people.  It’s about time in  Australia that we all nailed our colours to the mast and said that immigration has  contributed a lot to Australia and within that, part of our immigration intake has to  include refugees.  But that doesn’t mean that you give the green light to people  smugglers.  We can’t have the sort of terrible, catastrophic drowning at sea.

So I believe it is a complex issue, but with me you’ll have someone that says  firmly and clearly that Australian Labor does support immigration but we want to  make sure that we have the criminal syndicates engaging in human trafficking  put out of business.

LAURA JAYES:  Okay- and what will you do on carbon tax policy?  Tony Abbott,  in his first term, will repeal the carbon tax. Will you go to the next election  promising to reinstate an ETS?

BILL SHORTEN: I believe that we do need to put a price on carbon pollution.  I  don’t believe that it is leadership by Australia’s elected representatives, to put off  until next week, next year, and next decade, dealing with challenges to our  environmental sustainability. So I do believe we should have a price on carbon  pollution.

As for what the Abbott government do- I mean, let’s face it, they’re not exactly  setting any land speed records for getting down to work. You get every  impression that they don’t want to do too much until next year. Australia can’t  afford to have a government who just wants to simply say the status quo is  enough. The rest of the world is getting on with life and we can’t afford to ignore  what’s happening.

LAURA JAYES:  Looking over the last month of this whole leadership contest, it  has been a bit of a month in limbo for Labor, perhaps, in terms of taking the  argument up to the government- was it all worth it do you think?  Or does there  need to be some tinkering of the rules that Kevin Rudd put in place?

BILL SHORTEN:  I believe that this process has been a good process for Labor  to engage its membership base. What happens when political parties lose  government is quite often they descend into an orgy of self-recrimination and  almost become a circular firing squad. Instead what we’ve had is a pretty civilised  proposition, a debate of ideas, and approaches.



I think that Anthony Albanese and myself, have indicated to Labor that win, lose,  or draw, Labor needs to be able to engage in its discussions and processes  without publicly attacking each other.

Disunity is death, and what the Labor party has done here is dusted ourselves  off. We’ve seen the verdict of the Australian people. We don’t want to throw away  the legacy of everything we did in the past because we did a lot of good  things. By the same token we can’t pretend that the situation is great electorally  for Labor. So Labor needs to connect with the people. We need to have a solid  party which is functioning well and welcoming of people and we need good  policies. The three Ps - the party, the policy, the Australian people.

LAURA JAYES:  I’ve heard that slogan a few times over the last month or so.

BILL SHORTEN:  Yes, well it’s staying.

LAURA JAYES:  The message that I’ve been picking up, particularly in the last  month, is that the main or the only reason Labor lost the election was because of  the leadership disunity.  Was there more than that, more than just disunity?   Were there some policies that didn’t go down well with the voting public that  Labor needs to reconsider?

BILL SHORTEN:  It wasn’t just disunity, but disunity was a large factor. In my  opinion, and it’s an opinion I’ve expressed to thousands of party members,  disunity was very damaging. Also what is challenging is that we can’t accept  every policy as right.

On the fundamentals; putting a price on carbon, the National Disability Insurance  Scheme, providing Australia with a 21st century National Broadband Network, our  economic management through the global financial crisis. They were good things  but that doesn’t mean that we should slavishly hold onto every policy.

I believe that we went too hard in the matter of sole parents. I also recognise that  from the first term there was still the legacy of the rushed implementation of the  pink batts. So, it doesn’t really matter what we tell ourselves, the Australian  people have told us these things.

What I also know though, going forward, is that Australians are living  longer.  They want to see more equal treatment of women in our society. Small  business is part of the Australian economy and needs more innovative policies to  support them.  The regions are fundamental to our future, not just the three big  east coast cities. And of course, we’ve got to engage in the digital revolution

that’s happening. The internet is changing the way young people connect with  each other and it’s changing business options.

There’s a lot of good things in Australia’s future, but the world doesn’t owe us a  living. And so what Labor has got to do is help navigate and articulate a path to  the future, where Australians can get ahead, and all Australians can be included.

LAURA JAYES:  Bill Shorten, good luck this afternoon.

