Page 1 of 16



SPEECH



HON JOE HOCKEY MP

SHADOW TREASURER

CEDA ECONOMIC & POLITICAL OVERVIEW CONFERENCE

BRISBANE

THURSDAY 28 FEBRUARY 2013



“HOW THE COALITION WILL ASSIST BUSINESS”

**CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**

I am delighted to be here today back in Brisbane with all my friends in the Sunshine state.

In my travels around Australia I am often told by business people how tough it has become to

do business in Australia.

They tell me that input costs are high, labour costs are high, regulation is high, the Australian

dollar is high, international competition is fierce, and profits are low.

Those that have business operations outside Australia point to the lower cost of doing

business in those countries and suggest that significant changes are necessary for Australia to

remain competitive.

I have been asking these business people to put numbers on it - to quantify the cost

disadvantage for Australian based operations.

The other day one did. He asked me to drop round to his home on a Sunday night and he

walked me through the figures.

Page 2 of 16



The numbers I am about to discuss are for a significant manufacturer with similar operations

in Australia and the United States.  They show energy and labour costs.

Energy Costs USA Europe Australia

Australian  Cost Premium

Electricity (cents p/kWh) 0.045 -- 0.09 100 %

Gas ($ / GJ) 4.28 -- 7.78 82 %

Carbon Tax (p/tonne (Scope 1 & 2))

0 $5.45 $23.00 --

Annual Carbon Tax Obligation 0 -- $ 12.55 m $ 12.55 m

Annual Carbon Tax Rebate 0 -- $   3.38 m $   3.38 m

Total annual energy cost $27.84 m -- $ 50.01 m $22.17 m



As you can see the cost of electricity per kilowatt hour in Australia is about double that in the

USA.

The figures show that the cost of gas per gigajoule is about 80% higher in Australia.

They show that the carbon tax in Australia of $23 per tonne is more than four times the

equivalent European carbon price.

This company has an annual carbon tax obligation in Australia of $12.6 million.   They

receive $3.4 million in industry assistance for their trade exposed products but the company

is emphatic in claiming that not all its production is covered.

In Europe the carbon tax obligation would be less than $3 million.  In the USA there is no

carbon payment at all.

The next charts show the detail of employee costs in Australia and the USA.

Page 3 of 16



Labour Cost Average cost per employee

Payroll USA Australia

Standard hours per week 40 38

Overtime hours worked 8 2

Overtime multiplier rate 1.5 2

Overtime hours paid (overtime hours worked x overtime multiplier rate) 12 4

Subtotal, Total paid hours p/week 52 42

Average weekend penalty hours -- 6

Overtime multiplier rate -- 2

Penalty hours -- 12

Total paid hours per week 52 54



This slide shows that the Australian employees work fewer standard hours than their US

counterparts and the same overtime hours including weekends, and yet the Australian

employees get paid for more full time equivalent hours due to higher penalty factors.

Labour Cost Average cost per employee

Payroll USA Australia

Average rate per hour $20.13 $35.28

Pension/Superannuation (rate) 10 % 9 %

Pension/Superannuation ($) $2.01 $3.18

Hourly rate paid to employee $22.14 $38.46

Weekly paid hours including overtime 52 54

Weekly wage subtotal $1,151 $2,077

Add: Annual Leave and Long Service Leave $51 $165

Total $1,202 $2,241

Annual Salary $62,520 $116,556



This slide shows that the Australian employees receive a higher average rate of hourly pay

which flows through to a higher average annual salary.

Page 4 of 16



Labour Cost Average cost per employee

Payroll USA Australia

Add: Taxes and Insurance

Payroll Taxes (rate) 7.65 % 5.45 %

Workers Compensation (rate) 2.38 % 7.37 %

Medical Insurance (rate) 24.73 % --

Subtotal $ 18,917 * $ 14,939 **

Total Cost $ 81,437 $ 131,495

*   Excludes superannuation

** Includes superannuation



The final slide shows the average annual cost per employee for this particular company is

about $81,437 for employees in the US versus $131,495 in Australia including overtime,

payroll taxes and other on-costs.  This is a cost premium of 61%.

These numbers are all in Australian dollars so the current high value of the dollar is adding to

the competitive disadvantage.

Whilst it is only a snapshot of the operating costs of the business and it excludes other areas

of business cost such as cost of capital, cost of credit and tax arrangements for depreciation

and so on….the picture is pretty clear.

I find it hard to believe that other built-in costs such as regulatory costs in the form of red

tape and green tape are more onerous in the United States than in Australia.

Moreover I am prepared to accept that the sheer scale of both demand and supply in the

United States makes other costs such as logistics a far greater burden in Australia than in

North America.

I am sure this is not a surprise to you.

Page 5 of 16



These comparisons raise the very simple question of how Australian businesses are supposed

to compete in global markets when the cost premium for operating in Australia is so high

relative to other developed nations.  The cost disadvantage is of course even more marked

against the developing nations to our Asian north.

This competitive disadvantage is compounded by a government which has declared war on

the business community with new and increased taxes and capricious policy decisions.

So what is the Coalition going to do to make a difference?

We can’t change everything but these are issues about which the Coalition is very concerned

and we need to respond where we can.



Cost of labour

Australian labour is expensive. Is that a bad thing?  No, not at all.   We can compete with

higher wages provided our output per worker is globally competitive.

Higher household income means that our people have high spending power.  That provides a

high standard of living and facilitates strong household consumption.

And it benefits businesses because it provides a strong and expanding domestic market into

which they can sell their goods and services.

Australia’s standard of living must not go backwards. There is no national benefit in cutting

wages.

What we do need to do is to ensure that our workers have the skills and knowledge that our

industry needs.  Education, training and retraining is a key step to unlock labour productivity

gains.

And we need to ensure that employment conditions can meet the varied and changing

requirements of Australian workers and Australian businesses.  And that is why, as a starting

point, we have already signalled that we will, within the framework of the Fair Work Act,

Page 6 of 16



look at cautious, careful and responsible improvements to labour market regulation to ensure

better outcomes for workers and for business.

Whilst our more detailed policy will be released well before the next election we have

already announced our commitment to re-introduce the Australian Building and Construction

Commission with all of its old powers to be a vigilant cop on the beat to crack down on

industrial thuggery around construction sites across the country.



Productivity

More broadly, the way to accommodate and indeed thrive with high wage costs is to focus on

lifting productivity so that the per unit labour cost is competitive.

The Coalition has a strong six point productivity growth plan.

First, there will be genuine welfare reform to lift participation in work.  As an example of

what can be done I refer you to the Coalition policies at the last election to improve outcomes

for mature and young Australians.

Second, there will be reform of the public sector to improve the efficiency of its operations

and to ensure it is providing the services which only government can best provide.

Third, we will slash $1 billion of red and green tape to reduce business regulatory costs. As

an example of this we will revisit the FOFA (Future of Financial Advice) reforms to remove

costly duplication and red tape that has been imposed on the entire Financial Services

industry.

Fourth, we will review competition policy to ensure that large and small businesses are

competing on a genuinely level playing field. And I particularly want to recognise the

significance of recent comments by Terry Davis the Group Managing Director of Coca Cola

Amatil who recognised as a major supplier to Coles and Woolworths, that a structural

imbalance exists between the major supermarkets and suppliers and that there is a need for a

national debate.

Fifth, we will ensure Commonwealth spending on infrastructure provides value for money.

Moreover we will work in partnership with our state colleagues to deliver initiatives like our

$1 billion contribution to the Gateway Motorway upgrade here in Brisbane.

Page 7 of 16



And the sixth initiative as I have already mentioned, we will look at incremental

improvements to labour market regulation within the framework of the Fair Work Act.



Energy Costs

Australia should have more affordable energy. We have enormous reserves of energy and in

particular an abundance of coal and gas.

And yet, as we have seen, Australian businesses face costs for energy that are relatively high

by global standards.

The most direct step the Federal government can take to lower electricity and gas prices is to

abolish the carbon tax.  Treasury’s own modelling suggests the carbon tax increased retail

electricity prices by 10% and retail gas prices by 9%, and wholesale electricity prices by

40%.1 One of the first objectives of a Coalition government will be the repeal of the carbon

tax.  That will lead to immediate price relief for businesses and households.

As a side benefit it will also help to plug an emerging structural hole in the budget.

The carbon tax is shaping up as a major fiscal blunder.

The Carbon Pricing Mechanism commenced on 1 July 2012, with a fixed price period of

three years, commencing at $23 in 2012-13 and rising to $25.40 a tonne in 2014-15.  In 2015-16 the scheme will transition to a flexible price and be linked to the European market.

The government has linked an ever rising stream of spending to the carbon tax.  The

government’s own numbers show that the carbon tax package as a whole is projected to be

underwater to the tune of around $4 billion over the 4 years from 2011-122. So abolishing the

tax and its associated spending actually improves the Budget bottom line!

Current projections in the 2012-13 MYEFO show the government expects to raise just over

$35 billion (accrual) from carbon pricing over the forward estimates.



1  Strong Growth, Low Pollution, Modelling a Carbon Price, Overview p8, July 2011  2  Clean Energy Bill Explanatory Memorandum p41

Page 8 of 16



However the gap between Budget projections and actual receipts based on new policy

parameters means that the Budget hole is significantly larger.

And the key reason for this is that revenue projections for 2015-16 in the May 2012 Budget

and MYEFO are based on an estimated carbon price of $29 a tonne.

However, as we discussed, the price of carbon in Europe has recently been about one fifth of

that, at less than $6 a tonne.

The Australian economy and the Australian budget are balanced on a knife edge.

The government expects that the carbon price will go up and up and up with an increasing

burden on business.

But if it doesn’t, and instead falls to the recent price in Europe, then while the burden on

business will be reduced there will be a significant structural hole in the budget to add to the

existing black hole of unfunded promises.

If the Treasurer fails to have a realistic forward estimate in the Budget then there will be a

great and unfair burden placed on the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of the

Department of Finance to provide realistic numbers in the Pre Election Economic and Fiscal

Outlook released 10 days into the election campaign.

This is but one example of many conflicting pressures on senior public servants in the lead up

to the publication of realistic PEFO data. Other areas of concern include inflated revenue

estimates in company tax receipts, massive underestimation of asylum seeker costs and, of

course, perennial embarrassing writedowns in mining tax receipts.

I have no doubt that as things stand the budget we inherit if elected will be far worse than so

far revealed by published information.



Tax

Business has been damaged by the sheer capriciousness of tax policy.

Page 9 of 16



This government has announced 27 new or increased taxes since coming to office in

November 2007.

The Business Tax Working Group established by the government was supposed to be a forum

under which new business taxation arrangements could be negotiated and agreed.  Business

groups participated in good faith with the belief it would give them a say and provide some

forward notice of any reforms.

But then out of the blue the government announced in MYEFO an $8.3 billion claw forward

of business tax revenue by moving from quarterly to monthly pay as you go instalments for

large companies.  There was no regard to the pressure this may place on cash flow and

investment.

And more recently the government announced with no warning it was funding its Orwellian

titled “Plan for Australian Jobs” package by cutting the Research and Development tax break

for large companies, reaping $1 billion over four years.

The Government has become immensely unpredictable on tax policy despite the charade of

consultation.

Remember the long promised cut to the company tax rate which was withdrawn without

warning.

Then there were the recent retrospective changes to tax consolidation cost setting rules, which

along with retrospective changes to transfer pricing measures shored up $8 billion of revenue

for this Government.

The business community could be forgiven for thinking the government views it simply as a

cash cow for funding Labor’s pet projects and re-election spending.

Any notion that this government is in partnership with business to grow wealth and jobs has

long been consigned to the dustbin.

Perhaps the Treasurer’s greatest failure on tax is the bungled Minerals Resource Rent Tax.

Page 10 of 16



This is a tax that has been through 5 different structures with 7 sets of revenue estimates.  The

initial Resources Super Profits Tax was originally estimated to raise $12 billion in its first

two years.  The revenue estimates have been progressively reduced such that the seventh and

latest version of the MRRT was estimated to raise only $4.4 billion over two years.

Now the government has been forced into admitting the tax raised just $126 million in its first

six months, in a year in which it was forecast to raise $2 billion.  That’s just a bit more than

the Queensland government raises from traffic infringement cameras each year.

Treasury Secretary Dr Martin Parkinson has admitted the design of the mining tax is

responsible for its failure to generate revenue, not the falling commodity prices, higher

currency and state royalties blamed by the government. It seems neither the Treasurer nor the

Prime Minister fully understood the real cost of the concessions agreed to when they

renegotiated the tax in private with the chief executives of the big three mining companies.

The government is now split on whether the tax should be renegotiated once again.

Making a bad situation even worse, the government linked expenditure of at least $15 billion

over the forward estimates to the revenue.  This was their plan to share the benefits of the

boom.

There were a couple of things wrong with this Labor plan.

First, a recent Reserve Bank study has shown that the mining industry has strong multiplier

effects on the rest of the economy.3 Employment in resource related activities is roughly

double that in the resource sector alone.  The benefits are already widely spread.

Second, for three years my colleagues and I have warned the Government not to put the

budget at risk of a structural hole by linking an ever rising stream of spending to an uncertain

and volatile tax.



3  20 February 2013, Industry Dimensions of the Resource Boom: An Input-Output Analysis, Research Discussion  Paper 2013-02



Page 11 of 16



The announced MRRT package of revenue and spending was projected to produce a

deterioration in the budget bottom line of at least $6 billion under the government’s own

estimates.  So even before its birth the Mining Tax was being spent and it was leaving the

Budget worse off.

I doubt even the government now knows the size of the structural hole in the budget given the

catastrophic shortfall in revenue.

Only this Treasurer could introduce a tax that raises almost no revenue, yet increases

Australia’s sovereign risk profile, adds record levels of red tape for business, and creates a

huge structural hole in the budget.

This tax was sold by the government as an “historic reform”.  As blunders go it was certainly

historic.

This is Labor’s new benchmark in public policy and the Treasurer must be held to account.

In government the Coalition will rescind this tax. And we will not proceed with its associated

spending except for the gradual increase in the Superannuation co-contribution from 9% to

12%.

It is difficult for many commentators to get their heads around the fact that abolishing a tax

package improves the Budget bottom line over the forward estimates. But the numbers, as

proven, do not lie.

Abolishing this tax will strengthen the Budget bottom line.

It will be doing the people of Australia a favour and it will be doing the budget a favour.



Australian Dollar

The current high value of the dollar continues to be of concern to those Australian businesses

that focus on exports and those which compete with imports.

Page 12 of 16



Since the Australian dollar was floated in December 1983 it has averaged around US$0.75.

At present it is sitting around US$1.03 and over the past two years it has been as high as

US$1.10.

A recent report from HSBC suggests the Australian dollar is the most overvalued currency in

the world4.

The Governor of the Reserve Bank has also recently observed that the Australian dollar is

somewhat overvalued.5 This was confirmed by Guy Debelle of the RBA this week.6

What is unusual about the current period is that the Australian dollar has not declined in line

with the softening in commodity prices and narrowing of interest differentials.

There have been suggestions that the current high value of the currency has been influenced

by the actions of offshore central banks in seeking to exert downward pressure on their own

currencies.   These have been termed “currency wars”.

Switzerland has been actively intervening in currency markets to hold down the value of the

Swiss Franc.  The USA and UK have indirectly facilitated downward pressure on their

currencies through ultra low cash rates and bouts of quantitative easing - essentially printing

money.  Europe also has a very low cash rate.  Japan is now under scrutiny for seeking to

lower the value of the Yen.

In addition, the relatively high yield and high credit rating of Australian government

securities has contributed to high demand for these instruments.  Over 80 per cent of the

quarter of a trillion dollars in Commonwealth securities on issue are now held offshore.

Finally, and critically, the fiscal policy of the Australian government has also contributed to

the higher Australian dollar.  It is now well accepted that running an expansionary fiscal

policy at a time of high capacity utilisation will lead to interest rates and a currency higher



4  HSBC Global Research, Currency War Special, 13 February 2013  5  Appearance before the House Standing Committee on Economics, 22 February 2013.

6 The Reserve Bank's Operations in Financial Markets, Guy Debelle  Assistant Governor (Financial

Markets), Address to the University of Adelaide Business School, UniBreakfast, Adelaide - 26 February  2013

Page 13 of 16



than they would otherwise be.  Four years of the most expansionary fiscal policy in our

history at a time of near full employment have played their part.

There is no doubt that the high Australian dollar is impeding the competitiveness of

Australian exporters and making life difficult for Australian producers who compete with

imported products.  Tourism, education, the rural sector and manufacturing are all feeling the

pain.

But on the other side of the coin, the high Australian dollar brings benefits for businesses

which rely on imported goods, and for consumers who purchase cheaper imported products.

So what could or should be done?

The first point is that there is no “correct” value for the A$.  We can look over time at how it

has moved relative to its fundamental drivers but that does not mean that any particular value

is “right or “wrong”.

Second, movements in the currency create losers but also winners.  Exporters and import

competing industries find life tough under a high dollar.  But importers and consumers love

the lower prices on imported goods.

Those who argue for a lower dollar are effectively arguing in favour of higher prices for

consumers - at a time when many households are under extreme financial pressure from

rising electricity prices and now the government’s carbon tax.

I note there have been recent comments from some respected names in economics suggesting

that the time for intervention has come.  These have included Warrick McKibbon who is an

ex member of the RBA Board.

The Reserve Bank has indicated that to engage in formal intervention in the currency market

they would need to be confident the market was irrational.  And they caution that they

haven’t seen that in this episode.7



7  Appearance before the House Standing Committee on Economics, 22 February 2013.

Page 14 of 16



We would need to be extremely cautious in tinkering with such a successful policy measure.

The floating of the Australian dollar has proved itself one of our most successful policy

reforms and has served Australia well over nearly three decades.

Having said that, a Coalition government would assist the Australian dollar in finding its

proper market value through running tighter fiscal policy, paying down government debt and

creating room for interest rates to be as low as possible subject to maintaining continued low

inflation.

We would also take a more pro-active stance in international forums to advocate for less

government interference in currency markets.  It is in the best interests of all nations that

currency values reflect their relative comparative advantage and that trade and capital flows

take place at prices set by the market.  Australia is a prime example of the benefits that can

flow from a “cleanly” floating currency and we must be a strong advocate of the global

advantages of this system.

More generally, we would encourage businesses to view the high dollar as an opportunity.  A

high dollar means imports are cheap.  Business should be utilising this period to import

cutting edge equipment and world class technology so as to boost the productivity and

efficiency of their domestic operations.

Finally, I am concerned about the recent revelations that the Treasurer took $500 million of

the RBA’s $1.1 billion 2011-12 profit as a dividend for the Budget, directly against the

advice of the Governor.8  If I become Treasurer I will as a matter of urgency meet with the

Reserve Bank to discuss its Reserve Fund requirements.  It is absolutely essential to the

public interest that the Reserve Bank has all the tools it needs to deal with the challenges of a

volatile global economy. This includes appropriate reserves at all times.



How the Coalition will Help Business

Beyond these specific measures the Coalition will assist business by building stronger

relationships and giving business a seat at the table.

8  Appearance before the House Standing Committee on Economics, 22 February 2013.

Page 15 of 16



The Coalition has a completely different strategy for its relationships with the business

community.

We do not see business as the enemy.  We do not view business as a cash cow to be tapped at

will.

Rather, the Coalition wants to be in a close and supportive partnership with business.  I am

not saying we will always do what business wants, but we will avoid changing policy without

consulting with business. We know that it is business - and not government - that initiates

investment, that drives productivity improvements, that creates jobs, and that ultimately

underpins the rising living standards of all Australians.

And so we will enter a compact with business.

I tell you today the Coalition will create a stable and certain environment under which

business can get on with doing what it does best.

We will get our own house in order.  We will balance the books, live within our means and

pay down the debt.

We will reduce the burden of taxation by removing the carbon and mining taxes.

We will facilitate stronger growth in productivity by building infrastructure that lifts

efficiency.  We will cut productivity sapping red tape whilst preserving a regulatory

framework that underpins the public good.

We will strengthen engagement with the Asian region to enhance business opportunities.  We

will broaden our focus beyond mining to include agriculture and services, we will strengthen

educational ties, and we will boost Asian language studies in schools.

Underpinning all of this, the Coalition will work to restore confidence.

Business needs to know that the government has a clear vision and the capability to

implement that vision with competence.

Business needs to be sure that the rules of the game will not be changed while the game is

being played, and that any reforms will be well telegraphed and negotiated in advance.

Page 16 of 16



Above all, business needs to know that the government recognises and values the

contribution that it makes to national prosperity.

And in the Coalition we do.

[ENDS]

