The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Operation Sovereign Borders update  Friday, 06 December 2013

Press conference, Sydney

Scott Morrison: Welcome to our 12th briefing of Operation Sovereign Borders.

Today we will be providing a further update on the incident at Christmas Island that I  reported on yesterday by way of statement and last night.

I am pleased to advise that all the now revised figure of 27 people that were on the  SIEV who came ashore, I can confirm on Monday, have now been located and are in  the care of the Department of Immigration and Border Protection at the Phosphate  Hill transfer facility or with the AFP en route to that facility, and that obviously  includes the nine who were unaccounted for last night and earlier this morning.

What was also believed to be five persons in the statement I issued last night on the  South East Coast has proved to be just four and hence the revision down from 28 to  27 persons that were involved in that incident.

This has been an unusual incident that raises a number of questions that will be the  subject of a standard post-incident operational assessment to ensure that any  lessons learnt from this incident are incorporated into future practice.

I wish to thank all of those involved in the search and rescue in relation to these 27  persons, all the on-island agencies, rangers, and others, but in particular the  Australian Federal Police who coordinated the on-land effort and, of course, those  from Border Protection Command who were involved with operations at sea.

We should never forget that this is a very big ocean in that vicinity. These are very  small vessels. And these 27 people who are now safe should count themselves  extremely fortunate that they did not suffer a far worse fate.

Anyone getting on a boat should not think that there is an Australian safety net  waiting for them. If they get on one of these boats, they put their lives in the hands of  people smugglers and far too often we know how that can end in the most fatal of  consequences, particularly as we go into this very dangerous period of the monsoon.

I am sure that all Australians will be very pleased that there has been no loss of life  on this occasion and all those 27 persons are now safe and accounted for.  Throughout this incident, the government has provided reports on the information as  we received it and then was able to be confirmed.

This is our standard practice for incidents of this nature and Lieutenant General  Campbell will provide a more detailed report on this incident in a few moments along  with the other arrival information, as is the normal practice for the period.

For weeks we have been warning that smugglers will try to lift their tempo of  ventures in this final window before the monsoon, and that is what we have seen in  this past week. Conditions have been favourable for such ventures and the  government will not be surprised if further ventures are attempted in the few weeks  remaining before the monsoon formally sets in.

Notwithstanding these latest arrivals, the decline in illegal arrivals by boat since  Operation Sovereign Borders remain at below 80 per cent of what they were in the  previous period following the Regional Resettlement Arrangement under the former  government up until the commencement of Operation Sovereign Borders.

This is an 80 per cent reduction which is not a job completed, there are still  challenges, as the events of the past week clearly demonstrate, and there is still  much work to be done, and that's why the full sweep of the government 's measures  are necessary to get that job done.

The other major development in that context over the past week was the action by  the Opposition to support the motion of the Greens in the Senate to seek to disallow  temporary protection visas. In an effort to ensure the people who had previously  arrived illegally by boat would be granted permanent visas and a pathway to  citizenship - as was the case under the previous government 's policies rather than a  temporary visa, which was the policy that the Coalition took to the last election and  received a strong mandate for.

We believe that handing permanent visas to people who have arrived illegally by  boat, regardless of when they have arrived, sends the worst possible message, and  we took immediate steps as a government to ensure that the action that was  undertaken in the Senate by Labor and the Greens was immediately negated.

As I reported to a separate media conference this week, the government moved to  shut and keep shut the Labor shop on permanent visas for people that arrived  illegally by boat. I used my powers under Section 85 of the Migration Act to cap the  number of onshore protection visas to ensure that no person who has arrived  illegally by boat will receive a permanent protection visa from this government.

I should also stress that all those who arrived by 17 August 2012 who also form the  vast majority of the 33 000 that are left behind of that case load that Labor failed to  process, those people are also all eligible to be transferred to Manus and Nauru for  offshore processing and they shouldn't assume that necessarily their claims would  be assessed here so long as we have the opportunity to send them to Nauru and  Manus in the future.

I will now pass over to Lieutenant General Campbell to provide his weekly report  and, as usual, he will take questions then and then will depart and I'll take questions  on these and any other matters.

Angus Campbell: Thanks, Minister.

Welcome to the Operation Sovereign Borders briefing for the week that will conclude  late this evening.

In summary, during this reporting period, 162 illegal maritime arrivals, six crew, and  27 people whose status is yet undetermined on four suspected illegal entry vessels  were or will shortly be transferred to Department of Immigration and Border  Protection Authorities on Christmas Island.

29 illegal maritime arrivals and two crew from one SIEV were transferred on Tuesday  3 December.

133 illegal maritime arrivals and four crew from two SIEV will be transferred early this  evening Eastern Australian Daylight Savings Time.

Their transfer was delayed and would otherwise have been concluded within the  normal weekly reporting period but for our response to the incident at Greta Beach  and maintenance work at the Christmas Island wharf.

At approximately 2: 40 yesterday afternoon Eastern Australian Daylight Savings  Time, National Parks and Wildlife officers on Christmas Island informed the  Australian Customs and Border Protection Service that they had assisted a group of  people from a vessel which the people claim had sunk near Greta Beach off the  south east coast of Christmas Island.

An on-land and at sea search and rescue effort was then coordinated by the  Australian Maritime Safety Authority's rescue coordination centre and local  Christmas Island Authorities to whom I'm extremely grateful.

27 people are believed to have been on the vessel, all of whom have now been  accounted for.

22 people from the vessel are at the Phosphate Hill detention facility in the care of  the Department of Immigration and Border Protection and have been so since  yesterday.

One single adult male is at the Christmas Island Hospital in a stable condition after  sustaining minor injuries. An additional four persons have been transferred into  immigration custody this morning after the assistance of the Australian Federal  Police in recovering them from, or in the vicinity of Greta Beach.

The fate of the vessel is currently unknown, but as indicated by the Minister, initial  reports from the persons travelling suggest it has sunk. We currently believe that the  people landed at Greta Beach on the very late evening of Monday 2 December,  possibly, pending on reports, into the very early hours of Tuesday. This may never  be clear.

Christmas Island, I would note, is a seamount prone to rough seas, jagged cliffs and  extensively covered by dense jungle. These people are extremely lucky to have  survived their ordeal.

Their arrival was not detected, but their outcome, as the Minister indicated, will be  the same as for all other illegal maritime arrivals. They will go to the offshore  processing centres either on Nauru or in Papua New Guinea.

While undetected arrivals have occurred very occasionally in the past, I have  directed the Commander of Border Protection Command to undertake an  assessment of our procedures, disposition, and capabilities to mitigate where  possible such surprises.

As I said last week, travel by boat is very dangerous and the outcome could have  been much worse for these people.

Also during this reporting period 46 people were transferred to an offshore  processing centre, 26 to Manus, and 20 to Nauru. And as of this morning there were  1165 people on Manus, 686 people in Nauru, and 2157 people at the Christmas  Island facilities.

Also during the last week, one illegal maritime arrival transferee was returned to Iran  after electing to go home voluntarily from Manus Island.

Thank you. Are there any questions?

Journalist: The condition of the asylum seekers, they were what, roaming jungle for  a few days, scavenging food?

Angus Campbell: Well, as we understand it, they arrived very late, as I said, on the  evening of Monday 2 and were able to make contact with persons yesterday, so I  think that they had a very difficult and distressing time.

It's not clear exactly how they came ashore and the circumstances or the weather,  nor, indeed of the particular way in which they were able to take care of themselves  as they struggled. Those cliffs are extremely difficult and jagged and the jungle very  thick.

Journalist: Did anyone on board have any communication equipment and if so did  anyone try to make a distress call [indistinct]?

Angus Campbell: We are unaware of any communication attempts by them and as  yet from the incident, I haven't received reports as to what material they were  carrying.

Journalist: How were they able to get to Christmas Island undetected?

Angus Campbell: As I've said previously, it is a big ocean and these are very small  wooden craft.

Now, we do have radar capability on both our vessels and at Christmas Island, but  depending on the nature of the general weather conditions and the sea swell, the  size of the craft, it is possible but rare to see these sorts of incidents arise, and that's  why I've asked the Commander of Border Protection Command to have a look at  both lay down capability and procedures to see if we can minimise such  circumstances.

Journalist: What nationality are they?

Angus Campbell: I've raised previously that we don't speak to questions of  nationality or ethnicity simply because it may draw attention to some people  smuggling syndicates as to those populations that have a disposition or propensity to  move, which we don't want to encourage.

Journalist: Can you tell us were there children, can you give us a bit more of a  breakdown…

Angus Campbell: I'm only aware at the moment that there may have been one  unaccompanied minor. I'm saying may have been, but I'm not aware of any young  children.

Journalist: You said there were 162 arrivals altogether this week?

Angus Campbell: So this is not including the 27 involved in the Greta Beach  incident. There was one arrival of 29 IMA on 3 December and accumulation of 133  will be offloaded this evening from two other vessels.

Journalist: Excuse me is that - are we correct in thinking that that will be a total of  five since Sunday? Five vessels since Sunday?

Angus Campbell: No. I'm looking at a combination of four vessels across this  reporting period, as I just described.

Journalist: That's a spike isn't it? That's an increase?

Angus Campbell: What we've seen in the period of Operation Sovereign Borders is  what I might describe as clustering of arrivals and I'm not really in a position to offer  you a judgement as to its implications or a trend analysis. It is too early.

We did have a period where there were 20 days with no arrivals. So I think I have to  watch what's happening and be able to work some sense of an analysis over time,  but I can't offer that comment at the moment.

Journalist: Did any of those other vessels capsize? Have you gone to the rescue?

Angus Campbell: We have had some vessels that have got into very serious  difficulty up close to Indonesian waters, in Indonesian waters over the period since  Operation Sovereign Borders commenced.

We haven't had vessels, to my recollection, at or in the immediate vicinity of  Christmas Island in those circumstances. We do, unfortunately, find vessels that are  not appropriately provisioned or, indeed, seaworthy as you might wish them to be,  as, indeed, I'm sure the illegal maritime arrivals would have preferred them to be.

Journalist: [Inaudible question]

Angus Campbell: I'll take this here and then we'll cross.

Journalist: Have you had any reports of boats that haven't made it? That have been  reported to have left Indonesia and have not arrived or have been detected by  Australian operators?

Angus Campbell: No we have not. In those circumstances you would have been  advised. And we would have done everything that we could in circumstances where  we knew that a boat was in distress, and working with our partners in the region also,  and any other mariners in the vicinity.

Journalist: General, just to clarify the numbers, you say that in the last reporting  period there were 162 people involved, but in addition to that there - what we think  are the 27 that have arrived…?

Angus Campbell: That's right, so I have kept those separate because we have not  yet been able to identify with sufficient confidence for me to offer that - the  breakdown of the number who are illegal maritime arrivals, and the crew.

Scott Morrison: Those 162 were for the three boats, and then the fourth one is the  27.

Journalist: Just following up - this is accounted for by four boats, is there another  one that you believe is on the way, a fifth one, that's what we were told?

Angus Campbell: Oh I understand. I - as you may be aware don't comment on on-water operations and I think I've very extensively explained why. In this reporting  period we have four vessels.

Journalist: Is that cluster as a result of Indonesians refusing to cooperate with  Australia on combating people smuggling?

Angus Campbell: I think that there's issues of pre-monsoon, there's weather,  there's the people smuggling capacity to bring together prospective travellers. We're  not in a position to offer you a confident statement of why we have a cluster today.

Indeed, I'll be very interested to see how we see conditions and outcomes over the  next few weeks. It is getting progressively, increasingly, more dangerous for people  to travel because of the weather.

Journalist: But that flow of information from Indonesia, the tap is still turned off?

Angus Campbell: I have been very careful, and I wish to continue to be, to allow  governments to deal with what is - you must understand, an incredibly sensitive  issue, and one that I am not going to step into.

Journalist: Mr Morrison, would you like to step…

Scott Morrison: Just before we go there, are there any other questions for  Lieutenant-General Campbell?

Journalist: I understand that a boat carrying 14 Vietnamese people was intercepted  this week and taken to Darwin. Were these people seeking asylum or not?

Angus Campbell: I'm unaware of the information you're offering, and so I'm going to  leave that one.

Scott Morrison: There was a fishing vessel there were some interceptions of, which  wasn't an asylum case and I issued a statement on that earlier in the week. So - any  other questions for General Campbell?

Journalist: General I apologise if you've covered this off, but can I just clarify how  many of the 27 are believed to still be - well, not in safety or in custody?

Angus Campbell: All of them are now in the custody of Australian Government  authorities, whether it be the AFP, or the Department of Immigration and Border  Protection.

The AFP is simply in transition, and as I understand it all persons have been  removed from places which might be described as exposed danger, and either at or  moving to, our processing centres on Christmas Island.

Journalist: Can you tell us about the minor injury; was it a result of that treacherous  condition…?

Angus Campbell: I believe that to be the case in terms of the rocks and the weather  conditions, but I cannot offer you a definitive statement.

Journalist: Will there be an increase in patrols as a result of the undetected arrival?

Angus Campbell: I am very, very conscious of not messaging to people smugglers  or indeed to prospective travellers.

I simply offer the message that I would always say - this is extraordinarily dangerous,  people take their lives in their hands, people smugglers lie, the boats are  unseaworthy in many cases, and the weather is deteriorating significantly. Do not  attempt to come to Australia without a visa on an open boat across the ocean.

Scott Morrison: Thank you General.

Journalist: Minister, are we seeing chickens coming home to roost, Indonesia's not  cooperating, and we're seeing more successful arrivals in Australia as a result of  that?

Scott Morrison: Look, I think it - to draw that sort of conclusion, some may wish to  do that, but I don't think it's necessarily borne out. What we do see, as the General  said, is you see some clusters. We've had weeks like this also before those issues  arose. So, I don't think this needs to be over- analysed.

What is important is the Foreign Minister was in Jakarta yesterday, there is a  process that has been agreed between the leaders which is being worked through,  both parties to this relationship very much want to get it back to a normal  transmission arrangement, and that's what everybody's working towards.

As I've said from this platform many times, I've always been very optimistic that this  will occur because there is so much at stake for both countries to ensure this gets  back on track, and I think genuinely everybody's working to that end.

Journalist: Minister, can you give us an estimated date of completion for the IPC on  Manus Island and also will that be housing single adult males, families or both?

Scott Morrison: Well, it has always been the policy that Manus Island is for single  adult males. It's not a facility for families. It should never have been a facility for  families, that was the practice of the previous government, which, after some long  period of time, they acknowledged and changed.

We have been rapidly expanding the facilities on Manus Island because under the  previous government offshore processing had been underfunded and under  capacity. To do offshore processing properly, you need to address those two issues,  and this government, because we've always believed in offshore processing, has  been setting about doing it correctly.

Now, we are moving towards the completion of that first phase of expansion, and we  hope to have that done by Christmas.

That's for I should say, the offshore processing facility. The East Lorengau facility, as  I have said before, is a post processing project, and that's hard wall accommodation  over in East Lorengau, and that project will be completed next year.

Journalist: Is there a date next year? I understand is that the UNHCR is saying  April? Is that still…

Scott Morrison: Well, I can't comment on what the UNHCR are projecting, and I  don't know what they'd be basing that on.

But that was the East Lorengau facility, and that timetable is in the first, sort of -  around about that order. Construction timetables in places like Papua New Guinea  can be variable as anyone who has worked up there on a commercial basis would  know, but that's what we're working towards.

Journalist: Minister, you describe this as a cluster - but your critics are saying that  four boats, 200 people, in less than a week, you are not stopping the boats, what  would you say to that?

Scott Morrison: I would say that under Operation Sovereign Borders the number of  illegal arrivals by boat has fallen by over 80 per cent. Under the previous  government, over 50 000 people turned up on over 800 boats at a cost blowout of  more than $11.6 billion, and with the loss of more than 1100 lives, that's what failure  looks like. And the previous government knows all about that failure, and I find their  even daring to draw comparisons an affrontery.

Journalist: Is it a failure for the operation though that 27 people made it undetected  onto Christmas Island?

Scott Morrison: What the General said, and what I said in my own comments, this  was an unusual incident, and there will be a post incident assessment as you would  expect.

It's a big ocean, these are small boats, and while these are surprises, I don't think  they're necessarily a surprise in that sense - that individuals, that smuggling  syndicates will band together, and when the weather conditions are favourable they'll  try it on.

I've said that every briefing. The smugglers will always try it on. We've got to an 80  per cent reduction, we think that's an excellent start but the job's not finished.

Journalist: Are there going to be immediate measures taken to safeguard against  something like that happening again?

Scott Morrison: Well, I wouldn't want to overdramatise the incident as others have.

This vessel, we're still not sure of the circumstances in which it came aground, if  that's indeed what occurred, and how the people came onshore, and that's what's  been worked through on Christmas Island at the moment as we debrief and interview  the people who were involved in that incident.

And we'll form a picture of that, and that will enable us to understand how that vessel  came to be in that place at that time, and to the extent that there are any changes  that are necessary, well, I'm sure the General will ensure that takes place.

Journalist: Minister five weeks ago you said that there'd been no decisions taken as  to which asylum seekers living in the community might be returned to detention, has  a decision since been taken, has anyone been brought back to detention?

Scott Morrison: Well, people go in and out of detention all the time.

One of the reasons sometimes people go back in detention is because they've been  charged for crimes, and I've brought quite a number of people back into detention for  being charged with a whole range of crimes from sexual offences, to assaults, to

robberies and things of that nature. So, there are people moving in and out between  bridging visas and detention on a regular basis.

The decision by Labor to support the Greens motion in the Senate this past week to  disallow temporary protection visas has required the government to make a very  swift response, that response means there'll be no permanent protection visas  handed out by this government, and at this stage I have no intention of lifting the  statutory bar that would enable persons to make an application for such a visa, and  so that negates the intention of commencing any sort of processing.

And so, the events of the past week have changed, I think, the environment there but  I'll be making some announcements over the next few weeks about how we might be  dealing with the onshore claimants who have not arrived illegally by boat, because  they have been caught in the net here, and then it's my intention to resolve that soon  to ensure that they are not victims of what Labor and the Greens have done in the  Senate.

But if you have come illegally by boat, you're not getting a permanent visa; it's just  not going to happen.

Journalist: Just to clarify - people who did come illegally by boat, that haven't  committed a crime and are in the community, and are on so called negative  pathways, are they the people that may be sent back into detention?

Scott Morrison: Well, that hasn't occurred at this stage because the new  assessment process that we've been working through, which was close to  finalisation, the decisions of the Senate this week have changed how that might  progress at the moment, and so that's been re-evaluated.

Journalist: Just a quick question on conditions in Nauru. I understand that there has  been an increase in the number of pregnant women in Nauru, and their conditions -  they're being kept in tents. Can you confirm any of those details?

Scott Morrison: I can confirm that it's the policy of the government that there are no  exemptions to offshore processing for people.

The most dangerous place for a pregnant woman to be is on a boat coming to  Australia, I wish there was an exemption on that, but there isn't because the  smugglers put pregnant women on boats, and pregnant women put themselves on  boats and put themselves and their unborn children at great risk. And that is a great  tragedy that, that would occur.

So, pregnant women do go to Nauru and the appropriate facilities and care is put in  place, and I've had discussions with the Secretary about how alternative  accommodation is made available if pregnant women wish that alternative  accommodation, which is not in a tent.

Journalist: Minister, last week in some footage of you doing an interview for the  Nauru TV, there was also footage of you speaking to people who are in the camps at  Nauru and there was a point you made that people who assisted people smugglers

would potentially be arrested and charged by the AFP, can you explain what crime  they are actually being charged with under Australian law?

Scott Morrison: Assisting people smuggling - I mean I've made that same warning  right here from this podium. Assistant Commissioner Lancaster has made that same  warning; Commissioner Negus has made that same warning.

Just because you think you're trying to help somebody by paying for them to get on a  boat or facilitating their arrival here illegally by boat, don't think you won't come to the  attention of the Australian Federal Police.

Don't do it, there are crimes associated with that sort of behaviour, and if you've  committed such a crime you can expect a knock on the door.

Journalist: Minister is it still government policy that if asylum seekers - possibly  while in detention commit offences, that A, they should be prosecuted, but B, that it  will also be taken into account in terms of their assessments?

Scott Morrison: Well, anyone who is convicted of a crime runs the risk of falling foul  of the character test. And if you've been convicted of a crime in a detention centre  while you've been in a detention centre, then the bar is even lower, and people  should expect me to apply the full force of that provision of the act.

Journalist: If it turns out that these 27 have in fact been eating endangered crabs  which are protected because they're in danger of extinction, would that…

Scott Morrison: Oh look I think that's a lot of hypotheticals there and I'm not  prepared to indulge those sorts of hypotheticals.

Journalist: Minister, this week you've given interviews and issued statements  outside the usual briefings, why have you changed your stance on…

Scott Morrison: Well I haven't. I've been giving interviews for 12 weeks.

Journalist: Are you changing your policy on communicating with the [indistinct]?

Scott Morrison: No. I've always been giving interviews. We've always been here,  every week. Every Friday. Or when we were doing them on Mondays.

We've held almost as many press conferences as boats have arrived. If the previous  government had done that, they would have held over 700 press conferences. So I  think the last 24 hours is a further demonstration of the way we've been consistent in  the way we apply these policies.

If we believe there is an incident in which Australian agencies or authorities are  involved in assisting to protect against the loss of life or in a rescue then we err on  the side of providing some immediate reporting on that incident, as we did last night.

Now we're not going to rush to that report. There were many stories running round  yesterday afternoon, some of which were completely false. We were getting

conflicting reports and we waited until we had the information that we believed was  accurate before issuing further statements, and that's what people can expect.

I also took the step last night of contacting directly and personally the Shadow  Minister, to keep him appraised of a number of things. What the status of the incident  was, what our knowledge was, and how I would be continuing to advise the  Australian people about what the nature of this incident was and what the outcomes  were.

Now the Shadow Minister and the Greens chose to engage in some political  commentary this morning when to the best of our knowledge people were still at risk  and were unaccounted for. I think that was unfortunate. But each person has to be  accountable for what judgements they make about what they say and, importantly, at  what time.

Journalist: Do you have any more detail about how they survived in the jungle?

Scott Morrison: No, I have no other detail other than what the General has but we'll  work through the detail.

I mean this was a fairly remote part of Christmas Island. It was also unknown to the  locals in terms of them being there as well, so I think that sort of highlights how  remote - and it's not just the remoteness of the location, it's the remoteness of the  terrain.

I mean General Campbell was being a little modest, he knows that terrain pretty well  from his time doing training exercises there. So he's a pretty good assessment of  how tough some of that territory can be.

Journalist: Can we just clarify [indistinct] the flow of information from Indonesia  about people smuggling, you also say you hope that will be fixed, can we just  confirm now that the flow of information from Indonesia on people smuggling  [indistinct] that remains cut off. Is that correct?

Scott Morrison: Well the Indonesians have made comments on these issues, and in  terms of what Indonesia is doing, I'll refer you to what Indonesia has said.

I don't think it helps for me to provide a commentary on what the Indonesian officials  have said, and you can refer to their - I'll refer you to the comments that they have  made.

What the Australian Government is doing is spending every effort we have to ensure  that this relationship gets to the position that it has long enjoyed, and particularly in  this area.

I believe it will, because it is in Indonesia's interests, it is in Australia's interests, and  as the days and weeks go by then I think we continue to make progress.

I particularly want to commend the Prime Minister, obviously, for his leadership on  this, but the Foreign Minister as well, for the way she was able to conduct those  discussions yesterday with her counterpart.

Journalist: Can we join the dots? A boat turns up and we didn't know it was there,  and the cutting off of information from the Indonesians?

Scott Morrison: Well, David, journalists often join dots. But they don't always join  them in the right way.

That's the risk, I suppose, journalists take when they make those sort of leaps. But  that's for journalists to do, not for politicians to assist them to do.

What's important that I say here today is that our partners, not just in Indonesia but  right throughout the region, are critically important to this task. There is no one  partnership, there is no one measure that will see the end of this trade. It is the  combination of measures that is important. It is the consistency of measures that is  important. And that's why temporary protection visas were so important.

The Opposition just doesn't seem to understand that if you're handing out permanent  visas to people who have arrived illegally by boat here in Australia, and then they  report that back to people in Pakistan and Iraq and Iran, they won't make the  distinction about Nauru and Manus Island and all of this. And neither will the people  smugglers, they'll just lie.

So you have to be consistent. And I think the fact that the Opposition doesn't  understand the importance of consistency and policy in these areas, and the  measures working in concert. And of course, the resolve you need to back this up.

I mean, none of the measures we're undertaking have we been dragged kicking and  screaming to as the previous government was. We've done these out of conviction,  and I can say quite categorically that the right measures are now in the right hands  on border protection and we're getting the right results.

Thanks for your time.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm210127.htm   Last update: Monday, 09 December 2013 at 09:57 AEST



