



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT



E & OE PROOF ONLY  MEET THE PRESS, NETWORK TEN  SUNDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2013

SUBJECT/S: DEBT CEILING, CLIMATE CHANGE, REMUNERATION  TRIBUNAL, CENSURE OF MORISSON BY THE SENATE, CUTS TO  CHILDCARE, NBN, KEVIN RUDD

KATHRYN ROBINSON: The Australian Senate will soon become a battlefield - the  Prime Minister and his Government going to war to get two major pieces of  legislation passed by a hostile Labor and Greens coalition, which holds the balance  of power until July next year. The Abbott Government wants to lift the debt ceiling  to $500 billion, and repeal the carbon tax - and it wants to do both before the end  of the year. One of the figures standing in the way is our guest this morning -  Leader of the Opposition in the Senate Penny Wong. And our panel - business editor  for the ‘Daily Telegraph’, Phil Jacob, and News Corp’s opinion editor, Tory Maguire.  Good morning to you all.

TORY MAGUIRE: Good morning, Kath.

PHIL JACOB: Morning.

ROBINSON: Senator, I’ll begin with you. Joe Hockey this week warned that if he  didn’t get an increase to the debt ceiling of $500 trillion, it could force a shutdown  like we saw in the United States. Would you stand in his way and let this happen?

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE:  Well, the only person threatening a shutdown is Joe Hockey. He’s being a bully boy,  and he ought to start behaving like a responsible Treasurer. The reality is, we are  quite willing to increase the debt cap. In fact, Joe Hockey could have had a $400  billion debt cap on Thursday. But he chose, instead, to go down a path of making a  political point, of making threats, and bullying the Parliament. Well, I don’t think  that’s good enough.

ROBINSON: But by your own admissions, $400 billion isn’t enough. $370 billion,  with a buffer of $40 billion-$60 billion is what’s need - which is in excess of $400  billion.

WONG: Well, let’s remember a couple of things. First is Tony Abbott said before the  election, in relation to a debt cap increase that the then Labor government put on  the table, he said the Government should specifically justify this. Well, we want Tony  Abbott to be good to his word. We want him to be the Prime Minister he said he’d  be, and show Australians why it is they need such a massive increase in the debt  cap. I mean, this is an extraordinary amount to increase the debt cap by, sight  unseen. Now, it might be justified. It might be that since they came to Government,  things have happened which have made this required. But if that’s the case, why  won’t they let Australians in on the secret?

JACOB: But Senator Wong, you were saying that it’s an extraordinary amount to  raise the debt ceiling by. But in four years of Government - the last four years - I  believe the Opposition approved the debt ceiling to be raised by around $250 billion  for you.

WONG: And Phil, what did we do every time we sought to do that? We put before  the Parliament our economic plans. We put before the Parliament Budget updates,  which explained very clearly why this was required. And you might recall that under  our government, despite what this Government says, we had a AAA credit rating  from all three credit rating agencies. The issue here is Joe Hockey doesn’t want to  tell anybody what his true numbers are. He wants this kind of increase - a $200  billion increase - sight unseen.

And just remember where we started - so the secretaries of Treasury and Finance  before the election said - put out a document, a Budget update, that said that the  debt ceiling, essentially, will be $370 billion in 2016/2017. Joe Hockey in 2013 now  wants a massively greater increase than what was required projected to be required  in a few years’ time, without providing any information. Well, Tony Abbott said that  he’d restore accountability and improve transparency. It’s a pretty funny way to  show that.

MAGUIRE: Senator, why do we even need a debt ceiling? I mean, it was introduced  in 2008, under very different economic circumstances - we’d survived perfectly well  without one before. It’s now created this highly-charged political and economic  bottleneck - shouldn’t we just get rid of it?

WONG: Well, I think the point here is governments should be true to their word.  And you know, Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey said that they were - they would be a  Government that would reduce debt and deficit, and some of their first acts, since  coming to Government, have been to blow out the deficit, and to seek to increase  the debt ceiling. Now, it’s a pretty clear game plan - they’re going to do that, they’re  going to say that the situation’s really bad, it’s all because of Labor, then they’re  going to impose massive cuts on Australian families next year. It’s a very obvious  game plan. I think the point is this is not the Government they said they’d be.



JACOB: Senator Wong, if we can move to the carbon tax - will you provide a  trigger for eventual double dissolution in the Government in the next three to six  months?

WONG: What we will do is to continue to respond to the science. Climate change is  real, and Australia does need an effective response to climate change. Now look, this  is a difficult issue. I’m not pretending it isn’t. But I think if you sit down and read  what scientists tell us, if you understand the implications for Australia today, and for  our children and our grandchildren, then it is the responsibility of this generation of  politicians and Australians to act. I’ll be going after this to one of the rallies that will  be held around the country, and I’ll be saying the same thing. You know, we can’t  walk away from this responsibility.

MAGUIRE: But Senator, doesn’t Tony Abbott have a mandate? I mean, the result is  in - he was very clear in the Federal Election about getting rid of the carbon tax. He  won the election. How can you ignore that?

WONG: Well, I’d make a couple of points. No-one elected me, or any Labor  Senator, or any Labor member, to do anything other than to hold to our position on  climate change, which is that Australia needs an effective limit on the carbon  pollution we put into the atmosphere. Otherwise there’s not a response to climate  change. I mean, Tony Abbott wants to rush this bill through. I see - it’s quite  interesting, actually - even some businesses are reported in the papers on Friday  and Saturday as raising concerns about the speed of repeal, and the lack of scrutiny.  And most importantly, he wants to replace the current arrangements with direct  action. Well, that’s a slogan. That’s a slogan that could potentially cost taxpayers  much more. I think it’s time we did focus on that, and Mr Abbott’s Government was  held to account for their policy - which they’ve not been prepared to disclose in  detail to Australians.

MAGUIRE: Changing the subject, Senator - documents released under FOI have  shown that the Remuneration Tribunal has looked at what they describe as the  possibility of ex-prime ministers ending up in dire financial circumstances, and that  perhaps a safety net needs to be considered, to make sure that we don’t end up  with an ex-prime minister living on the breadline. How would that possibly be a  situation, with modern Prime Ministership’s being the way they are?

WONG: Well Tory, to be honest I haven’t seen those documents. I think you said it  was the Remuneration Tribunal that was expressing these concerns -I mean, the  Remuneration Tribunal is independent, they need to consider all matters around the  remuneration of parliamentarians independently.

JACOB: And do you think it’s realistic, though, that ex-prime ministers, I mean, with  the very large pension that they receive, might find themselves in financial strife  over the next 10 years?

WONG: Well, I’m not going to be drawn on hypotheticals, about what might or  might not happen. I mean, it’s a matter for the Remuneration Tribunal. I would  make the point that one of the things that has occurred, as you might recall, is that  politicians entering the Parliament after 2004 do not receive a pension such as  people prior to that. So, you know, it’s a different set of circumstances, much more  in accord with community standards, and I think that that’s appropriate.

ROBINSON: Welcome back to Meet the Press. More now with the Leader of the  Opposition in the Senate, Penny Wong. Senator, there are reports this morning that  the Australian Government is donating two patrol boats to the Sri Lankan Navy, to  help effectively stop the boats. Is this an initiative - a Tony Abbott initiative that  you’d support?

WONG: Well, can I first say this is government Abbott-style, isn’t it? You can’t tell  the Parliament or the Australian people what’s happening when it comes to dealing  with asylum seekers, but you can drop a story about operational matters to the  papers on Sunday so you get a run. I mean, it’s - this is a Government that, you  know, just doles out the information that it wants to dole out to a few individuals, a  few people - but refuses to front up to the Parliament and tell Australians what’s  occurring. I mean, you know, cooperation with our neighbours, cooperation with Sri  Lanka, is something Labor has said is a priority for a long time. I’m glad that the  Government, after being so negative about, for example, the arrangement with  Malaysia, has now come to the view that regional arrangements are important.

JACOB: And would you agree with Tony Abbott’s assertion that he’s closed the  floodgates, in regards to recent boat arrivals?

WONG: Well, I think if you look at the tracking of arrivals, the significant reduction  occurred in the period after then-Prime Minister Rudd announced the arrangement  with Papua New Guinea. I mean, that’s really been what’s reduced arrivals. I think  it’s been a real pity, since this Government was elected, that we’ve seen such  secrecy.

I think - I haven’t seen - I mean, I haven’t seen a Minister in the House of  Representatives get up and say “Because I’m going to tell you on Friday, I’m not  telling you now” - which is effectively what Scott Morrison has been saying all week.  Well, I don’t think Australians should be getting their information about what their  Government is doing from the Jakarta Post. I think they should be getting it from  their Government.

MAGUIRE: Senator, on that - you’ve made efforts in the Senate to compel Scott  Morrison to inform the Parliament what’s happening. Can you explain to us what sort  of sanctions could be imposed, or how you would make that happen?

WONG: Well ultimately, that’s a matter for the Senate. And the obligation is actually  imposed on Senator Cash, who is Mr Morrison’s representative in the Chamber, and  she is obliged to table, under the order, a range of documents. If she doesn’t do so,  the Senate can determine how it wishes to proceed in response to that. And

ultimately, you know, there are a number of options which can occur. I think in the  past, for example, people have refused to deal with legislation in the portfolio until  the portfolio minister has complied with the order. You can have a censure of the  ministers. You can ultimately refer the matter to the Privileges Committee to  consider further action.

So, you know, we will methodically go through this, not because we want to make a  political point, but because I think there is no justification for the level of secrecy  that this Government is demonstrating. The culture of secrecy is really quite  pervasive, and we have to stand up to it. This is a democracy, after all.

ROBINSON: Do you think that all these measures that you’ve got up your sleeve  will lead to greater transparency?

WONG: Well, that’s ultimately a matter for the Government. I do think they - I  think two things. First, as I said - they’re really very addicted to secrecy, at a very  early stage in their period of Government. But I think that the other point is they’re  treating the Senate as if it were the House of Representatives. And the Senate, as  you know, no government - John Howard very briefly had a majority in the Senate,  and that led to WorkChoices, and I think that helped bring him down - but generally,  governments don’t have a majority in the Senate. You have to manage your  interaction with the Chamber respectfully - sometimes robustly - but what you see  instead is this Government treating that Chamber with real contempt, and I don’t  think Senators are going to take too kindly to it.

ROBINSON: Senator, if we can move on to childcare now - there are reports - oh,  well obviously there is a Productivity Commission into childcare that’s going on.  There is suggestions that the 50 per cent rebate will be means tested - would that  be a good idea?

WONG: Well look, you know, we didn’t take that step in government, and the  reason was that increasing the participation of women remains a national economic  priority. And the primary benefit for the childcare rebate is second income earners,  the great majority of whom are women. So you’d have to be very careful, if you  were the Abbott Government, going down this path - that you didn’t in fact set up a  set of disincentives for women to participate in the workforce.

You also have to get your priorities right. I don’t understand why the Abbott  Government would have a rolled-gold paid parental leave scheme, that’s funded by  retrospectively taxing Australians and double-taxing shareholders, but at the same  time trying to limit access to the childcare rebate. It’s a very strange set of priorities,  and not a set of priorities that I think most Australians would agree with.

JACOB: Senator, there have been suggestions that perhaps money would be better  spent on improved childcare, and perhaps nanny facilities. What are your thoughts  about that?

WONG: Well, you know, I think that Tony Abbott didn’t go to the election saying  that he was going to cut childcare. And if he does that, I think it would be a very  clear breach of the sort of Government he said he’d be. I think we’re going to see a  fair bit of that. We’re going to see a fair bit of this Government doing something  they didn’t ‘fess up to Australians before an election.

MAGUIRE: Senator, you’re a working mother - what do you - what’s your  assessment of what would be the most productive thing? What would working  Australian mothers like to see most?

WONG: Well, I don’t like to, you know, pretend to be the expert, because my  partner - who’s probably watching this with our daughter - was very keen to come  with me today, but I told her it probably wasn’t a good idea. She is - you know,  Sophie, my partner, is the primary career. But my observation would be, trying to  have work arrangements which enable both parents to more share in the care of the  child is probably the key. And we haven’t done as well on that, as a country, as we  should.

Parliamentarians have done even more poorly. Some private sector firms have done  much better. But I think, as a nation, whether it’s for fathers or mothers, I think  more parents would like the opportunity to balance work and family, and we have to  keep improving our work structures, to enable that to happen.

MAGUIRE: Obviously one of the big dilemmas in the provision of childcare is the  cost of labour, and the pay for childcare workers, and I’m sure everyone agrees that  childcare workers deserve more pay, but how do we pay for it? On the minimum  wage - earlier this week Maurice Newman gave a speech where he said that  Australia’s comparatively high minimum wage, of about US$33,500 a year, is actually  holding back the Australian economy - because we’re so much further ahead than  our competitors - and argued that it should be dropped. What’s your position on  that?

WONG: I don’t agree with that at all. The Labor Party doesn’t agree with an  approach to the Australian community and economy which is all about cutting wages  and reducing the minimum wage. I mean, it’s one of the things that makes this  country a decent society, is that we don’t have the levels of working poor that you  see in too many other economies. You started your question with childcare - I think  it’s very disappointing for parents and for childcare educators that one of the first  acts of the Government was to renege on arrangements that we had put in place to  help fund part of the sector to lift wages, to reflect better qualifications.

I mean, that’s what this was about. This was about improving the quality of care for  our children, and lifting qualifications, and therefore making sure that people were  paid appropriately. But on the minimum wage, I mean, this is a really 19th century  view - that you want to reduce wages in order to compete. We’re never going to  compete on wages, and we shouldn’t try. We should be competing on our  innovation, on our capacity, on the high levels of skills in our community, on the

innovation and entrepreneurship of our business sector. We should never be  competing on trying to drive down wages.

JACOB: And Senator, if we can talk about the NBN - you were the Finance Minister  when Lazard put out their report in 2010, talking about perhaps how financially  unviable the NBN was. I mean, why wasn’t that advice heeded?

WONG: Well, I think it’s really telling that this Government seeks to selectively leak  advice. Let me tell you - when we went through various decisions around the NBN,  including in relation to the deal with Telstra, we went through an exhaustive process  of considering advice - including advice from departments, advice from my  department, as it then was, given I was the Minister -the Department of Finance.

We took advice, that was considered very carefully by Cabinet. We also had other  consultants look at this, and ultimately the government came to the view, in fact,  that the agreement with Telstra actually reduced the risk in the project - was a  significant de-risking strategy, as I recall being advised.

I want to make the point, on the National Broadband Network, this is - there’s a lot  of politics being played by this Government, trying to destroy what occurred, trying  to portray what occurred as being inappropriate. I make this point - you can build a  cheaper NBN, if you’re prepared to say to Australians you don’t want everyone to  have access to high-speed broadband. That’s what this Government is saying. They  want to try and build a cheaper NBN. I suspect it won’t be cheaper in the long run.  But what they’re actually saying is we’re not going to give it to everybody, and  people are going to have to pay to it get it. It’s a very different project, and that’s  what’s important.

ROBINSON: Senator Wong, briefly, just before we go - Kevin Rudd’s resignation.  What does it mean for the ALP?

WONG: Well, I think this is the end of an era - an era of Government, and an era  of some division and conflict, regrettably. And I think - I said on election night that  the election was a time to draw a line for Labor, and for this generation of Labor  leaders, and Labor frontbenchers, and the entire Labor Caucus - to move beyond  the division that really, I think, let us down, and let Australians down, over these last  years.

So we’ve got a job to do as an Opposition - to hold this Government to account, a  Government that isn’t the Government they said they would be. And to do that  properly, we have to remain united. I do think, though, we have to honour our past  prime ministers, and on this occasion, I do honour Kevin, and the work he did, his  many achievements - and from a personal level, as I’ve said, you know, he led us to  government, he put me in the cabinet, I got the opportunity to be a cabinet minister  in a reforming government. That’s an enormous privilege, and I owe him great  thanks for that.

ROBINSON: Senator Wong, we thank you for your time on Meet the Press this  morning.

WONG: Good to be with you.

ENDS

SUNDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2013

