THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

MEDIA RELEASE

Tuesday, 28 May 2013

KEENAN HAS NO TIMETABLE FOR STOPPING THE BOATS

The Coalition’s promise to “stop the boats” is in tatters with shadow minister Michael Keenan today  revealing he could not say when the Coalition’s commitment would have any effect.

In an extraordinary interview on ABC NewsRadio, Mr Keenan admitted the Coalition’s promise was  unachievable  saying  he  wouldn’t  be  “putting  an  estimate  on”  when  the  Coalition  would  stop  the   boats.

HOST: Abbott said in February he would stop the boats within weeks, that has since been  abandoned. What is a realistic expectation of what you can do?

KEENAN: …our efforts will have quick effect, but I don’t know about putting an estimate on it.

KEENAN - ABC NEWSRADIO - 28 MAY 2013

Mr Keenan’s hand on heart confession is in direct contrast with Tony Abbott’s promise to stop the  boats within months.

First it was months:

QUESTION: So if they haven’t stopped in three months your policy will be a failure?

ABBOTT: I think in three months we’ll make a big difference.

ABBOTT - ABC RN - 16 AUGUST 2010



Then it was six months or 12 months:

QUESTION: Mr Abbott, on your previous answer, you said that you would expect to stop the boats  quickly I think, was the phrase you used. Can you be more specific, would that be 12 months, six  months?

ABBOTT: Well within those timeframes.

ABBOTT - PRESS CONFERENCE - 25 OCTOBER 2012



The  Coalition  has  finally  admitted  what  the  Gillard  Government  has  always  known,  that  Tony   Abbott’s “stop the boats” is all slogan and dog whistle - and not an achievable election commitment.

A  three  word  slogan  will not  stop the  global problem  of  people  using desperate measures to seek  asylum. There is no quick fix to stop asylum seekers traveling to Australia by boat.

What  Mr  Abbott  knows  will  work  is  what  he  refuses  to  support  - a  regional  approach  - as  recommended by the independent Expert Panel on Asylum Seekers and backed by the Government.

Instead, the Coalition says no to Malaysia, a country which says yes to accepting arrivals - but they  say yes to sending arrivals to Indonesia, a country which says no.

The  Gillard  Government  is  determined  to  break  the  people  smugglers’  business  model  and  stop   them taking people’s life savings and all too often their lives.

Media Adviser: Glen Atwell on 0437 437 218 or glen.atwell@immi.gov.au

