

Transcript of interterview

Lateline  Posted on July 12, 2013   comments

SUBJECTS: Education funding; Peter Slipper’s legal costs; Newspoll

E&OE…………………………..

EMMA ALBERICI: Our top story now is the time extension given to Queensland to sign on to the Government's  school funding reforms. Joining us now from Adelaide is the Manager of Opposition Business. He's also the

Coalition's Education spokesman, Christopher Pyne.

Welcome, Christopher Pyne.

HON CHRISTOPHER PYNE MP: Good evening, Emma.

ALBERICI: Tell us in what way is the existing school funding model better than the alternative being proposed by

the Government, otherwise known as Gonski?

PYNE: Well firstly, the current model has a national reach, whereas the model that's being proposed by the

Government is now four different models for four different states, side deals for the independent schools and  rumoured side agreements with the National Catholic Education Commission. So, New South Wales, for example,

which signed on first, must wonder whether their agreement is gonna be reopened for discussion, because the  other states that have signed on have been given special arrangements and extra money. So the current system

is fairer, it's more transparent, it's clearer for people to apply, it has better indexation and it means every school  next year and every year after that will be better off and get more money. Whereas the model that's being

proposed by the Government called the Gonski model, in spite of the fact that it's not the Gonski model, cuts  spending in the next four years by $325 million and means that at least 63 schools alone, independent schools in

NSW will lose money, let alone the hundreds of schools in Victoria and Queensland that have already been  identified by those governments.

ALBERICI: Just two weeks ago, one of the Gonski panel members, Kathryn Greiner, former wife of the NSW  Premier, said this Government proposal is very close to the original Gonski model and in fact she said the current

system is broken and that the Government's proposals represent a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to fix them.

PYNE: Well I don't know how Kathryn Greiner can say that the Government is introducing the Gonski model

when the Gonski panel of which he was a member required extra spending every year of $6.5 billion.  So over the forward estimates, that would be $26 billion, Emma, and yet, in this budget that's just gone past,

the Government has announced cuts to spending of $325 million for schools alone and for all education $4.7

billion. So, on the one hand the Gonski panel said they needed $26 billion over four years of new money; on the  other hand, Labor has cut spending by $325 million. So, the Government isn't introducing the Gonski model, it's

simply introducing the model that undoes the previous Howard Government model because of ideological and  personality reasons; but even then, at least four jurisdictions have not signed up to this model because they see

that it is a massive grab for power by Canberra and you have to believe that Labor will deliver rivers of gold in  years five and six when we couldn't even trust them not to introduce a carbon tax they promised they wouldn't

introduce and they undid the border protection laws that have led to 45,000 asylum seeker arrivals. So, why  would you trust Labor now?

ALBERICI: Not sure where you've got your figures, but the Auditor-General has acknowledged that the new plan  represents $900 million or thereabouts in extra money over four years - over the next four years and the budget

papers say the Government will commit to the current level of funding plus 4.7 per cent per annum plus loadings  for disadvantage and it seems to be where the discrepancy might lie is in the current national partnerships for

literacy and numeracy and socio-economic disadvantage, those sorts of arrangements which will now come  under the full umbrella of these Gonski proposals.

PYNE: Well Emma, you're right about that in the last phrase. The truth is the Government has abolished the  targeted programs, abolished the national partnerships and in rolling those into the new funding model have

pocketed $325 million. So over the next four years, they are not putting as much in …

ALBERICI: Pocketed? Doesn't that go towards all of this?

PYNE: No, the $325 million is a saving in education, so they've pocketed that as a budget saving. So they've  transferred less money across to the new model than they would've spent if the current model was staying in

place for the next four years. That's why there's a cut to education and that's why it's a con for Labor to try and  say that they are increasing spending on education in schools when they're actually cutting it. Unless you believe

that in five or six years' time they will miraculously produce billions and billions of dollars to spend on schools,  which is three elections away potentially. So I don't trust Labor from week to week. And quite frankly, I don't

know why anyone would trust Bill Shorten when Julia Gillard couldn't trust him and three years ago Kevin Rudd  couldn't trust him.

ALBERICI: NSW, Tasmania, the ACT and South Australia are on board. Campbell Newman says he's now working  with the Prime Minister and hopes to achieve a deal for Queensland. The murmurs from Victoria sound good too.

The Independent Schools Council of Australia has also put its weight behind the Better Schools program. I mean,  presumably they've not signed on blind; they've done the calculations and have determined that there are some

real benefits for their students.

PYNE: Well, Emma, there are secret deals and special arrangements and sweetheart agreements with all those

four jurisdictions and also the Independent Schools Council of Australia. The Government is promising more  money …

ALBERICI: But at the end of the day, the framework - if you don't mind my interruption …

PYNE: Not at all.

ALBERICI: Excuse me, but the overall arrangement as we all understand it is a set price per student plus  loadings for disadvantage. I guess where the negotiations are is who funds how much of it. But at the end, how

school students are funded is supposed to be more equitable than the system that is around now, and after 20

months and five esteemed members of the education and political and business community, this is the formula

they've developed.

PYNE: Well that sounds less like a question and more like an opinion, but nevertheless, putting that to one side

for one moment. In Tasmania, a special deal has been arranged for Tasmania whether they have a discount on  the indexation that they have to provide. They've also been given the money and they've been told they can

spend it however they wish to. In NSW they've been given an indexation freeze for the next two years and they  don't have to achieve the student resource standard of 100 per cent in four years, they only have to get to 95

per cent. In the ACT they were given an extra $83 million. In South Australia they were given an extra $190  million. In every state and territory that signed up, a special deal has been made. So the Government has

completely adulterated the model that they proposed in the budget. All of those extra funds have blown their  surplus sky kigh. The Government needs to explain, the Government needs to come clean with how much extra

money is being given as a bribe to these states and territories in order to make them sign up and why is it that  they're now claiming to have a new school funding model nationally, when in fact they only have four out of

eight jurisdictions and worse than that, the model is different in every state and territory that has so far signed  up. It is a dog's breakfast, Emma, and the Government needs to explain how they are gonna get away with that

in the next two or three months of campaigning.  ALBERICI: Tony Abbott yesterday said a Coalition government wouldn't support the Gonski Better Schools

reforms unless all states were on board. You've said it would have to be a majority. Which one is it?

PYNE: Well Tony Abbott said that you couldn't call the scheme a national model unless all the jurisdictions were

signed up and that's a statement of the obvious. What we've said from the beginning, from about May when this  debate began, is that if it an overwhelming majority of states and territories sign up to it, then the Coalition

won't create more uncertainty by undoing that model. But the Government is far from getting even a bare  majority of the states and jurisdictions to sign up. Sure, Queensland and Victoria are talking to the Government,

and so they should, but there are some insurmountable problems. Victoria wants $7 billion. The Government  offered $3.5 billion in five and six years' time. Victoria wants it to start pro rata next year. Victoria wants the

model to be dismantled.

ALBERICI: If Victoria and Queensland sign on, will that be enough?

PYNE: Well you're completely ignoring my answer. I made the point that Victoria's asking for twice as much  money as the Government has offered and they want it to start next year. Queensland wants more money and

they want it to start next year. Now the Government has said that they won't be giving them any extra money  next year, it'll start in five years' time. Queensland, Western Australia and Victoria want to dismantle the central

control that the Labor Party's proposing from Canberra. Now if they dismantle that central control, the whole  reason for the Federal Government spending, apparently all this extra money in five or six years' time from now,

has disappeared. So, if they make an agreement with Queensland or Victoria or WA, it will essentially be to  dismantle any kind of school funding model and make a mockery of everything that they started to do a few

months ago.

ALBERICI: Let's move on. Acting Special Minister of State Gary Gray today said that the Commonwealth would

cover former Speaker Peter Slipper's legal costs after what was found by the Federal Court to have been a  politically motivated court case against him. Do you support that decision by the Government?

PYNE: Well we think Kevin Rudd needs to answer some questions about this. Firstly, this must've been a cabinet  decision, so Kevin Rudd obviously believes that Peter Slipper's legal fees should be paid. Only a few months ago

Nicola Roxon said that the legal fees would not be paid and that if a suggestion was made by Peter Slipper's  legal team that the Commonwealth pay them, that they would decline to make that payment. But since the

prime ministership's changed a fortnight ago, something seems to have happened because Kevin Rudd has

obviously agreed that Peter Slipper's legal fees should be paid by the taxpayer. We also want to know, does that  mean Craig Thomson's legal fees will also be paid by the taxpayer?

ALBERICI: Well, no, Gary Gray made the caveat that this was because it was politically motivated lawsuit and  that that could damage democracy?

PYNE: Well that seems very much to be in the eye of the beholder from the Government.

ALBERICI: Well, no, that was the Federal Court decision.

PYNE: Well usually there is a rule, a rule that either applies or doesn't apply, Emma. You can't have the cabinet  or the Prime Minister in this case making unilateral decisions to simply pay the legal fees of people who sit on the

crossbenches because they've decided that a legal case which is under appeal, I should point out to you, by Mr  Ashby's lawyers as well as Mr Ashby is somehow politically motivated. The truth is that Kevin Rudd needs to

explain in all this talking and travelling around in supermarkets and primary schools that he does rather than  actually getting on with governing, he needs to be asked the question: why does he think Peter Slipper's legal

fees should be paid by the Australian taxpayer and will that be extended to Craig Thomson? And when was his  first discussion with Mr Slipper about the payment of his legal fees? Was it before he was Prime Minister or was it

during the period he was stalking Julia Gillard or has it been since he was the Prime Minister?

ALBERICI: Still on Mr Slipper, there appears to have been a disparity in treatment between Peter Slipper and

Tony Abbott with regards to misclaimed expenses. Is it clear to you why Mr Abbott was able to simply pay back  his $9,400 that he mistakenly claimed and yet Mr Slipper is being pursued through the courts for $900, which is

less than 10 times that?

PYNE: Well I think the point is there that the department makes those decisions about which mistakes should be

pursued and which ones shouldn't. I mean, sometimes there is an inadvertent error and over the years people  have been asked to pay that back. It's happened on hundreds of occasions where someone's overpaid $180 or

$9,000 and the department follows them up. In the case of Mr Slipper, the department has made a decision,  which is a matter for them not for me, that there might be some intent involved rather than a mistaken error of

judgment and that's probably why they're pursuing him in the courts, but that's a matter that they'll explain in  the courts.

ALBERICI: Two weeks into his renewed leadership, Mr Rudd has certainly changed the political dynamic and the  opinion polls. What can Mr Abbott do, do you think, to convince Australians that he'd make a better PM because

at the moment they don't seem to think so?

PYNE: Well, Emma, I think the most important thing that the Coalition can do is to continue to explain to the

Australian people that we have a plan to reduce their cost of living pressures by abolishing the carbon tax, by  giving them less job insecurity, by abolishing the mining tax, by getting economic management back under

control, by returning a surplus budget at the federal level and living within our means, and most importantly by  protecting our borders and stopping the boats from the deluge of 45,000 asylum seekers that have come since

Kevin Rudd changed the laws. Now, Kevin can talk; he can certainly do that. His response to the asylum seeker  problem of course is to have another summit with the Indonesians in a month's time. Talking is cheap. We need

actual action. Now, Kevin Rudd has identified the problems. He's given speeches about all the problems people  are having. Amazingly, he's discovered that electricity prices are too high in Australia, but he doesn't have any

solutions to these problems whereas the Coalition does have solutions, and if we are elected, we will immediately  abolish the carbon tax, the mining tax, bring back the Australian Building and Construction Commission, start

living within our means, bring back temporary protection visas, turn back the boats where it's safe to do so and

increase offshore processing. So we've got plans, whereas Kevin Rudd just has a lot of hot air.

ALBERICI: Newspoll has Mr Rudd leading Mr Abbott 53 to 31 in the preferred Prime Minister stakes. Tony Abbott

was working for John Hewson during the supposed “unlosable election”. Has the ghost of 1993 come back to  haunt the Opposition?

PYNE: Emma, I was elected in 1993, so it's very much seared in my memory, 20 years ago. I can tell you that  the Coalition has never taken this election for granted. Winning an election from Opposition is a very tough job.

The Australian public don't change the government that often. So we've never assumed, whether it was Julia  Gillard or Kevin Rudd, that this election was in the bank and that is why we will continue to explain every day

that we have a plan which will reduce the cost of living pressures, support people's jobs - unemployment went  up again yesterday to 5.7 per cent, the highest in five years. We have a plan to live within our means, we have a

plan to stop the boats. All Kevin Rudd has is the Kim Kardashian approach of Australian politics, which is to  publish selfies of himself on Facebook, to trip over wire, some cameraman in supermarkets, to high five primary

school kids in primary schools. What we need is the Prime Minister to decide to either govern or to campaign,  and if he wants to campaign, call the election and let's get on with it. If he wants to govern, get back to

Canberra, recall the Parliament and let's do some governing. He can't have it both ways.

ALBERICI: Christopher Pyne, thanks so much for spending your Friday night with us.

PYNE: It's a pleasure, Emma. Thank you.

ENDS.



