

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





Sky PM Agenda

10 July 2013

Subjects: Withdrawal from Afghanistan, Egypt leadership crisis, Indigenous recognition in  Constitution, asylum seekers on bridging visas

E&OE…

DAVID SPEERS Thanks for your time.

Are you concerned about this apparent tension between the US and Afghanistan at what is a  very sensitive time?

JULIE BISHOP David, the ultimate goal of the military intervention was to ensure that the  Afghan Government could provide security for the nation and ensure that Afghanistan would  not again become a safe haven for terrorists. The transition period will be complex and there  are no easy answers as to the ongoing role for the international forces once the Afghan  Government takes control of the security of the country. There will need to be military  judgments. There will need to be political judgments.

There are reports that the negotiations between the United States and the Afghan Government  are rather tense with the Obama Administration saying that the President retains all options  including the option of complete withdrawal, the so-called “zero option”. President Karzai on  the other hand is saying that the United States can have permission to retain up to nine  military bases in Afghanistan. And there’s apprehension that’s been reported amongst the  Afghan citizens, particularly women, who are concerned that a full withdrawal could lead to  fundamentalism. From Australia’s perspective….

DAVID SPEERS So you’d have concerns about that?

JULIE BISHOP Yes indeed. From Australia’s perspective we will obviously continue to  work in cooperation with the NATO led forces, with the United States, with the international  forces. We hope that the negotiations can be resolved because logistically it will be a very  complex task of coming out of Afghanistan.

DAVID SPEERS And there’s really only, what, six months until the end of this year? There’s  six months until the end of this year, when we still don’t know what’s going to happen next  year?

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s right. The Australian military have paid a heavy price. The death  of 40 of our soldiers has been a sacrifice that they have made and the cost to the taxpayer in  having our troops in Afghanistan has been tremendously high so we would not want the gains  that we have made lost through precipitous withdrawal.

Likewise we don’t want the sacrifice of our soldiers to have been in vain. We want to ensure  that this ultimate goal of the military intervention - that is the transition to the Afghan  national forces to be in charge of security can be achieved as quickly as possible. But it will  mean that there are some judgments still to be made as to the role of an ongoing international  force what size it should be, what is the role.

DAVID SPEERS Could I turn to the situation in Egypt? Things do appear to be well,  potentially spiralling out of control there. We’ve seen supporters of the ousted President  being gunned down. We’ve seen supporters of the Muslim brotherhood throwing an opponent  off the roof of a building. How concerned are you about the potential for civil war in Egypt?

JULIE BISHOP I’m deeply concerned by what we have seen. There seems to be a precedent,  almost a cycle, whereby protesters can go to the streets to overthrow a government and are  backed by the military. It’s happened with the dictator Mubarak. It’s now happened with the  elected President Morsi.

You have those opposing the President saying that they won’t agree to an early election in  2014. You have those supporting Morsi taking to the streets to protest his removal and the  violence is escalating. It’s been reported that 50 people have died, over 400 people have been  wounded. Some of the Muslim Brotherhood leadership are calling for an uprising against the  military so this is deeply concerning.

I’m also worried about the fate of Coptic Christians in Egypt who need to be protected and  overall the security situation is very fragile. The circuit-breaker I believe must be an election,  a free and fair election, as soon as possible and an attempt to return to democracy and put  some stability back into what is otherwise a very volatile situation.

DAVID SPEERS And Julie Bishop lets turn to some domestic matters. The Prime Minister  has today declared that he will hold a referendum within two years if he wins the election of  indigenous recognition in the Constitution. Now he’s suggested that the ball is in Tony  Abbott’s court in this when it comes to declaring support. Tell us what the position is and do  you think a referendum really can be held within two years?

JULIE BISHOP Well first David, it is really disappointing for Prime Minister Kevin Rudd to  try and turn this into an attack against Tony Abbott when Tony Abbott released a policy some  time ago that promised, should the Coalition be elected, we would release a draft  constitutional amendment within 12 months of coming to office, and we would have broad  community consultation because in order for any referendum to succeed you need a lot of  support in every state in every community across the country.

So for Kevin Rudd to try and suggest that Tony Abbott needs to tell us what our policy is,  well it has been out there. Does Kevin Rudd not even know what he’s talking about when he  seeks to politicise this? It seems he’s learned nothing from his first time round in this job.

So we think that broad community support will be required and that’s why Tony Abbott has  set out a sensible and logical approach to Constitutional recognition.

DAVID SPEERS Can it be done in two years though? Your plan is to have the draft wording  in 12 months but presumably the referendum at the following election?

JULIE BISHOP David the issue is to get broad based community support and we will consult  for as long as it takes to get that support. There is no point going into a referendum without  broad community support.

This is the problem that the Labor Government is in with the Local Government referendum -  badly prepared, hastily done, without doing any of the groundwork of getting that community  consultation underway.

The indigenous recognition is far too important to be left in the hands of people who can’t  design the proposal, can’t get the process right, can’t gain community support.

So under the Coalition Government we would release a draft constitutional amendment  within 12 months and then we would set about building that community consensus that’s  absolutely vital for a referendum to succeed.

DAVID SPEERS On the issue of border protection - there has been a further cost blowout in  detention centre costs in Australia. The Government approach to dealing with this strain on  the detention system has been to release more people on bridging visas. There are now about  16,000. There could be more by the time an election comes around on bridging visas in the  community. Has the Coalition worked out what it will do with these people? Can you transfer  them onto Temporary Protection Visas? Do they go back into detention? What do you do  with them?

JULIE BISHOP First David, horrendous waste and mismanagement seems to be a hallmark  of any government that is led by Kevin Rudd. It happened last time he was in the job. It’s  happening again now. So we shouldn’t be surprised to see these massive cost blowouts.

We must also never forget that after Kevin Rudd unpicked the Coalition’s border protection  laws he triggered a crisis in border protection. Up to 1000 people have reportedly died at sea.  There has been a massive cost blowout, about 46,000 people have made that risky journey by  boat to Australia.

Kevin Rudd can keep talking about going to a meeting to keep talking about what he’s going  to do, but he must take action now, as the Coalition would if we were in government, to stop  the people smugglers and stop the boats coming. Otherwise there are going to be more boats,  more people die at sea and more cost blowouts.

We have a plan, a policy that will include temporary protection visas, offshore processing,  turning back the boats where it is safe to do so and working cooperatively with countries in  our region to stop this people smuggling trade.

DAVID SPEERS Ok the question is about those on bridging visas that you might inherit  should you win the election. What would you do with them?

JULIE BISHOP Methodically we will have to go through this to ensure that people who  should be returned to their countries are returned, that those who are on visas that enable  them to be in the community can be released into the community. We’ll have to methodically  go through it. Last time we did it - we’ll do it again - of ensuring that we can restore integrity  to the system.

DAVID SPEERS So you will reprocess the lot? There’s thousands of them. You’ll reprocess  them all?

JULIE BISHOP For a start we have to put in place proper processing on health and security  checks that aren’t being done. The head of our intelligence and security forces admit that  they’ve got a very ‘light tough’ approach to national security checks for these people. So  we’re going to have to do a lot of work to restore order and integrity into our immigration  system.

DAVID SPEERS If you’re not satisfied with the health and security checks you’d have to  bring them all back into detention, wouldn’t you? To do that?

JULIE BISHOP David, you’ve got to be sensible about this. Our point is that we will stop the  boats in the first place and then we will methodically work through the people that have  arrived here since Kevin Rudd unpicked the laws in 2008 and triggered this whole crisis.

DAVID SPEERS Deputy Opposition Leader Julie Bishop. Thank you for joining us this  afternoon.

JULIE BISHOP Thanks David.

- Ends -



