

PRIME MINISTER  TRANSCRIPT OF JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE  BEIJING, PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA  9 APRIL 2013



E & O E - PROOF ONLY

Subjects:      Australia-China relationship; Meeting with Chinese Premier Li  Keqiang; Australia in the Asian Century White Paper; National Broadband  Network, National Plan for School Improvement; Australia-China Free  Trade Agreement negotiations

PM:  I am joined by Ministers Carr, Emerson and Shorten.

We have just come from a very good meeting with Premier Li, where we had a  broad ranging and very positive discussion about the relationship between  Australian and China.

I have been delighted across my meetings this week with the President and with  the Premier about their evident commitment to the Australia-China relationship  and in the words of the President to taking that relationship to a new level.

I came here with the highest level political delegation ever fielded from Australia  to China.

We came at the time when the new leadership in China had just emerged and  was settling in, and we have had through discussions and work, a breakthrough  in the relationship between our two countries.

We have had a very good week for Australia here in China.

The breakthrough in particular is the relationship between our two countries at  leader-level and it’s institutionalisation into annual leader level meetings.

We’ve agreed to an enhanced ministerial dialogue, which means each year there  would be structured annual leaders meetings to give strategic direction to this  incredibly important relationship for our two countries.

We’ve also agreed to enhance ministerial dialogue to support the work of leaders  and that will include an annual foreign and strategic dialogue lead by the  Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs with the Chinese Minister for Foreign  Affairs.

And there will also be an annual strategic economic dialogue lead by the  Treasurer and the Minister of Trade, and on China’s side by the Chair of the  National Development and Reform Commission.

We have agreed to designate our relationship as a strategic partnership.

That is a recognition that this is a relationship of incredible importance to  Australia, it’s broad, it’s deep, it’s complex and it’s a relationship that we intend to  keep focusing on very strongly into the future, including through these new  dialogue arrangements.

In terms of a strategic partnership from China’s side, this is a relationship  between us and China in terms of the annual dialogue.

This is a relationship that they have with very few countries around the world.

This is a significant breakthrough and I’m very pleased to be able to announce it  today.

We have achieved other important outcomes this week.

We’ve strengthened the future of trade relationship through direct trade of our  two currencies on the Chinese mainland.

We’ve bolstered business-to-business links and I’ve been pleased this week to  see so many senior Australian business people here in China - great Australian  companies pursuing work here in China - and I’ve been very pleased too to meet  their Chinese counterparts who are also making a strong contribution to our  economic relationship.

We focussed as well the all-important people-to-people links by launching an  Australia Week in China to promote tourism and to promote the images of  Australia in this country.

We’ve committed ourselves to work together on the shared challenge of carbon  pollution and climate change through a carbon-trading experts group.

We’ve agreed to work together to deliver aid in the Asia Pacific, to respond to  challenges to drug-resistant malaria.

And we will also strengthen defence cooperation through a strategic policy and  military capability planning exchange.

These outcomes will well and truly build the truly comprehensive relationship with  China we envisaged in the white paper, the Australia in the Asian century White  Paper, our national plan for the future which we announced last year.



There are few countries more important to us than China. The outcomes we have  achieved this week are a real investment in our future for all Australians.

I’m very glad that we’ve had such a successful visit.

I’m very happy to have shared this day with my ministerial colleagues, and I’m  happy to take your questions now.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the whole world is focussing on China and wants  to strike up relationship with the new Chinese leadership.

You’ve beaten the rest of Asia to the punch by getting the strategic dialogue that  only a couple of other countries of the world have.

How does it feel to have scored that sort of coup and put Australia right in the  forefront of this relationship?

PM: Well I’m obviously pleased for our country. This is an important step for  Australia, which is why I say this has been a good week for Australia.

A good week for Australia because this relationship is so important to us, and  now with this agreement we know that we will command attention here in China,  that we will have an annual level leaders’ exchange which galvanises our  system, their system, to prepare for it, to work through issues and to work  together.

That’s why it’s good news for us and good news for our future.

JOURNALIST: Obviously, at government and diplomatic levels this sort of thing  is seen as very important but all people in the street, people back in Australia  looking at it, looking for a practical angle to it.

Can you give us some examples of what it might mean for Australians?

PM: I think people in Australia understand how important China is to our  economic future.  I think they understand that very deeply.

And I think people too have an intuitive sense that as China continues to rise that  there are strategic changes in our region with implications for Australia and we  need to be able to understand them and work through them.

I think people would understand too, that right around the world countries are  competing for China’s attention.

They want to come to China and be heard. They want their issues to be right  there at the forefront of thinking in China.

That is understandable as this great power continues to rise.

What we have secured, through an annual leaders’ level dialogue and the  supporting ministerial dialogues, is a structure that says we’ll be there at the  table.

We won’t have to compete every time to get to the table. We’ll be there at the  table working on the issues that deeply matter to both of us.

And of course that goes to peace and stability in our region, it goes to our  economic relationship, it goes to the shared big-picture challenges of climate  change that the world necessarily has to focus on, and that our two countries  have to focus on.

JOURNALIST: These things can drive reform, because leaders can drive  bureaucracies et cetera.

Do you have any priorities in terms of what you want to achieve now that you can  get to the table with the Chinese Premier?

PM: Well we’ve of course had discussions at Premier level. I’ve met regularly  with the Premier, with the President, so we’ve got a good relationship now.

But this is about getting to a new stage and that’s why it’s a real breakthrough.

The things that are on our agenda are the things that we’ve been working on this  week; deepening our economic ties and broadening them.

We want to see diverse economic links, trade and investment links.

Strengthening our people-to-people links because nothing’s more important to  our understandings for the future.

Continuing to work on our defence links because that helps build trust and  cooperation.

Working on shared challenges like climate change for the future.

Working on the shared challenges of development in our region where too many  people die of preventable causes, and we’ve seen things like drug-resistant  malaria.

But it’s a relationship of course where we will work on the two issues that matter  to Australia and China, our bilateral relationship.

But as we aspire to make this a more and more comprehensive relationship, it’s  also about what we can do together, working within our region and within the  world, structures like the East Asia Summit and the G20 and APEC where we  work together.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can you give us some background as to how this  came about. When did you first start working on it?

And given that the leadership change was so relatively recently, what does it  mean and what does it say about how China values Australia, that this is  effectively one of the first things that the Chinese leadership team has done?

PM: Well, I wrote last April, so in April 2012, to the then President, to President  Hu.

But Senator Bob Carr, as Minister for Foreign Affairs, travelled to China in May  2012 and pursued some discussions. So I wrote the letter and Senator Carr was  here pursuing discussions.

I then asked Dennis Richardson, who is of course a very senior and experienced  public servant, to act as my special envoy on this question, and he travelled to  China in September last year.

Then we knew that we would see the leadership change in China and that there  were certain formal processes that needed to go through as the leadership  changed.

And in the very short window, between the formal change of leadership and this  visit, I spoke to the Premier by telephone.

JOURNALIST: Just a sense of the significance in terms of the history of the  relationship, is it the most important development since Whitlam came here in the  70s?

PM: Look, I think when people write the history of this relationship they will, of  course, always start it with Gough Whitlam and that tremendously courageous  decision that he made to have diplomatic relations with China.

And sitting here today, I don’t think we feel the weight of that decision perhaps  the way we should.  It was a truly courageous decision in its time.

And there have been steps forward in the relationship since. When the history of  the relationship is written, this will be remembered-



[INTERRUPTION]

PM: When the history of this relationship is written, I think this will be  remembered as a day that a big step forward was taken.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you think Gough would think or what you  hope he thinks of your work today?

PM: I think, for those of us that care about this relationship, and work on this  relationship - obviously Gough’s role is the stuff of legend and the stuff of history,  understandably - I’m not really reflecting on it through his eyes.

But certainly Gough has a lot to be proud of in creating modern Australia through  what he did to create this relationship.

JOURNALIST: A fairly important legacy of your prime ministership (inaudible)?

PM: This is an important breakthrough for us and I’m obviously very pleased, but  I’m pleased for Australia, it’s been a good week here.

It’s a step forward for us as a nation, that’s important for us.

It’s important to the people of Australia, it’s important to peace, stability, the  ability to talk about those things, the ability to talk about our economic  relationship in a structured dialogue every year.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said, I believe you were quoted as saying at  some stage that foreign policy and foreign affairs issues had not been the top  priority for you in your political life.

Are you getting into it now?

PM: I’ve taken this question quite a few times, as it happens.

And I think what you will find I said I talked about how I would always feel very  comfortable, indeed feel most comfortable in classrooms in Australia talking to  kids about their future.

As I think you’ve seen from the nature of the foreign policy engagements that I  have, I have now conspired to make sure that I now go to classrooms around the  world.

And I very much enjoyed the exchange with the young people in the classroom  today.

And those exchanges, obviously these important leader-level discussions are the  stuff of foreign policy, but I’d have to say it’s often the exchanges that I have with  young people, like the one I had today, which gives me the most heartwarming  sense about the future for our two countries.

JOURNALIST: Notwithstanding my earlier technical slip up, could you tell us  about how you found Premier Li Keqiang and do you think also that perhaps he’s  a Premier that, given his fluency in English, his affinity with the west, that he is  maybe a leader with which Australia can build, sort of a deeper and warmer  relationship, that people had previously tried to build but had be less successful  with the likes of say Hu Jintao?

PM: Human beings are different, and everybody‘s got a different style and  different personality.

I enjoyed my engagements with President Hu and with Premier Wen. I had the  opportunity to meet Premier Li before.

We in fact reflected on our earlier meetings in 2009 in Australia and then in 2011  when I travelled here as Prime Minister.

He’s an outgoing person to talk to, a real sense of humour, quick to smile and to  share a joke. I think in an Australian style we enjoy that.

We like a sense of friendly warmth in a conversation rather than all the formality  that can go with these occasions, so I did get a sense of warmth and  engagement from him.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you had quite length talks with the Premier today.  What other dimensions of the relationship did you get into?

And as you foreshadowed in recent days, did you speak about the Australians  detained in China? If so, what did you say, and what did the Premier say?

PM: I did raise a range of consular issues.

I’m not intending to go into them by the names of individuals. People that are the  subject to consular cases are entitled to their privacy too.

But I raised a range of consular issues, because in terms of raising that kind of  matter it’s appropriate to do it with the Premier and so I did that today.

Our discussions on consular cases will continue.

We talked broadly about our relationship, we obviously talked intensively about  the annual dialogue that we’re announcing today.



We talked about our economic relationship, about the steps forward we’ve taken  on that during this visit, about our aspirations for a free trade agreement, about  our aspirations for strengthening economic ties because that’s good for both our  countries, it’s good for Australian jobs.

We talked about regional peace and security. We referred to tensions on the  Korean Peninsula, we talked about the work we do in bodies like the East Asia  Summit.

We talked about the defence links between our countries, our focus on things like  carbon pollution and climate change, issues of cyber security, and I did canvass  human rights questions including Tibet.

JOURNALIST: In your speech yesterday, you added, that you would like to see  personal freedoms as something that is also pursued as China goes along the  reform road.

Is that something, and does this level of talks give you more freedom or more  ability to raise those more pointed questions, like human rights and like the need  for people to have a greater sense of personal freedom?

PM: We have a continuing Human Rights Dialogue with China.

When I’ve met leaders in the past, I’ve raised human rights. I did it on both  occasions, the meeting with the President and the meeting with the Premier  today.

That Human Rights Dialogue will continue. And I do believe that we have a  relationship where issues are not off the table, they are on the table for  discussions.

JOURNALIST: A lot of countries would potentially want to have this deal. Why  us?

What do we bring to the table? Is it a whole lot of iron ore? Or what is it that  they’ve said we’ll do it with you, I think there are only three other countries that  China has such a relationship with.

And a second question: on defence is there anything specific? Are we going to  have joint exercises or anything like that?

PM:  On the defence question, the step forward we’ve taken today in this  dialogue in our defence arrangements.

So we have a standing dialogue that I’ve spoken to you about during the course  of this trip, a military-to-military dialogue.

There will also be a policy-level dialogue which will happen between our  militaries. So this is all about building trust and confidence and transparency for  the future.

On “why us,” I think it says something about how China views its relationship with  Australia.

Yes, we have got a strong economic relationship, but that has been continuing  for some years now, so I think that the aim here is to be broadening and  deepening the relationship, so it is truly a comprehensive one.

And that is why it requires annual leaders-level exchanges, and I think that is  what China sees in it, a kind of deeper relationship with Australia.

JOURNALIST: How was the meeting with the chairwoman of Huawei today?

PM: I’ve met a number of Chinese business leaders whilst I have been here in a  series of business of events.

Huawei is a major employer in Australia. It has created a number of Australian  jobs. It’s a substantial seller of telecommunications technology in Australia.

So, just like I have met other Chinese business leaders, I met with the  chairwoman of Huawei today.

I did note that at the business leaders’ dialogue I was at that she was the only  woman representative from China amongst the business leaders gathered there.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you discuss the NBN decision?

PM: No, we did not.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you that a boat packed with  asylum seekers sailed into Geraldton harbour today, and is it proof that the  Government has lost control of our borders?

PM:  I’m going to leave that matter for the responsible-

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)

PM: I’m obviously here for a different purpose here today so that will be dealt  with back home.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I have a question about your remarks in your  speech today about defence. You mentioned the live-fire exercises that Australia  and China do together.

You also mentioned that you would like to bring the US into some sort of three-way exercise.

Have you approached the US on this? Is this something that is an ongoing  project with the US, and has there been any reaction from the Americans?

PM: We’ve certainly discussed with the US and it has been the subject of  discussion with other countries in our region.

Having exercises that bring together military forces, our own US forces, forces  from other countries in the region, to do things like disaster preparedness  exercises in the region in which we live, where we have seen so many horrible  disasters that have taken so many lives.

Things like the Japanese tsunami come to mind very, very quickly, as well as  what happened in Indonesia with the tsunami.

We’ve on more than one occasion exchanged military personnel for the purpose  of going to do humanitarian assistance.

If you exercise jointly about those things, then it builds your capability for that  kind of urgent response. It also builds some trust and confidence and that’s a  good thing.

JOURNALIST: China’s traditionally not been that excited about third parties  hosting or being involved in US-China defence drills.

Has there been a change of heart? What are they saying to your idea of bringing  the US and China together?

And can I ask a second question. What are we going to do about the debacle of  Asian languages education at schools and high schools in Australia?

PM: The answer to the first is our focus today was on this policy dialogue that I  spoke of in answer to another question over here so we didn’t talk about trilateral  exercising during the course of the discussions today.

On Asian languages in schools, we’ve certainly set a big aspiration in the White  Paper for children having access to a priority Asian language during school.

There’s been a lot of endeavours to lift Asian language study, indeed languages  study, in Australian schools. It’s proved to be quite difficult to do.



I think there’s two things we can do, which would make a difference.

One, we would want to embed this in our national plan for school improvement  associated with our funding reforms.

So it’s not an add-on to the whole schooling system and the whole school  funding arrangements are over here and then you have a boutique program over  here.

We want to embed it in the whole school funding arrangements. That’s a new  approach.

We’ve never tried that before, and so I think that that gives us a difference for the  future.

And number two, one of the problems here is you get in a spiral down where not  many people have been studying languages so that there’s not many qualified  language teachers.

So not every school can have a language teacher in any language or all  languages and obviously it’s not a sustainable vision to say in every primary and  secondary school we’d have someone who can speak every language and teach  in it.



But through the power of the National Broadband Network, we can in real time  with high quality and definition, bringing language teaching to schools that don’t  have a language speaker available to them.

So I think they’re things we’ve got to do. We’ve also got to be very clear with  young people - and this is one of the things we wanted to spark out of the White  Paper - very clear with our young people about why that real effort is worth it.

It’s not easy to become fluent in another language; you are actually sitting next to  very high level very skilled translator, he could be explained to you how it’s not  easy.

So it’s not easy to become fluent in another language, so we have to be inspiring  our young people to understand why all that effort is worthwhile.

And indeed, careers like yours, your own and Peter’s, are things that we can  point to that make that effort worthwhile.

JOURNALIST: One of the big gaps in the relationship is the FTA. Did you get a  sense that that can be progressed in the next couple of years, and maybe Dr  Emerson has a comment.



And I was wondering what the ministers feel was the biggest point of this  exercise for them?

PM: Well, great minds think alike.

That was exactly the terminology I used in the meeting with the Premier, that it is  a gap in our relationship, and we are going back into talks on the FTA in May and  I’ll get Dr Emerson to address those talks.

MINISTER EMERSON: We seek high ambition for the FTA.

An FTA is worth having, but if it is high ambition and that means that we need to  deal with the sensitivities on both sides.

We could have a low ambition FTA, like a trophy to sit on the national  mantelpiece to say we’ve got one, but we want it to do some work we want it to  make a difference.

And the Premier today looked around and I said I’m the FTA guy so I guess I’ve  got a special responsibility because he was looking for the FTA guy.

The reason he was looking for the FTA guy is because the Premier was very  keen and spent some considerable time talking about the challenge that the  great benefits that an FTA would bring.

MINISTER CARR: I don’t want to add to what the Prime Minister said.

JOURNALIST: Would the National Broadband Network be at risk under a Tony  Abbott Government?

PM: A very creative try but I’m leaving that to the folks back home too.

Thank you very much.

[ENDS]

