

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Radio National w Fran Kelly

5 February 2013

Subjects: Election date, release of policies and costings, Sri Lanka visit

E&OE…

JULIE BISHOP Thank you Fran, good morning to you.

FRAN KELLY Tony Abbott told Shadow Cabinet yesterday that quote “people are looking  for a little bit more from us, they want us not so much to be an opposition, but to be an  alternative government”. What does that mean?

JULIE BISHOP Well the Coalition is working hard every day to outline the plan that we have  for Australia’s future should we be elected as the next government and we are ready to  provide strong and stable and certain government for the country in contrast to the Labor  Government which is in disarray and chaos. You only have to listen to the comments from  Labor members and Senators themselves to understand the level of disquiet, disillusionment  and disarray within the Labor ranks.

FRAN KELLY Does it mean in real terms that you’ll be talking more about policy and  releasing more policy and moving less censure motions in question time, suspending standing  orders for debate in question time?

JULIE BISHOP Well we decide our parliamentary tactics on a day-by-day basis but overall  this is part of our plan. We are in opposition for three years and this is how we always  intended to run our campaign for the next election. This year we will be outlining more  detailed policies, we’ve already released a number of policies, Tony’s given a number of  headland speeches about the direction that we would take the country, our core vales, our  approach to economic management, to welfare, to taxation reform and the like and we’re  going to be talking about that this year.

I mean the country has been let down by a very bad government and we want to ensure that  our policies, our plans for the future reflect the concerns of the Australian people. We’re not  there just to hold power as Labor is desperately doing, we’re there in the interests of the  Australian people.

FRAN KELLY For the voters to make that judgement and really judge you as an alternative  government they’ll need to see your policies and in terms of economic management they’ll  need to see the sums and there’s been a lot said about that. You will have all the numbers you  need when the budget is released on the 14th of May as of budget night there’ll be no excuse  will there for the Coalition not to move on releasing costings for their policies?

JULIE BISHOP Well that’s not correct Fran, there will be..

FRAN KELLY Why not?

JULIE BISHOP Well because the full impact of the budget will be not known until the 30th  of September which is another reason why the Prime Minister clearly chose the 14th of  September as the election date, so the full impact of the budget won’t be known until the 30th  of September.

But over time we will of course cost our policies, we will be releasing policies in relation to  small business to help them get back on their feet, we’ll be releasing policies in relation to tax  reform, we’re going to get the budget under control, we’re going to cut out waste, we’ll  reduce debt..

FRAN KELLY But it’s all very well to say those things until you produce the numbers on  how you’re going to do it, and the government will be held to account for the numbers. It  says it will work to on the budget, won’t you at least be equal, even stevens, on that measure  if you’re both using the numbers set down in the budget?

JULIE BISHOP We will be costing all our policies before people have to make their choice  on election day.

FRAN KELLY But more than three days before? More than 10 days before?

JULIE BISHOP Well these are matters we’ll determine when we see the state of the books  Fran, I don’t know what the books are going to look like. Not any of the government’s  forecasts have actually come to fruition. Wayne Swan has promised about 300 times that he  would deliver a budget surplus, the last time Labor delivered a budget surplus was in the  1980s.

FRAN KELLY The Coalition has called yesterday on the Clean Energy Finance Corporation  to hold off on any funding decisions until after the election now. But this is just a bluff isn’t  it? We’re not in any kind of legal caretaker mode now are we?

JULIE BISHOP Well Julia Gillard has called the election for the 14th of September, it seems  that the Australian Electoral Commission believes that the election has been called, already  it’s talking about postal votes and that sort of thing, so the Electoral Commission is gearing  up for the election, we certainly are and we believe that the government has made this call,  we are in virtual caretaker mode. Things like the equal access for political parties under the  Broadcasting Act, that is now applicable as I understand it, I’m yet to be told that it’s not and  so I think this is an own goal for the government.

FRAN KELLY What’s the [inaudible] in caretaker mode mean though, I mean are you really  arguing the best thing for the country now, seven months before the start of the election  campaign formerly, before the writs are issued, the public service go into caretaker mode  now?

JULIE BISHOP Well you’re not seriously suggesting that Julia Gillard hasn’t set the election  date? She said it’s the 14th of September. Now if we are to take her at her word, and I know

that’s a big call, if we’re to take her at her word, it’s the 14th of September so we are in  virtual campaign mode now.

FRAN KELLY So is it the Coalition’s position now then, seven months out before the writs  will be issued, the public service of Australia suspends policy delivery?

JULIE BISHOP We’re taking advice on that matter.

FRAN KELLY But you’re seriously considering that you think that the public service should  go effectively into caretaker mode now?

JULIE BISHOP Well we are seriously considering the implications of the Prime Minister  setting the 14th of September as the election date. It was her call to make it six months early,  it seems that nobody in her own party believes her reasons for it and if it was to provide  certainty and stability to the Australian people, well three days after she announces it two of  her senior ministers resign so it’s not providing any certainty and stability within the Labor  Party. You can’t run your own party, you can’t run the country, that’s the old saying.

FRAN KELLY So you’re seeking advice on this. Who’ve you gone to make a call on this?

JULIE BISHOP That’s a matter for the party administration.

FRAN KELLY You’re listening to RM breakfast, our guest this morning is the deputy  opposition leader and shadow foreign minister Julie Bishop.

Julie Bishop you’ve just returned from Sri Lanka where you discussed border protection  issues with the Sri Lankan government and the Coalition’s position is that all asylum seeker  boats could be intercepted before they reach Australian waters, you’ve got the Australian  Navy involved in that. Would a Coalition Government, can we be clear on this, instruct the  Australian Navy to turn back boats in international waters?

JULIE BISHOP Yes, on our border protection policy that is what we’ve satisfied ourselves  upon after our visit to Sri Lanka on our border protection policy. I’m satisfied that it is correct  given the views of Tamils, the Sri Lankan Government and representatives from the Indian  Government where about 6000 Tamils have returned to be reintegrated into Sri Lankan  society. We’re convinced that our policy is correct.

FRAN KELLY Is it legal? Because there’s many legal experts lining up to say it would be in  breach of international maritime and refugee law.

JULIE BISHOP Well the United States have court cases that back its position and they do it  on a regular basis.

FRAN KELLY Is it safe? What about asylum seekers aboard those boats with genuine fear of  persecution? Wouldn’t you be in breach of the non-refoulement obligations of the convention  by sending them back?

JULIE BISHOP Fran this is an interesting point. If there are people in Sri Lanka who fear  persecution, India is about 30km away and India provides safe haven for refugees, access to  work, education, schooling. In fact the UNHCR has said India is a model country when it

comes to its treatment of refugees. If you fear persecution you can get to India within hours.  If you were otherwise to get on a boat, it would take weeks to deal with the people smuggling  trade, a 3000km journey by boat, it would cost you 1m rupee and you are more likely to die  at sea than you are to be persecuted in Sri Lanka.

FRAN KELLY Is it any government’s right to tell people who are in fear of their lives where  they should go to claim safety? Certainly under the convention it’s not.

JULIE BISHOP Fran I am convinced that our policy setting is right. I have been there, I’ve  been to the North, I’ve visited former Tamil strongholds, the Tamil Tiger town of  Kilinochchi, we met with the TNA, we’ve spoken to a range of people, seen conditions on the  ground and in terms of the reconciliation process, yes there’s a way to go, political settlement  between the Sinhalese and the Tamils must be effected but as far as rehabilitation is  concerned we’ve seen real attempts to rehabilitate the former Tamil Tiger cadres within the  society.

The resettlement has virtually been completed, the reconstruction, the infrastructure build in  the North of Sri Lanka has to be seen to be believed, of course there are grievances but we  mustn’t make the mistake to assume that every controversy, every grievance relates to the  Tamil conflict.

FRAN KELLY What were you told though? What did you hear of ongoing Tamil abuse by  the Sinhalese?

JULIE BISHOP We didn’t hear of ongoing Tamil abuse by the Sinhalese, that’s the point.  There was one Tamil MP whose office was raided by local police, and he complained about  that to us and fair enough, but when we asked the Tamil leadership whether the Tamil MPs  had been harassed or violated or physically abused they said no. They didn’t cite this instance  of his office being raided as an example of any violation or abuse.

We have satisfied ourselves that conditions on the ground are such that people can be  returned safely and the evidence of that is 6000 Tamils who have returned from India and are  living in Northern Sri Lanka.

FRAN KELLY Because that is disputed immediately by one Tamil National Alliance MP,  they say that people in Kilinochchi and surrounding Tamil areas are living in fear and there’s  been no improvements in their lives and they’re afraid to speak out.

JULIE BISHOP That is absolutely not the case..

FRAN KELLY He also said he told, this MP told you this personally.

JULIE BISHOP Yes I met him, I know exactly who you’re talking about. That was the MP  whose office had been raided by the police, he claims he’s been framed over pornography on  his computer, we won’t go into the details, it’s a police matter.

But overall we saw significant improvement in schooling, the North now has electricity, they  didn’t have electricity four years ago, there’s now mobile phone coverage throughout the  North, there are new hospitals, new roads, malnutrition rates have fallen dramatically, teacher  student radio is now 17/1 there are 28,000 students now in schools who weren’t in schools, I

mean the improvement is palpable. Everywhere you go people are talking about the  investment in the North and we were free to talk to whomever we wished and we got a lot of  feedback over the five days that we were there.

FRAN KELLY Julie Bishop, thank you very much for joining us on breakfast.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends -



