UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT



17 June 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL ROWLAND - ABC24 NEWS BREAKFAST

SUBJECT: Polls; ALP leadership; asylum seekers; National Plan for School Improvement.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

ROWLAND: And to look at what's ahead and what's shaping up to be a lively week in  Canberra, we're joined by the Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus and the Opposition's defence  spokesman David Johnston. Gentlemen, good morning to both of you.

JOHNSTON: Good morning, Michael.

DREYFUS: Morning, Michael.

ROWLAND: Mark Dreyfus, if I could start with you, are you prepared to go to the election  with a primary vote with a two in front of it?

DREYFUS: Michael, I spent last week, most of it, in my electorate talking to people and  taking soundings in my electorate. I tell you what they were mostly talking about to me: it  was their disgust at the way the Prime Minister was treated last week and the overall tone  of political debate. They want to see us lift this week in the tone of political debate, and I'm  hoping to contribute to that.

ROWLAND: Well, they might have been telling you that, but this much more extensive  survey by Nielsen shows that people have switched off the Labor Party generally.

DREYFUS: Well, as I say, I take soundings from people in my electorate. I talk to people  there. The other thing they were talking to me about was just their general dissatisfaction  with Tony Abbott and their distrust of him. I hear this over and over again.



People are very worried about the risk that Tony Abbott presents and why wouldn't they  be? In Victoria we've got a Liberal Premier now starting to talk about reviving WorkChoices  again, industrial relations stuff. That's what we're not hearing from Tony Abbott because he  wants to be a small target.

I want to see a return to some policy debate, Michael, and I'm looking forward to hearing  questions about policy from the press gallery as well.

ROWLAND: David Johnston, if I can turn it to you, on this poll really shows voters aren't  enamoured of either leader, because it shows that Malcolm Turnbull is twice as popular as  Tony Abbott.

JOHNSTON: Well, Mark's sticking well to his speaking notes for this morning. The fact is that  small business, business generally, the mining industry's doing it quite tough at the moment  and yet Labor wants to talk about itself. The pollsters are very self-indulgent in asking a  question that is completely removed from reality. When Kevin Rudd was the leader, his  polling went south; Tony Abbott was the Opposition leader. I've no reason to doubt the  same thing will happen when they reshuffle the deck chairs on this Titanic, this train wreck  that is Labor in terms of dysfunction, carbon tax, boat people, you name it. Look, we're  focused on winning the next election, not on polls.

ROWLAND: Mark Dreyfus, back to you. If, theoretically speaking, Kevin Rudd was to return,  would you serve in a Rudd Cabinet?

DREYFUS: Look, I'm focused on getting on with the job that we're here to do in Canberra for  this next two weeks, the last two sitting weeks of our Parliament. There's one hundred bills  on the Senate Notice Paper, some of them are exceptionally important, notably the  constitutional amendment referendum. I went to the Australian Local Government dinner  here in Canberra last night. There's more than 500 councils in Australia that are agreed on  the need to amend our Constitution.

That's what they want to see us dealing with here. It passed through the House last sitting  week, 134 votes to two, gives you an idea of the level of support, and they want it passed  through the Senate in the next couple of days. That's the sort of thing we want to get on  with.

ROWLAND: I want to drill down to some policy issues, but just one final question. You didn't  answer the question. Peter Garrett, the Education Minister, clearly took a view when asked  yesterday that he wouldn't serve in a Rudd Cabinet. What is your position on that?

DREYFUS: I don't comment on my colleagues, Michael. I'm here to serve as a proud...

ROWLAND: No, I'm not asking about your colleagues, I'm asking your view, Mr Dreyfus.

MARK DREYFUS: You're asking about my colleagues in every sense and I'm here to serve as  a very proud Minister in a Labor Government and continue to serve the people of Australia.  That's what this is about for me. It's serving in a Labor Government.

ROWLAND: Okay, let's look at some of those policy issues. One, of course, one intractable  one is asylum seekers. David Johnston, on the show earlier we had Chris Barrie, the former  Navy Chief and Defence Chief, not very happy with the Coalition's plan to turn boats back.  He says, and I'm quoting him directly, that is dirty filthy work for the Navy. It is, isn't it?

JOHNSTON: Well, Michael, let me first say I really want to serve on a Tony Abbott front  bench. Turning back the boats is one very small part of our overall suite of policies in dealing  with 3000 people a month is what we're dealing with. The dysfunction of this Government is  costing us somewhere between $6 billion and $10 billion a year.

Now, what we need to do is engage Indonesia properly and respectfully. The problem is as  big for them as it is for us. To have journalists constantly focusing on one small part really  does underline the nature of the problem. This is a problem that the Labor Party created.  You know, remember Oceanic Viking? Remember the way we dealt with live exports? The  Indonesians are very upset with us. We need to get them back to a place where we can talk  to them properly and we can, together, deal with this problem. That's the solution.

ROWLAND: The Indonesians have made it very clear they're not willing to sign up to this  particular part of your policy.

JOHNSTON: Well, let's sit down and talk to them about that. Let's sit down and engage  them properly. I mean, telling them that their supply of meat is going to be terminated by a  press release is no way to create a friendly relationship where we can deal with problems  together. That's what this Government has done and we're paying a big price for it, may I  say.

ROWLAND: Mark Dreyfus, over to you. Gonski, the big policy position being pushed by the  Prime Minister. We had the Victorian Education Minister Martin Dixon on the show as well  earlier. He wouldn't rule out signing up to Gonski, but he has serious questions about your  funding model. How confident are you of getting your home state of Victoria on-board?

DREYFUS: I'm very pleased to hear you say that Martin Dixon, the Education Minister in  Victoria, is talking positively about it - so he should be. This is very heartening to hear that  he's going to put the interests of Victorian schoolchildren ahead of partisan political  interest. We've seen a conservative government, the New South Wales Government, sign up  to the national school funding reform. It's long overdue.

I'm calling on the Victorian Government to get on with it quick-smart because it means  nearly $4 billion for Victorian schools. That's what people in my electorate talked to me  about last week. They want to see the Victorian Government sign up to the Gonski reforms.

ROWLAND: But if Victoria, for argument's sake, was to sign up, you still wouldn't have a lot  of states, namely Queensland, and Western Australia, who haven't signed up to Gonski.  What hope is there of the Prime Minister reaching that 30 June target?

DREYFUS: Discussions are continuing. We've seen New South Wales sign up, we've seen  South Australia sign up, the ACT sign up. Discussions are continuing with Queensland and  Tasmania and Western Australia and Victoria, and that's what this is about. It's about  getting on with the job of bringing in a needs-based funding reform.

It’s immensely long overdue. Howard Government ministers were talking in '05 and '06 and  '07 about why the school funding system was broken, and we get the ridiculous position  from Tony Abbott and his front bench saying there's nothing that needs to be done. Well,  anybody that's got anything to do with a school anywhere in Australia knows that we need a  needs-based funding system. That's what this is about. It's more money for Australian  schools and Australian schoolchildren, and I'm hoping we can get on with it.

ROWLAND: Over to you, David Johnston. According to Christopher Pyne, if the Coalition was  elected to government he'd sit back for two years and reconsider other funding models. Can  Australian schools, can Australian schoolchildren afford to wait that long?

JOHNSTON: Like everything this Government does, it's all talk and no action. The funding  model is non-existent. Western Australia, Queensland and Victoria have realised that under  Gonski they'll actually get less money, which is rather typical of the train wreck that is this  Government, you know, out there telling the media things are going to be rosy in the  garden. There's no money and when the sums are done, the states are quite right to be very  suspicious, but when the sums are done they see they're actually getting less money. Now,  you know...

DREYFUS: And that is just false, Michael.

JOHNSTON: Gonski is typical of what Labor does.

DREYFUS: [inaudible]

JOHNSTON: I'm sorry?

DREYFUS: That is just false, Michael.

JOHNSTON: No, it's not. It's obvious. Colin Barnett tells us every day that under the  Commonwealth model Western Australia will get less, and of course Queensland is coming  to the same conclusion and Victoria is coming to the same conclusion.

ROWLAND: But the question I was putting to you, David Johnston, what would you do in  government?

JOHNSTON: We'll have a look at what we can do. Michael, the presumption that  everybody's making is that government will be able to just sail along like we have, with debt

and deficit. The fact is this Budget has been blown, there is no money left for anything much  in terms of discretionary spending. Let's get a handle on how deep, how bad this economy  is.

ROWLAND: But education isn't discretionary spending.

JOHNSTON: I'm sorry, say that again?

ROWLAND: Education isn't discretionary spending.

JOHNSTON: Well, it is when you're booming up and talking about billions of dollars in new  money. Where's the funding model? People must ask where is the money coming from.

ROWLAND: Well, so, and on that basis, the Coalition will be reluctant to commit more  money to schools?

JOHNSTON: Absolutely if there's no money and it means more debt, more pressure on tax  payers, you know, more pressure on small business. Let's get our priorities right. Education  is crucially important, but somebody has to pay for it.

ROWLAND: Mark Dreyfus?

DREYFUS: Education is crucially important. That's why we're doing something about it.  What's disgraceful here is to hear David Johnston and Tony Abbott and others on the Liberal  front bench bullying conservative state premiers into not signing up for partisan political  reasons. We need to put the interests of our kids ahead of party interests. It's vital that we  do, and your question's the right one, Michael, that needs to be asked of Tony Abbott about  every single policy area - what are you going to do?

Because at the moment Tony Abbott's rolled himself into a ball. He's not owning up to what  he wants to do, he's pretending to be a small target. The question every day between now  and the next election is what are you going to do, how are you going to do it? And I'm  hoping we can return to some serious policy debate because that's what elections should be  about.

ROWLAND: Okay, we're out of time, so just one very very final quick question to you, Mark  Dreyfus. At the end of these two weeks, do you still expect Julia Gillard to be Prime  Minister?

DREYFUS: Absolutely.

ROWLAND: Mark Dreyfus and David Johnston, thank you both for your time this morning.

DREYFUS: Thank you.

ENDS

