THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  LATELINE  ABC  TUESDAY, 18 JUNE 2013

SUBJECT: 457 VISAS, ASYLUM SEEKERS

EMMA ALBERICI: The Federal Government hopes to have the changes to the 457 visa scheme passed  through Federal Parliament tomorrow. It believes the scheme has been rorted to get cheap labour  from overseas instead of hiring people locally. But independent MPs are questioning the need for  the reform when they say there's no evidence of widespread abuse of  the system. A comprehensive  survey of 1,600 companies and 3,800 475 visa holders conducted by the Migration Council of  Australia found that only two per cent of foreign workers were being underpaid.

The Minister for Immigration, Brendan O'Connor, joined us just a short time ago from our Parliament  House studio.

Brendan O'Connor, welcome to Lateline.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thank you.

EMMA ALBERICI: How are you going to convince the independents to back your 457 changes when  Rob Oakeshott for one says he hasn't seen any evidence to support your claims of rorting in the  system?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I think there is compelling evidence and all members and senators can  make their own decision on that and indeed Mr Oakeshott will be provided information, any  information he seeks from us in relation to that. These reforms of course come off the back of  matters or deficiencies with the current scheme identified a year ago by the Department. So they're  long term - they've been in the process of being determined for some time now. But we're at the  point where the Parliament must decide, and I think they will look to ensure that employers have to  look local first before they seek temporary labour from overseas and I think that's a reasonable  proposition.

EMMA ALBERICI: Do you stand by your figure of 10 per cent of Australian companies abusing the 457  visa scheme?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I've been asked to approximate the amount of visas that don't fulfil the  intent and spirit of the visa. By that I mean whether there  were legitimate shortages at the time. And  my view is that there is a significant problem with the scheme because you never had to fulfil your  attestations that you look for local work. In other words, you could say you look for local work, but if  you didn't, there was no infringements, there were no penalties and that has led to a point where  employers - a significant number, not a majority, but a significant number have sought to seek work  from overseas without looking locally. And that's confirmed by the Migration Council of Australia's  own survey where 15 per cent - and not 10 per cent, but 15 per cent of employers said they had no  trouble finding local workers, but they didn't seek to employ them locally.

EMMA ALBERICI: In fact I'm going to challenge that figure because I've looked at that report and that  15 per cent figure came from a question that asked: "Do you find it difficult to hire or employ  workers from the local labour market?" It didn't conflate that with whether or not they were  choosing instead to hire overseas.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, no, but it was for those people who were actually employing, sponsoring  457 visas.

EMMA ALBERICI: I did speak to Carla Wiltshire and I did read her report. Well she says you're  misrepresenting entirely her figures because she says that 15 per cent figure just relates to the  entirety of their workforce. So for instance, she makes the example that if a big employer - a big  retail employer was asked the question, they would say ...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's just ridiculous. That's a ridiculous construction on the question and I  would disagree fundamentally with what you're drawing.

EMMA ALBERICI: This was her report though. You're fundamentally disagreeing with her report?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I fundamentally disagree with the conclusions drawn with respect to the  Migration Council in suggesting that the 15 per cent doesn't refer to employers who sought to look  overseas when they had no difficulty in employing locals.

EMMA ALBERICI: No, can I give you the example they gave me, the people who actually wrote this  report?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Sure.

EMMA ALBERICI: They said with the example of a big retailer they were asked the question: "Have  you found it difficult to employ locally?," and they would say "No" because in  their entirety ...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: There's no "because" in the survey.

EMMA ALBERICI: In the entirety of their workforce they employ shopkeepers as well as, for example,  she said, people in IT, ...

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's an absurd construction.

EMMA ALBERICI: ... for instance, these retailers who are looking to go online for instance are looking  overseas to find the experts that can help them move into a different aspect of their industry.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, well that's just nonsense. The point is the 15 per cent refers to employers  who are involved in the scheme and they suggested they had no difficulty looking and indeed having  local employees, but they chose not to look locally.

EMMA ALBERICI: No, that's not the question, Mr O'Connor. That was not the question.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well let me tell you - well then we're going to disagree on the construction.  The other - we're going to disagree on the construction. My view from that report clearly indicates  that employers who are having no difficulty employing locally have chosen not to look locally. And  the reason they've chosen not to look locally is because there are no breaches if they do not. Now,  you can have one view and a construction on the question...



EMMA ALBERICI: That wasn't the question they were asked, that's all I'm saying.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, I don't agree with you. I'm suggesting to you that you can look all you like  aghast; the point is I believe the Migration Council of Australia used the data, which in fact is  departmental data, and wrongly constructed the actual analysis to the point where they are wrong  in their conclusions. Further to that, as I've said already, we have in sectors of our economy - if I can  go to other evidence, not just the report to which you refer - we've had 100 per cent increases in  457 use, for example in retail, when there's been a one per cent increase in total employment  growth. We've seen a decline in real and nominal wages in the IT sector where there's been a spike  of 457 uses and that's because we've seen I think a misuse of the scheme.

So there is sufficient information and evidence to suggest that we need to reform the scheme  because there is no requirement for the employer to fulfil their undertaking that they will look  locally. All we're doing by this reform is saying, "You should advertise locally." What's wrong with  looking locally first? There's nothing wrong.

EMMA ALBERICI: Minister, why didn't the Prime Minister look locally when she hired a head of  communications from overseas?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, look, we've gone through this a number of times now. It's not for me to  come on your show and talk about an individual staff member of the Government. It's about  whether we're ...

EMMA ALBERICI: But did she advertise locally?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I think the 457 application to which you refer was approved by the Howard  Government - that's the first thing. You'll have to ask the Prime Minister's office. But let's not  distract this very important debate about whether we use a temporary ski lled stream effectively and  efficiently and equitably and do it pursuant to the intent of the scheme - let's not distract it by these  sideline issues. Let's talk about: are local employees missing out, are unemployed Australians  missing out? And in some circumstances they are.

I have said all along: the 457 scheme is absolutely critical to our labour market. It shouldn't have a  cap on it because it needs to respond to the shortages in sectors of our economy, but it should not  be misused and local employees deserve a chance to be employed first.

EMMA ALBERICI: Now the Australian Industry Group's Innes Willox describes your campaign to crack  down on the 457 visa scheme as an almost redneck campaign to drive fear into the community.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well it's an absurd proposition. It's a typical response by an employer body  who doesn't want to talk about the facts - and it's also an offensive remark to suggest that in some  way we're looking to do anything other than to ensure that a temporary scheme is use d for the  purposes of responding to legitimate shortages in the labour market. There is nothing discriminatory  about our immigration policy. We have and we should be very proud of the fact that we have a non -discriminatory immigration policy. I'm a migrant. I can assure you I take great offence if people  suggest that I would ever introduce public policy in order to divide people. And I can assure you also  that we believe the 457 scheme should operate, but it will not maintain the confidence of the public  if indeed it is misused. And it is misused in certain circumstances and these reforms will only require  employers to look locally first, advertise locally, upon which, if there is a deficiency or a skills  shortage, they of course can use the 457 scheme, as they should be able to do. But it was always

intended to be used when there are legitimate shortages and I don't think there's anything wrong  with that and I think most Australians agree with me.

EMMA ALBERICI: Why haven't you managed to calm people's fears about these huge numbers of  asylum seekers coming to this country by boat?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I think it is a - it can be a concern for people when people see people  endangering their lives, there's constantly of course in the media - it's very dramatic and in many  cases it's very tragic. And I think that does create concern for people. I think there's a genuine  concern about the people that might be on the high seas.

I think there is a concern about people taking irregular passage to Australia and that's caused angst  in the community and for that reason I think we therefore have a responsibility in talking about  these things as well as we can without causing distress. I mean, if you want to look at the  comparisons, we're not alone; we're one of many, many First World countries that confront the  people seeking asylum, people taking grave risks on occasion. You know, we're one of many  countries and we probably are the target of only about two per cent of all that seek to come to First  World countries. So I guess the debate could be done properly and more responsibly, I think, by  leaders.

I think there could be less anxiety if we were to join together, and I guess my appeal to the  opposition, indeed to the Parliament, is it would be helpful if we work ed on those recommendations  that three eminent Australians coming from very different perspectives forged out of their  consideration and put those recommendations. Those three eminent Australians, Angus Houston,  Michael L'Estrange and Paris Aristotle, compromised, if you like, or came from different perspectives  and reconciled their differences. I think it's incumbent for the Parliament to do the same and accept  the recommendations so we can go forward. And if we did that, I think there would be less disqui et  within the community.

EMMA ALBERICI: UN staff are telling Somali refugees there's no point applying for humanitarian  protection in Australia because Australia won't accept Somalian refugees. Why not?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well that's not true. That's entirely untrue. In fact Somali is one of the five  African countries that are in the top 10 countries that we resettle. We've actually increased. Our  government is proud of the fact that we've just increased the humanitarian program places to  20,000. And for that ...

EMMA ALBERICI: But how many of them are Somalians?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well as I say, five of the top - I don't have the specific number; I didn't know  you were going to ask that particular question. But I can say this to you: that five of the top 10  settlement countries are African countries including Somalia and we ensure that people are settled.  But they are settled - they're more likely to be settled if they are seeking the UNHCR and IOM in  Africa. They're not seen as a priority in Indonesia according to the UNHCR, not according to the  Australian Government.

EMMA ALBERICI: But this is the UNHCR telling these people that in Indonesia they're not welcome in  Australia.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, well, I've said to you that's not right. The UNHCR is the  international body  that we listen to in terms of the priorities for people around the world and they are not on that list.

But the five of the 10 resettlement countries, top 10 resettlement countries include five African  countries. So it's completely ludicrous. Now, what will happen, Emma, if the Opposition were to be  elected is there'll be a reduction of 20,000 to 13,750 because the Opposition Leader is now opposing  the increase. It will mean there'll be fewer offshore places for Africans and there will b e an increase  likelihood for people to take dangerous irregular passage to Australia.

EMMA ALBERICI: The Government's budgeted $2.8 billion next year for offshore asylum  management, but after that the figure drops to $1.7 billion. Can you explain why the figure's going  down when the number of arrivals is going up?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well, firstly budgetary costs don't pertain specifically to just the number. It  depends on how long people are kept in detention, it depends on how long people stay in the  community - in the detention network. For example, because we're increasing the proportion of  detainees being on bridging visas, you're seeing a very significant decline in per capita costs. So you'll  see a fall in per capita costs over time as a proportion, or a greater proportion of detainees actually  on bridging visas on income, but not in detention. Detention is a very expensive exercise. It's not  only a concern to advocates and others about people being detained. It's actually quite frankly more  expensive. And so, certainly you'll see a reduction in per capita costs and that's why you'll see that  come up in the budget figures.

EMMA ALBERICI: Do you still think Labor can win the election under Julia Gillard when all the polls  indicate that you've got a much better chance of stemming the Coalition vote with Kevin Rudd?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I do. I think we can win the election, but we can only win the election if we're  united and I think we've got a very good message to sell. I think we've done some very good t hings in  terms of getting through the Global Financial Crisis, in terms of jobs, in terms of the economy  growing by 14 per cent. I mean, we are, amongst all advanced economies, the best performing  economy in the world. I think we've got some very good reforms in disability care and education  reforms and many others, and of course we've got the NBN broadband. These policies I think are,  both in terms of our achievements and what we're looking to do in the future, is something that I  think most Australians are agree with. But we cannot get that message out more effectively if we're  talking about ourselves and we're divided.

We must come together and we should come together behind the Prime Minister, and that will, I  think, not only show that we have got a plan for Australia's future, but it'll also expose the  deficiencies in the Opposition's so-called plan. A slogan on boats, nothing on education, nothing on  health, a very expensive attacks tax on companies. I think those things will be focused upon. But we  need to come together, Emma, and we need to focus on those things that matter to Australians.

EMMA ALBERICI: What's going to bring you together as a party?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I think - you would hope that there would be an understanding, a  growing understanding that without that unity of purpose, we're not going to properly present  ourselves as a good government. And I think we've got a very good record. And I think we should  compare - if you compare us with other comparable countries, we've done remarkably well in very  difficult economic times and we are a showcase in many respects when you compare us around the  world, but we need to show unity and we need to show that we want to win this election. And I  think we can win it because we've got a good record and we've got a good plan for the future. We  just need to be sure that the Australian people understand that we're together on this.

EMMA ALBERICI: We'll have to leave it there. Brendan O'Connor, thanks very much.



BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks very much, Emma.

