

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE  TUESDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2013

Subjects: Direct Action con, climate change, asylum seekers, opening of  the 44th parliament.

Samantha Armytage: Bill, Good morning to you.

Bill Shorten: Good morning Sam.

Armytage: Once the pomp and ceremony is out of the way today, the first order of  business is expected to be the Coalition’s move to abolish the carbon tax. Will you  support its axing given low income families and pensioners will be financially better  off here?

Shorten: Labor’s policy before the election was, which we are going to stick to after  the election, is that we will support repealing the carbon tax but on the basis that  the Parliament of Australia deals with and supports real, effective action on climate  change. What we won’t do is just support repealing one strategy on dealing with  climate change and carbon pollution and replace it with something that doesn’t  work. We think that mortgages our kid’s future.

David Koch: So you will oppose it unless Tony Abbott comes up with an  alternative?

Shorten: Well my nature is to always try and find the middle ground. I believe  climate change is real and I don’t believe a parliament, our parliament is meant to  be the leaders of Australia, should just put off to the future problems we should deal  with now. I think we owe it more to our kids and grandkids to deal with issues  rather than delay them.

Koch: Absolutely. So you’re not saying we’ll agree to the axing of the carbon tax  and wait for the Abbott Government to release some proposals. If they don’t  announce an alternative you’ll vote against it today?

Shorten: Yes, well we’ll debate but I imagine at some point in the next two to three  weeks, we’ll put up our amendments, if they are unsuccessful what we won’t do, the  Liberals current plan is going to mean that taxpayers have to pay a lot more money  to pay big companies who are putting out high levels of carbon emissions, carbon  pollution, we don’t think the taxpayer should pay polluters to put out their carbon.

Armytage: While we are talking about climate change, Green’s Senator Richard di  Natale has recently linked climate change to Typhoon Haiyan. Now we saw claims in  the last couple of weeks linking climate change to the bush fires. Do you think these  types of claims harm both sides of the debate?

Shorten: I think the timing of some of those claims is difficult because what we  have seen in the Philippines is a great tragedy. I and certainly the Labor party will  support the Red Cross appeal. I don’t think that the immediate aftermath should be  publicised but on the other side, I certainly said that view on the bush fires too, but  what I also recognise is that Australians are concerned that with more and more  extreme weather events, people are concerned about what is happening with our  climate. But I think in the immediate aftermath of tragedy with thousands of people  who have died, I would probably focus on the rescue and recovery. We’ve got very  good Filipino community in Australia they will be worried about their families. I think  that’s where my priority will be in the short term.

Koch: That’s fair enough. Alright, we have ticked off carbon tax, that was one pillar  of Tony Abbott of being elected, the other was asylum seekers, stop the boats.  There are reports this morning that more than 1,100 asylum seekers have been  stopped from reaching Australia as a result of work by Federal Police and Indonesian  counterparts. Is this a sign the new Government’s policy is working?

Shorten: I think it’s a sign that Labor’s policies in having a PNG solution where by  the message got out to people seeking to come by boat that they wouldn’t be able  to be processed in Australia but rather in Papua New Guinea. That message has got  out. I think fair minded people recognise this issue is complex. I also recognise the  work of our Federal Police and other agencies didn’t start on September the 8th  when the Abbott Government got elected. The work we’re seeing now, like all things  that are affective, it takes months and months of work so I think it would be a bit  cheeky of the Abbott Government to say the day after they got elected everything  changed. They certainly are experiencing some problems with Indonesia. It is a little  crazy that you can find out more about what’s happening with the Australian  Government policy through reading an Indonesian newspaper then what  Immigration Minster Scott Morrison is willing to tell our own journalists.

Armytage: So you’re back in Canberra, a lot of new members of the new  Parliament today, everywhere I look in the papers today Tony Abbott back in town,  you’re back in town. Clive Palmer is in town. Everybody is talking about Clive Palmer,  he thought he’d arrive unnoticed, he did not. Will you be working with him in the  Senate, what do you make of Clive Palmer being there in Canberra?

Shorten: I don’t know Clive Palmer very well; he’s a colourful figure and I  congratulate him on getting elected. I think it’s going to be pretty interesting really  to see how he goes and it’s good that politics has colourful characters and while I  wish him well and hope he does okay, even if I don’t know or I’m not sure I will  agree with everything he says.

Koch: So are you going to meet with each other, have you rung Clive up and said  mate, let’s have coffee?

Shorten: Well I do wish to meet with him but there’s other notable people who  have got elected. I congratulate all the 40 plus new MPs. It’s a privilege to represent  the people in the Australian Parliament. Today’s a big day, I’m lucky my family has  come up, we will see the opening of the 44th parliament, there will be a Welcome to  Country, so yes you’re right the show will start today and over the next few weeks.

I’m sure MPs will be very conscious in learning the ropes. Tony Abbott’s a new Prime  Minister, I’m a new Opposition Leader, I’m sure people will make some mistakes but  I believe the Australian Parliament will function pretty well.

Koch: Not many of us have their mother-in-law open opening the office do they?

Shorten: No, on the other hand all of us have got one.

Koch: [laughs] Said with affection.

Armytage: And yours is a lovely one we should add.

Koch: Exactly.

Armytage: I think that’s the understatement of the day, you won’t agree with  everything Clive Palmer has to say, I’m pretty sure that’s true.

Koch: Good luck on the first day of school.

Shorten: Thank you very much.

Koch: We did invite Prime Minister Tony Abbott to appear on the program this  morning, but he declined our invitation.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: 02 6277 4053

