



SENATOR THE HON KATE LUNDY

Minister for Sport, Minister for Multicultural Affairs, Minister  Assisting for Industry and Innovation

Transcript of interview with Kristina Kukolja

SBS World News Australia Radio

5 March 2013

MINISTER LUNDY: When Labor uses the phrase “foreign workers” it’s not a  reference to permanent residents and migrants who have made Australia their  home.  We’re describing temporary workers who are here to fill a gap in the short  term and by clamping down on the misuse of 457 visas this makes sure that not only  Australians, irrespective of when they arrived in Australia, get those jobs first.  It  seeks to clamp out exploitation of 457 temporary skilled migrants that we know is  going on as well.  So it’s about cleaning up that system and making sure it’s fit for  purpose which is filling genuine skills gaps in the Australian workforce.

JOURNALIST: That decision has led to quite a debate and it’s happening ahead of a  federal election.  What are your thoughts about the timing of the debate?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Well I think it’s a debate because the Opposition insist on being  very exploitative and tyring to cause division in our society.  We are very clear about  our motivation.  Not only do we celebrate our cultural diversity through our  multicultural policy, but we are quiet determined to ensure that people who have  newly arrived to Australia, be they refugees or  migrants, have the best opportunity  to land employment in this country. And when we talk about clamping down on the  457 visa class of temporary skilled migrant workers, it’s because we have a very  strong view and evidence that some employers are using the 457 visa system of the  temporary skilled workers to those workers’ disadvantage and certainly to the  disadvantage of skilled workers here in Australia ready, willing and able to work.

JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott is blaming the Prime Minister for being divisive and  blaming the Prime Minister for allowing the debate to become one about Australians  versus foreigners.

MINISTER LUNDY: I understand  what Mr Abbott is trying to do and it is Mr Abbott  who is causing division by deliberately, I think, misconstruing what the Prime Minister  is saying.  We’ve been very clear that we need to manage the 457 system.  This is  not about the terrific skilled workers that are coming in fulfilling a genuine need.  It’s  about  employers who are exploiting that system to the disadvantage of Australian  migrants, refugees, and Australian workers who have been here for generations,  ability to find work.  So Mr Abbott is deliberately twisting these words around.  It is, in  fact, the Opposition that seeks to use division amongst our migrant communities in  the way that they have.

JOURNALIST:  Are you concerned though that if not statements by the Prime  Minister, then statements by others in the debate, could be demonising foreigners  and this could extend even to migrants who may well be Australian citizens and not  foreigners themselves?

MINISTER LUNDY: Let me be very clear about this.  Our concern is with the  exploitation of 457 class skilled migrant visa and the way it is being used to displace  Australians regardless of their cultural background and that includes migrants and  refugees and I know, as Multicultural Affairs Minister, the challenges that many  people newly arrived to Australia are having seeking work.  We want to make sure  that those job opportunities go to our permanent residents, our newly arrived people  to Australia as well as Australian workers who are seeking employment.  The  temporary skilled migrant system fulfils genuine needs of skill shortage and there’s  evidence that that’s not the case at the moment and this is where Federal Labor  disagrees with the Opposition.  The Opposition wants to expand the temporary  skilled migrant visas.  That is not in the interests of permanent residents in Australia,  be they migrants or not or third generation migrant families.  It’s not about where  people are from, it’s about the job opportunities we have and we can create here in  Australia.

JOURNALIST: But are you concerned that any element of the debate that has grown  from this could be demonising migrants or foreigners?

MINISTER LUNDY: No, I reject that completely and I think the Opposition needs to  be held to account for making the statements they have.  They know exactly the  problem because they caused it with the blow out of the temporary skilled migrant  visa program during the Howard years.  They did nothing to ensure that employers  tested the Australian workforce market thoroughly before bringing temporary skilled  migrant workers in and of course, that program does have a legitimate role.  So it’s  about making sure it’s fit for purpose.

JOURNALIST:  But in talking about the nature of the debate that has evolved from  this, how is it that an issue of temporary work visas for foreigners that are supposed  to fill very specific job vacancies, so the 457 visas, has been turned into a general

debate about foreigners supposedly pushing Australians to the back of an  unemployment queue?

MINISTER LUNDY:   I think you need to ask the Opposition those questions.  We’ve  been very clear about the need, and I get feedback all the time from migrant  communities in particular and our new and emerging communities, that they are  concerned about not being able to secure the types of employment many of them  have qualifications for.  Now, I think it’s quite reasonable that our temporary skilled  migrant program is fit for purpose and is designed to fill genuine skills shortages and  we have evidence, as Minister O’Connor and the Prime Minister have said, that the  temporary skilled migrant 457 visa program is being exploited in some cases and  that’s why it needs to be tightened up.

JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister Gillard has said that the Labor Government inherited  a 457 visa system from the previous government that was quote “out of control”.   Why has the Government then waited until now to address what it perceives to be  the problems?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Look, there’s a lot of things that have been going on.  I know I  certainly have been involved in areas where there’s been concern expressed and  complaints made but at this stage we haven’t got the rules in place to be able to  address it and that’s what we’re responding to right now.

JOURNALIST:  So why wait until now if it’s known for some time that it inherited, as  Prime Minister Gillard says a visa system that was quote “out of control”?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Well I think what it shows is that as the evidence gathers we’re  able to put policies in place and hence announcing it now.  I’ve certainly, in my  experience with many of our new and emerging communities, have been getting  stronger feedback about the challenges they have in getting qualified jobs - jobs for  which they’re qualified - that their qualifications aren’t recognised in the way they  certainly believe they should be and thereby they miss out on those opportunities.

JOURNALIST:  Would that not call for then some other measures to help address  those areas?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Well I think the people with control over this is of course the  employers.  It’s the employers that apply for the 457 visas and people can only come  to Australia under those visas if they have a job.  So it’s not a question any  empowerment for those migrant workers coming in under that program.  It’s solely in  the control of the employers and our concern is that there aren’t legitimate skills  shortages and that system is being exploited and we want to put a stop to that.

JOURNALIST:  Ms Gillard says she doesn’t want foreigners to push Australians  looking for jobs to the back of the queue.  In your view, does that sort of remark  perhaps stir up resentment toward foreigners in the community or at least perpetuate

the perception that that’s what has been happening and that’s what foreigners have  been doing?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Well I think it’s - I need to make this very clear.  We’re talking  about temporary skilled migrant workers brought in under a contract of employment  to fill a skill shortage and the Prime Minister’s comments are reflecting on the fact  that some employers are bringing in temporary skilled migrant workers to fulfil jobs  that could otherwise be filled locally if the market was tested properly.

JOURNALIST:  Is the focus then sufficiently on the employers as opposed to saying  that foreigners shouldn’t be the ones pushing Australians to the back of the queue?   Is the emphasis perhaps in the wrong place?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Well no, I think the point is very clear.  I think it’s the Opposition  that has tried to twist this around.  The Prime Minister couldn’t be clearer in  articulating, I think, that it’s the 457 class visa system being exploited by some  employers, not all, but some employers and that’s why we need to tighten up the  rules around how that scheme operates to ensure it only genuinely fills skills  shortages and that local workers aren’t displaced as a result of that exploitation.

JOURNALIST:  The Opposition has pointed out that at least one person on a 457  visa has been working as a media adviser in the Prime Minister’s Office.  Does that  mean that there was no Australian media adviser suitable for that position?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Look, I don’t want to comment on specific staff.  That was  raised by Joe Hockey today to deflect questions about what the Opposition were  doing with their tax policy.  So I don’t think it’s relevant to a serious policy question  about the opportunities for employment for both Australians, be they migrants for  refugees or indeed temporary skilled migrant workers.

JOURNALIST: Could this broader debate about foreign workers in Australia have a  bearing on the election outcome do you think?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Look I think all of these issues are very dear to people in  Australia.  The opportunity for employment is seen as a very singular and important  measure of how one contributes to society.  I know in my portfolio that for many  humanitarian entrants and refugees  a job often means the difference between a  highly successful  settlement or otherwise.  So I’m very focused in my role on making  sure those pathways to employment for refugees, for humanitarian entrants and for  migrants more generally are very clear and open and that we get as many  successful outcomes with sustainable employment as possible.

JOURNALIST:  Could it be in any way though damaging to Labor?



MINISTER LUNDY:  No, because I think we’re focused on the best interests of the  people who choose to make Australia home or find themselves in Australia through  circumstances out for their control and for Australians who seeking work.  It’s fair that  we exhaust all opportunities for employment for our permanent residents as I said be  they migrants, refugees or anybody else, before we utilise the 457 class skilled  migrant program.  That program was there to fill shortages so our economy can keep  growing, not to displace people who are seeking employment desperately in  Australia at the moment and I know many refugees in particular who are very  frustrated that they don’t seem to get those opportunities yet they see temporary  skilled migrants with similar qualifications take up those opportunities.  So we can do  a lot better in making sure that people for whom Australia is home find those  employment opportunities.

JOURNALIST:  Is this debate in any way a threat to multiculturalism in Australia?

MINISTER LUNDY:  No it’s not a threat to multicultural Australia I think what it is is a  very strong endorsement of the fact that a multicultural Australia is successful  because we’re able to create employment opportunities for people who come to  Australia.  We don’t have a second class system of migrants not being able to find  and sustain employment.  It is about full employment, empowerment and full  participation in Australian society and for many a job is the key to that.

JOURNALIST:  On a personal note, does this debate make your job any harder?

MINISTER LUNDY:  Well I’ve been very focused on employment issues for our  migrant communities and our refugee communities in my portfolio of multicultural  affairs.  We’ve been doing some, I think, terrific work with Bill Shorten as Minister for  Employment and I get very strong feedback all the time from communities right  around Australia that these pathways needs to be strengthened.  They want to work.   They want sustainable full-time employment.  That’s the best way for them to support  their families and to build a better life.  So it’s very much a part of the work I do as  Minister for Multicultural Affairs and what makes Australia so successfully  multicultural is that there isn’t a second tier of underemployment for our migrants.   It’s about full participation and I’m incredibly proud of that and so should everybody  be.

JOURNALIST: Just lastly, will you be announcing any new policies ahead of the  federal election this year in the area of multiculturalism?

MINISTER LUNDY:  You’ll just have to watch that space like everyone else of  course.  It’s been a - it’s an amazing privilege to have this role.  It’s an incredibly  exciting time when you look at the whole picture of the enormous contribution  migrants have made to Australia generation after generation.  We are after all a  nation built on migration in many respects and that will only continue.  We know  through our work with the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper that we will

become more diverse over the years and that’s a wonderful thing for Australia and it  will only strengthen us.



