

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Sky News Australian Agenda with Peter Van Onselen,  Paul Kelly and co

10 February 2013

Subjects: Leadership, women’s ability to have it all, Julia Gillard, Tony Abbott, Kevin Rudd,  misogyny, AWU scandal, role of DFAT, Sri Lanka visit, border protection, WA election,  carbon tax, GST revenue, foreign aid

E&OE…

JOURNALIST As mentioned off the top of the program we’re joined here in the studio by  the deputy leader of the opposition Julie Bishop. Ms Bishop thanks for your company.

JULIE BISHOP Good morning.

JOURNALIST There’s an article about you in today’s Sunday Telegraph which talks about  how if all goes well you’ll be deputy Prime Minister. How does Warren Truss feel about  that?

JULIE BISHOP I can’t vouch for the accuracy of Sunday Telegraph stories but clearly as  everyone knows, should the Coalition win government, the National Party take up the Deputy  Prime Minister’s position.

JOURNALIST Even if the Liberals win in a landslide and can govern in their own right?

JULIE BISHOP That’s part of the Coalition agreement, but let’s not get ahead of ourselves.  We’ve got a very tough election ahead of us and we’ll be focussing our efforts on ensuring  that the Australian people see us as the alternative to what is a shambolic dysfunctional  government.

JOURNALIST One of the issues in this election year which I’m sure Paul would like to talk  about as well is going to be the female vote and some of the debate that’s been had after that  speech by the Prime Minister.

In that same story in the Sunday Tele today there’s a quote attributed to you about, making  the point that women can’t have it all. Is that the right message to send to women with  children in a sense from a career perspective? If I’m interpreting this correctly, they may not  be able to rise to some of the lofty positions that women who haven’t had kids can?

JULIE BISHOP Again I can’t vouch for everything in a Sunday Telegraph article but the  point I was making is, there was an article written recently in the United States by Anne-Marie Slaughter who pointed out that as a high profile career woman she had to make a  choice and the choice was she gave up her career to focus on her children. The point I’m  making is today women have many many choices but as you make one choice then that may  well rule out something else, so it was just a commentary on the challenges facing women  and we understand that.

That’s why Tony Abbott’s going to introduce this paid parental leave scheme that reflects the  challenges facing working women and we believe that a number of our policies will appeal to  women who either make this choice of staying at home, or going to work, or women who try  and combine both.

JOURNALIST But you do seem to be criticising women who think they can have it all?

JULIE BISHOP I’m not criticising, I’m just stating as a matter of fact Paul, that if you make  one particular choice then it can rule out other alternatives and there are options for women,  there are choices for women but at the end of the day it might mean that you can’t do  everything that you’d wish to do.

I mean there are a lot of things that I’d like to do but because I’m a Federal Member of  Parliament flying back and forth between Perth and Canberra on a regular basis there are  some things I can’t have.

JOURNALIST Staying on this article, is it true that Julia Gillard doesn’t talk to you?

JULIE BISHOP Yes, we don’t have much of a relationship at all. I have friends on the other  side of parliament. Just because they are Labor members doesn’t mean I don’t have things in  common with them and we can just discuss things. I have an easy rapport with a number of  people on the Labor side but that doesn’t include the Prime Minister.

JOURNALIST But isn’t this pretty pathetic that the two senior women in the national  parliament don’t speak to one another?

JULIE BISHOP Yes it is pretty extraordinary I’ve certainly gone out of my way to strike up  some sort of conversation but it seems I’m not Julia Gillard’s favourite politician.

JOURNALIST When did this start?

JULIE BISHOP It’s been around for a long time, I don’t really want to go into details but I  have a much easier rapport with other members of the Labor Party than I do with the Prime  Minister.

JOURNALIST What sort of response did you get from the Prime Minister at a personal level  when you began to question her late last year about the Slater and Gordon incident?

JULIE BISHOP I think she was expecting it. She knew that when she unleashed that  disgraceful attack on Tony Abbott calling him a misogynist, saying to a happily married man,  the father of three girls that he hated women, I think Julia Gillard knew what she was…

JOURNALIST Do you think she meant it that way though? I don’t think she meant it as he  hated women I think she meant it in this definitional change that seems to be happening to the  word misogyny, just that he didn’t favour women in a sort of modern sense.

JULIE BISHOP That’s clearly nonsense whichever way she meant it. You’d have to ask her  what she meant by the use of the word misogyny. I think it was a deliberate choice of word  and the Macquarie Dictionary hadn’t redefined it at the time she made the statement but it  was a whole sale attack on Tony Abbott which is clearly ridiculous. It’s demeaning to his  family, it’s demeaning to the women who work with him. I think that it was designed to paint  Tony Abbott in the worst possible light..

JOURNALIST But it’s clearly done some damage, it’s obviously done some damage to Tony  Abbott, he’s had to adjust his tactical approach. Do you think Labor will continue with this  attack in the election year?

JULIE BISHOP Yes I do believe they will. They obviously think they can score personal  blows, score points against Tony Abbott. It’s false, it’s clearly not true. Tony has a great  rapport with women. I work very closely with him, he’s got females surrounding him, his  chief of staff, he’s promoted a number of women in the party, his history. As a minister is to  promote women’s issues, as Minister for Health he had a whole range of policies that were  directed toward enhancing women’s health issues. So I don’t think the fact that he has this  wonderful background in promoting women’s issues will stop Labor from going for the very  low personal attack.

JOURNALIST Do you believe this puts a special responsibility upon yourself as the senior  woman on the Coalition side in terms of replying to these attacks? Is that the way you  actually see it yourself?

JULIE BISHOP Well I certainly believe that when lies are told about Tony Abbott they  should be refuted, not just by me but by every member of the team who knows Tony, has  worked with Tony, who understands he is not a misogynist. In fact he’s very supportive of  women’s issues and choice and options for women and that’s reflected in his policies.

JOURNALIST What about the fact that Tony Abbott says he won’t be changing his front  bench in government? You’ll be hoping I suspect that if you pick up seats there will be more  women amongst those, yet there’s only two women on the Coalition shadow cabinet team.  Wouldn’t you like to see changes if for no other reason to get more women around you in that  all important room?

JULIE BISHOP Well certainly we have a very united front bench team and the main  criticism of our front bench seems to be that some of them don’t have a high media profile.  Well being the most prodigious user of Twitter or being in the media all the time is not a test  of a good shadow minister. And our shadow ministers are working hard consulting with  industry and business and families and out in their electorates building their policies and  building their credibility in their portfolio area.

And Tony Abbott says as things currently stand this is the team he intends to take to the next  election, but of course there are always opportunities to promote people and I’m sure Tony  will promote some of the exceedingly talented females that we do have in the team.

JOURNALIST After the election? You’d hope soon after the election?

JULIE BISHOP Well, it’s a matter for the leader obviously, and circumstances, but the  current team is very experienced, very focussed and operating exceedingly well and when  you contrast it with the dysfunction within the Labor front bench, half of them can’t stand  each other. And there’s this ongoing leadership crisis within the Labor Party. I think the  Coalition appears a very very credible alternative.

JOURNALIST We’ll get a move on with portfolio issues shortly but just one question you  mentioned or Paul asked the question, about the AWU attacks between you and Julia Gillard  last year. The opposition have not started the year with a continuation of that line of attack,  are we going to see more of it, or have you in a sense given up on that?

JULIE BISHOP Well don’t forget these aren’t ideas that the Coalition came up with. This  whole story about Julia Gillard and her involvement in a slush fund comes from her own side,  from former AWU members, from the Fair Work Australia or the Industrial Relations  Commissioner Ian Cambridge. So her own side are promoting this story, we ask questions..

JOURNALIST Sure but you asked all questions, I mean almost every question time entirely  in 2012 with nothing so far..

JULIE BISHOP There is a police investigation in Victoria underway into Julia Gillard’s  involvement into the AWU slush fund affair and as new matters come to light I certainly  won’t flinch from asking Julia Gillard questions about her involvement in a matter that ended  up with hundreds of thousands of dollars going missing and no ones being held to account.

JOURNALIST Ok, let’s just clarify this, is it the opposition’s intention to pursue the issues in  Parliament this year?

JULIE BISHOP It’s not the opposition’s intention to flag on Australian Agenda our tactics in  the parliament but most certainly I will not flinch from asking Julia Gillard questions about  her ..

JOURNALIST So you won’t back down?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely not. This goes to her character, her judgment, and the not  insignificant matter of hundreds of thousands of dollars going missing from the AWU.

JOURNALIST To what extent is there a bit of tit for tat here? I mean Julia Gillard accuses  Tony Abbott of being a misogynist and a few months later the opposition launches this very  concerted parliamentary attack on Julia Gillard’s past when she was a lawyer at Slater and  Gordon, there does seem to be a connection.

JULIE BISHOP Paul, Julia Gillard came out and made a number of statements to the media  about this AWU matter as a result of leaks from her own side, as a result of a statement made  by Robert McLelland in the Parliament. So she put on the record a whole raft of explanations  or non-explanations as to her role. It was as a result of those public statements that we were  able to ask her questions because her story just does not stack up. There are many  unanswered questions about a rather shameful affair in AWU history.

JOURNALIST Now we mentioned Kevin Rudd a while ago, you are close to Kevin Rudd,  does he confide in you?

JULIE BISHOP I don’t know whether you’d call it confiding, but we certainly have spent  some time together. We’ve travelled overseas together, we do catch up from time to time,  when he was the foreign minister he was very gracious in giving me briefings on matters of  concern to the country and so over a glass of wine or two, we’ve shared some thoughts.

JOURNALIST And given the fact that you share thoughts with Kevin Rudd, he does I think  confides in you given the answer you’ve just given, what’s your assessment of the way Rudd  sees the current year in terms of the leadership?

JULIE BISHOP I wouldn’t say he confides in me. In this atmosphere within Labor, of leaks  against Prime Ministers then people investigating the leaking of the leaking, I wouldn’t  suggest he’s confiding in me as such.

This is my personal assessment. I believe that Kevin Rudd has one more tilt at the leadership  in him before the next election and that is because if Labor loses the next election, Kevin  Rudd won’t be the opposition leader. If Labor wins the next election, Kevin Rudd won’t be  the leader, so he’s got one chance and it will be between now and the 14th of September.

JOURNALIST Watch this space.

In your portfolio area, yourself and Scott Morrison travelled to Sri Lanka recently. Now the  UN has come out and said that the idea the Coalition has about turning back boats on the high  seas would be illegal. Is that embarrassing as the foreign affairs minister for the UN to be  saying that?

JULIE BISHOP Not at all and I disagree with their assessment of it. In fact the United States  do this on a regular basis with people who are coming from Haiti or from Cuba. There’s a  United States case about this and they have shown time and time again that they are within  their rights to do it.

We went to Sri Lanka for the express purpose of seeing what the conditions were like on the  ground, particularly in the former Tamil Tiger held strongholds in the North and we’ve  satisfied ourselves that our policies are right and what we’re seeking to do, should we win  government in stopping the people smuggling trade, can be achieved with the cooperation of  the Sri Lankan government.

JOURNALIST To what extent will you try and use the same technique when it comes to  other countries? That is get their support for turning back the boats?

JULIE BISHOP There will be a regional approach. Clearly this is not something just between  Australia and Sri Lanka because the asylum seekers are coming from other places as well, so  we will work through the Bali process we will try and work cooperatively with as many  governments as we can in the region.

But our specific concern in relation to Sri Lanka was this spike in people coming from Sri  Lanka even though the civil war had ended some three/four years ago. And we’ve satisfied  ourselves that we can work very cooperatively with Sri Lanka to ensure that the people

smuggling trade that has flourished there, under the Gillard Government in Australia, can be  dismantled.

JOURNALIST Can we just try to nail down the situation in relation to Indonesia? In a  Coalition Government you’ll be the foreign minister, you’ll have responsibility for relations  in Jakarta. So what is the balance between cooperating with Jakarta and taking a tough line  with Jakarta as far as a Coalition Government is concerned?

JULIE BISHOP Tony Abbott and I have already met with the relevant ministers in the  Indonesian Government on a number of occasions. I have a very good working relationship  with their foreign minister Marty Natalegawa and we’ll continue to work with them should  we win government to find solutions to the people smuggling trade in Indonesia and how we  can work together.

JOURNALIST So you want a solution with Indonesia, are you quite certain about that?

JULIE BISHOP With Indonesia.

JOURNALIST Are you quite certain about that?

JULIE BISHOP Quite certain about that.

JOURNALIST You won’t be imposing decisions or policies on them?

JULIE BISHOP Of course not. We have great respect for the Indonesian people and the  Indonesian Government, and as John Howard did in the past we will in the future work  cooperatively with Indonesia and ensure that we have a coordinated approach to dismantling  the people smuggling trade.

JOURNALIST You mentioned work cooperatively with them, is it true that one of the things  on the table in terms of Coalition planning on this is to try to assist Indonesia with its  terrorism problem with the Southern Philippines whether that is strategic assistance, or  whether that is intelligence assistance, as a way of cooperating so that they then help us with  the people smuggler business that’s delivering asylum seekers to Australia?

JULIE BISHOP Indonesia is one of our closest neighbours and one of the most important  countries in Australia’s foreign policy considerations and we will work very closely with the  Indonesian Government to assist them in concerns that they have over particular issues as we  hope they will work with us over our concerns..

JOURNALIST Does that include that particular issue Ms Bishop?

JULIE BISHOP I’m not going into the details. We are the opposition. I’m not in a position to  make agreements with foreign governments nor enter into any sort of arrangements with  them at this stage. Can I just say this? We have a very good working relationship with the  Indonesian Government which we continue to foster now so that when we’re in Government  there can be a seamless transition to working closely with them on a whole range of issues,  terrorism, border protection, illegal trafficking, a whole range of things.

JOURNALIST Can I put it this way then? Have they, in your discussions with the Indonesian  authorities, have they expressed to you that one of their concerns is terrorism from the  Southern Philippines when you’re talking to them about your concerns about boat people  coming to Australia?

JULIE BISHOP I won’t go into detail of confidential discussions I’ve had with security,  defence, intelligence representatives, but clearly terrorism is an issue we’ve discussed in  some detail.

JOURNALIST You’ve made it clear that your unhappy with the lack of influence that DFAT  has inside the decision making process within the Australian Government, how would you  change that as foreign minister?

JULIE BISHOP Over successive governments I think the Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade’s influence has waned as other departments have taken more responsibility,  particularly the Prime Minister’s office has in the last couple of years centralised a number of  foreign policy initiatives within that office.

And I believe that DFAT should be at the centre of foreign policy decision making in this  country. It’s a question of ensuring that the head of DFAT has the appropriate authority for  example, at the national security sub-committee cabinet meetings in terms of developing  particular policies. So much of our foreign policy has been seen through the national security  prism, now that’s understandable post September 11 but I think in the 21st Century we really  have to focus on what is the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s true role in  promoting Australia’s national interest. I’m very keen for it to have a focus on what I call  economic diplomacy, that we ensure we can find markets for Australian goods, we can focus  on our export oriented economy and do what we can to promote Australia as a strong and  prosperous economy.

JOURNALIST Well all this requires an increase in the budget. Are you confident you can get  an increase in the budget? And to what extend would you be prepared as foreign minister to  be looking at a transfer of funds from this incredibly large foreign aid budget to Australia’s  diplomatic strength?

JULIE BISHOP Well Paul clearly one of our first priorities in getting into government will  be to start to pay down Labor’s debt, some $250bn in gross debt is a mammoth task for any  government to have to grapple with, so our first priority will be to start paying down that  debt.

But once we’re in a position to look at increasing budgets in places, obviously defence is a  place where we need to increase the budget given that Labor has decreased it as a percentage  of GDP to very dangerous lows. I’m hoping that the Department of Foreign Affairs and trade  will also be able to put in a pitch for an increase in its budget.

JOURNALIST Can I ask you what kind of foreign minister will you be in terms of  appointments and political appointments? John Howard was known for not giving anyone in  Labor much of a break when it came to political appointments. Kevin Rudd actually upset his  Labor colleagues when he became Prime Minister by making quite a few appointments as  Prime Minister that were based on Liberals such as Brendan Nelson getting positions. What

will your advice be to Prime Minister Tony Abbott in these sort of appointments assuming  you do win the next election?

JULIE BISHOP I’ve always believed in merit based appointments and I would be looking for  the best people for the job.

JOURNALIST So you’d given Kevin Rudd a job?

JULIE BISHOP Well if Kevin wants to apply for a job I’ll judge it against the others who are  applying for that same position but certainly he has talents and ability and experience in  foreign policy that shouldn’t be wasted. And I think that former Prime Ministers usually have  a contribution to make, but I’ll certainly be looking for a range of people to fill our posts  overseas because they are after all Australia’s voice, ambassadors to the world and I think  there are a number of people not only within the department but also outside that have a lot to  contribute.

JOURNALIST I’ve got a feeling if Kevin Rudd’s applying for a job it might not be a position  in foreign affairs.

Julie Bishop stay with us, we’re going to take a commercial break. When we come back our  panel will join us and we’ll start the discussion in Western Australia where fellow West  Australian, albeit Labor Party Leader not on the conservative side, Mark McGowan has made  an interesting foray into the Federal debate where he has basically said that he would not  have introduced a Carbon Tax were he Julia Gillard.

Welcome back you’re watching Australian Agenda, Paul Kelly and I have been talking with  Julie Bishop the deputy leader of the opposition and to continue that discussion we’re joined  now by senior News Ltd columnist Piers Akerman, and business editor of the Australian  Geoff Elliott. Gentlemen welcome to the programme.

Ms Bishop we were talking just before the break about Mark McGowan. Now he’s fighting a  difficult election against your colleague, Liberal colleague Colin Barnett, he’s come out  yesterday in response to questions about the Carbon Tax and said he wouldn’t have  introduced it and he doesn’t agree with it. By the sounds of it he’s trying to basically get as  far away from Julia Gillard as he can in this campaign.

JULIE BISHOP This is very damaging for Julia Gillard. She would have us believe that  Australians have accepted her Carbon Tax but clearly what’s happening is that polling for  Labor in Western Australia has indicated that Carbon Tax is poison, that families are  concerned about it, they’re concerned about their job prospects, the cost of living, driving up  electricity prices, they’re worried about how it will hurt investment and Mark McGowan has  been advised that he’d better distance himself not only from Julia Gillard but from her  poisonous Carbon Tax.

JOURNALIST Is it going to help him do you think?

JULIE BISHOP I don’t think it will assist him in any way but clearly he believes that he  needs to distance himself from the Carbon Tax because it’s so unpopular in Western  Australia. Coming on top of the Mining Tax Western Australians can be forgiven for thinking  the Gillard Government has declared war on Western Australia.

The problem of course is, nobody will believe Mark McGowan. It’s been 12 months or more  that he’s refused to say where he stands on the Carbon Tax and here we are a couple of weeks  from the election and he comes out and says no I don’t believe in a Carbon Tax and I oppose  it and I wouldn’t have introduced one. Show me a Labor Premier that doesn’t embrace a tax  and it will be a revelation. He will impose more taxes should he get into government but he  sees it as convenient now to say he opposes a Carbon Tax, the point is it’s very damaging and  destabilising for Julia Gillard.

JOURNALIST Can I ask you then this, I mean so you think he will impose other taxes, but  Julia Gillard is she likely to campaign in Perth? Is she likely to be welcomed to come into  Perth if you’ve got a leader at State level that’s turned around and saying something like that?

JULIE BISHOP Well my understanding is that Labor don’t want her anywhere near the West  Australian Labor election campaign. For example, Julia Gillard is not being invited to launch  Labor’s campaign, but of course Tony Abbott will be in Perth for the Liberal campaign  launch in the middle of February. Colin Barnett will welcome having Tony Abbott’s presence  there because Tony Abbott will be campaigning against the Mining Tax and against the  Carbon Tax which are both so damaging for cost of living and investment and job  opportunities in Western Australia.

JOURNALIST Isn’t it just another variation though of the politics of the West where they do  tend to diss the Feds if you like? We see that even from Colin Barnett, not so much obviously  with your party, but obviously with the Gillard Government and its approach to foreign  policy looking North rather than to the East, but there’s a tradition with West Australian  politicians distancing themselves from Canberra.

JULIE BISHOP Well geographically we are on the West Coast and when you look North and  look West it’s not just a geographic location it’s a state of mind. Western Australia does see  its economic opportunities to the North - China, India, Japan, South Korea and the  government in the West are very disappointed with the performance of the Gillard  Government in terms of forging strong relationships with countries in our region.

For example, the live cattle export trade disaster that the Gillard Government imposed with  its ban on cattle exports to Indonesia. That had a dramatic impact on Western Australia. The  Carbon Tax will have a huge impact on the resources sector in Western Australia let alone  cost of living for households and the Mining Tax appears to be directed to Western Australia  hence the constitutional challenge for the Mining Tax.

So I think Colin Barnett is quite entitled to complain that the Gillard Government has  declared war on Western Australia and he will stand up and fight for Western Australia. This  is the point about Mark McGowan, at the end of the day he’ll fall in behind Labor he won’t  stand up, if he’s premier of Western Australia he won’t stand up for Western Australia  against a Labor Federal Government.

JOURNALIST But if he’s prepared to do so from opposition as he’s just done now, surely if  he’s got the authority of being premier he’s certainly going to be prepared to stand up to  Prime Minister Gillard?

JULIE BISHOP I doubt that very much. Everything that he’s demonstrated to date is that  he’ll fall into line and when there’s a bit of pressure on him, and he’s just been advised I

think Hawker Brittan are over there in Perth now, he’s been advised that polling is disastrous  on the Carbon Tax in Western Australia. I’ve not met anybody who embraces new taxes in  the West. They don’t think it’s a great idea to put a tax on electricity, to send electricity prices  up and up and up and up, year on year, for a State that’s so dependent on a resource and  mining sector.

JOURNALIST Do you think the East Coast establishments understand the changes in  Western Australia? I mean it’s got an economy growing at a faster rate than China for  instance.

JULIE BISHOP And unemployment at 4.25 per cent. The Gillard Government tries to take  credit for unemployment at 5.4 but when you look at Western Australia’s figures that’s  what’s assisting. I mean unemployment in Tasmania and elsewhere is going north whereas in  Western Australia it’s down in the fours.

I think there is a lack of understanding as to what is required for the Western Australian  economy to keep going at this turbo charged pace. It doesn’t need the heavy burden of  regulation, particularly in the environmental regulation controls that are being imposed, it  certainly doesn’t need additional taxes, and the Mining Tax. C’mon it does take a special  kind of genius to design a tax that has forecasts of what $4b and then $2b and raises only  $126 million and the government spent it…

JOURNALIST Colin Barnett has put a major claim on an Abbott Government saying that in  relation to the distribution of GST revenue he wants a better deal for the West and the West  getting back 70c of GST revenue in the dollar. What’s your response to that?

JULIE BISHOP We agree that Western Australia should have a fair go, and we’ll certainly be  looking at the GST in government. There’s nothing we can do from opposition but we believe  that Colin Barnett has made a fair point that if the West Australian share goes down at the  level that it’s been decreasing it ends up getting 10/20c in the dollar. I mean that’s a  nonsense, you want to ensure that Western Australia has sufficient GST to build the  infrastructure that enables the economy in the West to continue to..

JOURNALIST Well what would your baseline be then?

JULIE BISHOP Well they’re the sort of details we’ll sort out in government, but he does  have a point.

JOURNALIST Can I just ask you then, given that the current model means that the funds  going to WA are going to be reduced over time, do you think we’ve got to look at a new  model for GST revenue distribution?

JULIE BISHOP Well obviously this is one of the issues, with an economy like Western  Australia’s generating so much income you can’t possibly then punish it by reducing its share  of the GST.

JOURNALIST Would you prefer a new model? Would you like an Abbott Government to  have a hard look at it and come up with a new system?

JULIE BISHOP We’ll certainly have a hard look at it, whether it means a new system or not  remains to be seen. But Colin Barnett has a fair point and Tony and Colin have discussed this  on occasions and I’m sure they’ll continue to do so.

JOURNALIST You won’t give us any details but is there a commitment there that something  will be done? It won’t sit as it is now where WA sees its revenue continuing to slide in terms  of GST distribution?

JULIE BISHOP Well you just have to look at some of the comparisons. You have a state, let  me take Tasmania…

JOURNALIST I was going to ask you about Tasmania.

JULIE BISHOP …where the Green Labor Coalition have done all they can to suppress  economic activity in Tasmania. Well that government should not be rewarded for suppressing  economic activity by getting handouts from Western Australia. There’s got to be fairness in  the system and Colin Barnett has raised that point.

JOURNALIST Yet you won’t give us any details on it and I suspect the reason might be that  the Liberal Party is very hopeful of picking up seats in Tasmania and the reality is if you say  you’re going to do something about the GST situation in WA it means a State like Tasmania  is going to by definition gets less money.

JULIE BISHOP Clearly there has to be fairness in the system, everybody would agree with  that, that gets a head nod, and you cannot punish a State like Western Australia for being  successful and putting in place pro-development policies that drive not only the West  Australian economy but the Australian economy and that’s what the Barnett Government has  done.

JOURNALIST I think that there’s been a big debate today based on the leaked Coalition  discussion paper about Northern Australia. How committed is the Coalition to a new  development strategy for Northern Australia?

JULIE BISHOP We’re very passionate about developing the North, we have been for some  time. We took to the last election a number of policy initiatives that would see greater  development in the North whether it’s in relation to food or water, infrastructure generally.  That was a draft discussion paper, it was a collection of ideas that a number of people have  put to us. One of my ideas is in there but it’s not our policy, it’s been sent to a number of  people for input, a number of prominent Australians, and I understand Andrew Robb is  getting feedback from a whole raft of people.

JOURNALIST Presumably this in some form or another will end up being policy?

JULIE BISHOP That’s right in some form or another, but I noticed that Labor went into a  complete lather about it. I mean how dare the Coalition come up with policy ideas. And no  fewer than 11 Ministers put out press releases damning some of the ideas in it. Well that’s  obviously ridiculous. We will have a policy about developing Northern Australia which will  have a number of initiatives

JOURNALIST And it will be based on economic incentives presumably? I mean what else  can you do? There’ll be a whole series of economic incentives will there?

JULIE BISHOP We’re very aware of the tax consequences of creating zones. There are a  number of issues that we’re looking at there, but people are giving us ideas and we have ideas  of our own. It will come together into a policy paper that we’ll be putting out for  consultation. The idea of building centres of excellence in the North is certainly one that I’m  promoting and I support. The figure about money being redirected from the aid budget is not  right, but most certainly the idea of us building centres of excellence into tropical disease  research for the benefit of countries in our North is one of our ideas and I hope that we’ll be  able to announce that.

JOURNALIST Green tape obviously is an enormous issue though and if we were China we  probably would have had a couple more cities up in the North by now, not saying we should  go down that path, but obviously there’s zonal taxation issues but how do you get around the  issue of green tape?

JULIE BISHOP Well Tony Abbott has already announced that the Coalition will ensure that  the regulatory burden in this country is lessened by having a one stop shop environmental  approval process as opposed to the State and Federal dual track that’s happening at present  holding up projects for years. We will shorten that time still maintaining the environmental  integrity of the process but we’ll certainly lift that regulatory burden.

But the issues that we’re going to have to deal with are the Carbon Tax because that is just a  drag on investment and a drag on job prospects, and the Mining Tax which likewise even  though it’s poorly designed we can see that Labor and the Greens want to increase the Mining  Tax so it really does hit our strongest performers hard.

JOURNALIST So on that view you really do have to stick by your commitment that if you  can’t get the Mining Tax repealed through the Parliament if you win the next election you  will go to a double dissolution election? It’s not enough to simply drop the effective rate to  zero?

JULIE BISHOP The Carbon Tax will be an absolute definite for us. We will absolutely get  rid of the Carbon Tax. We will absolutely get rid of the Mining Tax and should we be  stymied by that, if our mandate is not recognised by Labor and the Greens that would mean a  double dissolution.

JOURNALIST How do you propose to address problem states like Tasmania where  Labor/Green policies over the last decade or more have institutionalised [inaudible] and  absolutely throttled any development, be it mining or farming or..

JULIE BISHOP Well clearly there are very entrepreneurial people in Tasmania who are  wanting to be part of the mainstream economy and on a number of visits I’ve had there  there’ve been some terrific projects in Tasmania, some wonderful businesses that are doing  things on a world class scale including in manufacturing. And they just need an even break.  Get rid of the Mining Tax, get rid of the Carbon Tax bring down the debt, encourage  productivity and a state like Tasmania can be a contributing part of our Australian economy  just as other states can and should be.

JOURNALIST I wonder if I can take you back to the foreign aid budget? This is a massive  amount of money, now I just want to clarify the opposition’s position. What is your  commitment in terms of an increase in the foreign aid budget?

JULIE BISHOP Our commitment has not changed other than Labor have made it impossible  to meet the date of 2015 to reach 0.5 per cent

JOURNALIST Nought point five.

JULIE BISHOP Of gross national income by 2015.

JOURNALIST So what’s the Coalition commitment?

JULIE BISHOP Well our commitment is to 0.5 per cent of gross national income but we  can’t put a date on it because of the state of the budget.

JOURNALIST You can’t put a date on it?

JULIE BISHOP No we can’t.

JOURNALIST Ok, so this is a worthless commitment because there’s no timeline.

JULIE BISHOP Well this is the commitment we took to the 2007 election and it’s the  commitment we took to the 2010 election and said on the basis of the books as we knew them  we’d be able to meet that commitment by 2015. Labor has now pushed that out way beyond  the forward estimates so we have no idea what will be required to meet 0.5 per cent in terms  of an increase by 2016.

JOURNALIST Can I just ask another question? I mean it’s widely believed given the normal  rate of increase in the foreign aid budget that it’s just riddled with all sorts of waste all sorts  of inefficiency is that your view?

JULIE BISHOP I am deeply concerned that there are instances of duplication and  misdirected priorities. That’s why I wanted an Independent Review into aid effectiveness and  aid efficiency. To his credit Kevin Rudd introduced that review when he was foreign  minister. However, there’s a fundamental recommendation that has not been implemented by  this government and that is, according to the review, there must be benchmarks in place  before the aid budget is increased so that we can judge its effectiveness, its level of  efficiency. The government have not put those benchmarks in place.

JOURNALIST And you’ll put them in place?

JULIE BISHOP Absolutely. That will be one of the first things we do in respect of the  foreign aid budget, we will put in place key performance indicators or benchmarks that they  must meet before there is an increase and that will be the first thing we do. And the feedback  I get from governments overseas, whilst they’re all very grateful for Australia providing  significant amounts of aid so often they say but it’s not in the areas that we want, it’s not in  areas that are likely to increase self-sufficiency or economic independence. So often we are  giving aid in areas that just increases their dependency on overseas development assistance.

JOURNALIST Julie Bishop you’ve been very generous with your time. Thanks so much for  joining us on Australian Agenda.

JULIE BISHOP It’s been my pleasure.

- Ends -



