

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS





PM Agenda - Sky News

18 July 2013

Subjects: UN Refugee Convention, carbon tax/ETS, changes to FBT

E&OE…

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop thanks for your time. Can I start on this? Do you support  Australia’s involvement in the UN Refugee Convention as it currently stands?

JULIE BISHOP David we have been critical of some aspects of the UN Convention on  Refugees since Mr Rudd weakened the laws in 2008 that led to the resurgence of the people  smuggling trade and the tragic consequences of over 1000 deaths at sea. But the primary  cause of the current crisis is not the Refugee Convention. It was the change of laws in  Australia that gave the people smugglers back a business model to sell.

The UN Convention on Refugees was crafted at a different time in different circumstances. It  was to deal with post World War Two devastation in war-torn Europe so its application now  is in very different circumstances. However, Kevin Rudd cannot rely on any flaws in the  Refugee Convention as an excuse for unpicking the Howard Government’s laws on border  protection that did stop the boats.

David, Kevin Rudd would love nothing more than to initiate a UN talkfest on the Refugee  Convention, preferably with him chairing it, but that would take years because there are about  145 member signatory countries to the Refugee Convention. To get consensus on anything  would be a very long term task.

Talking about changing the Refugee Convention will do nothing to stop the boats leaving  Indonesia and Sri Lanka now and do nothing to end these deaths that are occurring at sea.

DAVID SPEERS Ok I appreciate you don’t see it as the primary problem here. Just to tease  out what you’ve said, ‘we’re in a different world to the early 1950s when this was put in  place’. How then should the convention be changed? Or Australia’s interpretation of the  convention be changed?

JULIE BISHOP David, if you don’t mind I want to put this in context. We believe that  there’ve been 1000 deaths at sea in the last few years since Kevin Rudd changed the laws.  What I’m calling on the Government to do is to release the official figures of how many  people have died at sea. We need to understand the scale of what is happening. We haven’t  got the official figures. We know from the Houston Report which was released in about  August 2012 that there were something like 1000 deaths but…

DAVID SPEERS OK let’s get back to the question on the convention though..

JULIE BISHOP I’m coming to this. But there are also reports of boats that have gone missing  and have been unaccounted for. I call on the Government to release the actual numbers of  deaths at sea plus the number of boats that have gone missing and also those that have been  rescued closer to Indonesia’s shores.

DAVID SPEERS Ok we’ll follow that up. Just on the convention - what change needs to  happen …

JULIE BISHOP Well when we’ve got that we’ll have an understanding of the scale of the  tragedy unfolding now.

In relation to the Convention, this is a long term matter. This isn’t going to resolve any of the  issues now which are within Mr Rudd’s power to do something about now.

In relation to the Refugee Convention you could look at definitions. You could look at what it  applies to. You could look at a whole range of things, but there are 145 signatory countries.  The UN would have to convene a massive talkfest and people would have to sit around and  talk about it. Now that’s fine. That can happen. Of course…

DAVID SPEERS Or Australia could withdraw, or expend itself from cooperation in the  convention?

JULIE BISHOP But withdrawing from a convention you have to give at least 12 months’  notice. That’s my understanding.

DAVID SPEERS And you wouldn’t do that?

JULIE BISHOP Well even if we gave notice it would be 12 months. The solution to what is  happening at present lies within Australia, changing laws in Australia.

David it took a change of laws under John Howard to stop the boats back in 2002. It took a  change of laws in Australia by Kevin Rudd to re-activate the people smuggling trade that led  to these tragic consequences. It will take a change of law in Australia to stop it again.



DAVID SPEERS Ok I just want to clarify your position on this. Would the Coalition seek to  withdraw Australia from the convention?

JULIE BISHOP At the last election we put out a very detailed policy on border protection. It  wasn’t a slogan. It was a multi-page document on border protection and what we would do  and we put in it a paragraph or two about looking at the refugee convention and how it  applies now. Of course it could be improved. Of course it could be changed but that’s a long  term United Nations focus.

DAVID SPEERS But would the Coalition withdraw from it?

JULIE BISHOP Well I don’t believe that that’s the answer to the deaths that are occurring  now. We have to give 12 months’ notice. So that’s something..

DAVID SPEERS So that’s something off the table?

JULIE BISHOP No, I’m saying that’s something we can take advice on from expert lawyers,  from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, from the Attorney-General’s office when  we’re in government, if we are elected we will be able to look at that issue.

DAVID SPEERS So you’re open to that?

JULIE BISHOP Of course you’d be open to it but we said that at the 2010 election.

DAVID SPEERS Ok but in terms of these definitions that you point to, for example, whether  Australia should take in someone whose fled persecution but then come via Indonesia. Is that  what you’re talking about?

JULIE BISHOP Well David all these things can be dealt with now by the way we process  applications for asylum. We could do it now. That solution to this problem is within the  Australian Government’s control.

DAVID SPEERS So we could change the assessment rules and say ‘if you come via a  country like Indonesia you’re not entitled to protection under the Refugees Convention’?

JULIE BISHOP Well you can look at the actual terminology in the Refugee Convention  today. You could take it literally as it applies today and there is a notion of ‘first haven’ - the  first country that can offer protection. There are all these issues already in the Refugee  Convention.

The point I’m trying to make is that any esoteric analysis of the Refugee Convention or even  a policy debate about whether Australia gives 12 months’ notice of its intention to withdraw  will do nothing to end the deaths at sea that are occurring now.

I’d like to know the official number of the people who’ve died at sea and I’d like to see  Kevin Rudd actually put in place changes to the law that started the people smuggling  business again in the first place.

DAVID SPEERS Well sadly we have seen more deaths at sea over the last week. Can I ask

you a practical question? What would the Coalition’s policy have meant in the case of a boat  in very heavy seas that we saw earlier this week? It goes over, asylum seekers jump in the  water. What would happen under the Coalition’s policy in that regard?

JULIE BISHOP David, I don’t intend to get into the operational matters and I do not intend  to give a handbook to the people smuggling trade as to how a Tony Abbott-led Coalition  Government would respond to these circumstances.

You see this is what the Rudd Government has done. They’ve kept telling everybody that  there’s no solution, that Australia is powerless. Well the people smuggling trade have taken  them at their word and have continued to put people on these boats and send them on this  dangerous journey to Australia.

DAVID SPEERS But the reality is it would still be treated in the same way. Wouldn’t it?

JULIE BISHOP David, we will do as we did last time. We will work with Indonesia. We will  work on a regional cooperation solution. The Bali Process of 2002 was implemented in part  by the Howard Government so we understand the necessity of regional cooperation, but  nobody was complaining about the work of the Bali Process until 2008 when Kevin Rudd  changed the laws.

DAVID SPEERS Well he’s now talking about greater cooperation with Indonesia and Papua  New Guinea. Do you at least welcome that?

JULIE BISHOP David, it’s again another fig leaf to mask his failings. The failings at present  are not to do with a breakdown in regional cooperation. It’s to do with the fact that Kevin  Rudd changed the laws in Australia. He, to quote the Indonesians, ‘put the sugar back on the  table’.

We have to change the laws in Australia. Take away the permanent residency visa that the  people smugglers are selling to people. We’ve got to go back to the system of Temporary  Protection Visas, credible offshore processing and turning boats back around where it’s safe  to do so.

DAVID SPEERS Julie Bishop, could I just turn to the one big policy announcement Kevin  Rudd has made this week and that’s in relation to the carbon tax. Now we know the Coalition  have repeatedly said this election will be a referendum on the carbon tax and you’ve  demanded Labor respect the Coalition’s mandate should you win in repealing the carbon tax.  Can I ask? Will you respect Labor’s mandate should they win the election in shifting to an  emissions trading scheme earlier?

JULIE BISHOP It’s still a carbon tax David. The Emissions Trading Scheme is still a carbon  tax and it is still going to be one of the world’s biggest taxes on Australia, costing Australian  jobs, driving up the cost of electricity and driving up the cost of living in Australia.

DAVID SPEERS So that’s a no. You wouldn’t respect that mandate?

JULIE BISHOP Well it’s still a carbon tax and we have said that the referendum will be, the  election will be a referendum on the carbon tax. Let’s see if Labor win this next election. If  people want to vote for the fake policies that Labor are putting out now well the Coalition

will have to look at it.

But let’s see whether people are going to be duped by Kevin Rudd’s con that he’s abolishing  the carbon tax. Of course he’s not. His own figures, his own modelling show that the tax is  going to double, that it’s going to skyrocket up to $350 a tonne on his own forecasts, his own  modelling.

DAVID SPEERS And one of the big savings measures to pay for this as we know is the  scrapping of the automatic reductions, for salary sacrifice cars. We’ve heard this afternoon, in  the last hour or so from one of the lease companies. It’s going to be laying off 80 staff  tomorrow. The Treasurer’s explanation is that if you’re using your car for personal use well  you shouldn’t be entitled to a tax deduction. In principal do you agree with that?

JULIE BISHOP David, do you know the problem here? The Government’s in disarray again.  Do you know why? There is no evidence of the rorting that Chris Bowen claims and he says  he’s going to..

DAVID SPEERS Yes but counter to that is if you are using your car just for personal use you  shouldn’t be entitled to a tax break should you?

JULIE BISHOP But the whole point of this, and this is for nurses and police and government  employees and teachers and childcare workers, the whole point is to enable them a tax benefit  for a car that they use partly for their business.

Now he claims, Chris Bowen claims, that he’s going to save $1.8 billion dollars. That means  he’s wiping this benefit out for everyone, so he can’t say, ‘oh it’s just going to attack those  who are rorting it’. He’s taking it away for everyone. That’s what’s going to happen, and if  you’ve seen 80 jobs lost tomorrow wait til you see the rest.

This is a completely shambolic announcement by the government. They haven’t thought it  through. Once again they haven’t thought of the consequences for people’s jobs, people’s  livelihood.

It reminds me of the pink batts scheme. They come up with these ideas and they have no  understanding, no empathy for the consequences for people and I’m afraid we’re going to see  more jobs lost as a result of yet another ill thought through policy, on the run, by the chaotic  Kevin Rudd Government.

DAVID SPEERS Opposition leader Julie Bishop. Thank you for joining us this afternoon.

- Ends -



