THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

MEDIA RELEASE

Thursday, 6 June, 2013

ABBOTT AND MORRISON SPLIT ON STOPPING THE BOATS

A split between Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison on the Coalition’s promise to “stop the boats” is  proof the policy is in tatters.

This morning, just minutes after Mr Abbott declared the Coalition would stop the boats “from day  one”, Mr Morrison refuted his Leader by refusing to set out a timeframe during a Sky News  interview.

Unlike Mr Abbott, Mr Morrison knows the Coalition would not stop the boats.

The latest split in the Coalition ranks reveals what the Gillard Government has always known, that  Mr Abbott’s promise to “stop the boats” is all slogan and dog whistle - and not an achievable  election commitment.

A three word slogan will not stop the global problem of people using desperate measures to seek  asylum. There is no quick fix to stop asylum seekers traveling to Australia by boat.

Mr Abbott continues to crab-walk away from his commitment to “turn back the boats”, revealing  today he would only “maintain the option of turning boats around where it's safe to do so”.

“Maintain the option” is a world away from Mr Abbott’s long-held “we will” view of turning back the  boats.

Mr Abbott’s turn-back back-down comes days after his Deputy Leader Julie Bishop called the  Indonesian Ambassador a liar after the Ambassador made it crystal clear that Indonesia would not  accept the return of asylum seekers.

The Coalition on stopping the boats

First it was months:

QUESTION: So if they haven’t stopped in three months your policy will be a failure?

ABBOTT: I think in three months we’ll make a big difference.

ABBOTT - ABC RN - 16 AUGUST 2010



Then it was six months or 12 months:

QUESTION: Mr Abbott, on your previous answer, you said that you would expect to stop the boats  quickly I think, was the phrase you used. Can you be more specific, would that be 12 months, six  months?

ABBOTT: Well within those timeframes.

ABBOTT - PRESS CONFERENCE - 25 OCTOBER 2012



Then Michael Keenan admitted the Coalition could not put a timeframe on it:

HOST: Abbott said in February he would stop the boats within weeks, that has since been  abandoned. What is a realistic expectation of what you can do?

KEENAN: …our efforts will have quick effect, but I don’t know about putting an estimate on it.

KEENAN - ABC NEWSRADIO - 28 MAY 2013

Media Adviser: Glen Atwell on 0437 437 218 or glen.atwell@immi.gov.au

