

David Bradbury MP  Assistant Treasurer

Minister for Competition Policy and Consumer Affairs

Minister Assisting for Deregulation

Minister Assisting for Financial Services and  Superannuation



Transcript of interview with Marius Benson

ABC Newsradio

3 July 2013

E&OE

Topics: Economy, asylum seekers, Western Sydney

BENSON: David Bradbury, you are campaigning in your electorate, you are at  Penrith station in Sydney’s west. Is selling Labor’s message easier in that  area now with Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister?

BRADBURY: Look, I think certainly the events of the last week, as difficult as  they’ve been, have resolved the leadership question and that has given us the  opportunity to get back out there and be talking with people about the things  that are most important. In communities like this, it’s about making sure that  we’ve got a strong economy that delivers jobs for people; keeping interest  rates low, and that obviously continues to be the case after the Reserve  Bank’s decision yesterday; and making sure that we are engaged on the  issues that really are of most importance to people.

BENSON: On the economy, the remarks by the Treasurer Chris Bowen  yesterday are being seen as presenting a bleaker assessment of the

economy from the Government than was provided by Wayne Swan. Is that an  accurate reading of the current assessment?

BRADBURY: I think we’ve always been saying that there are some  challenges that the economy faces, particularly in terms of some of the  structural adjustments and transitions that need to be made and I think that  has been consistent, both in terms of what Wayne Swan and Chris Bowen  have been saying -

BENSON: So is the Bowen view bleaker?

BRADBURY: I wouldn’t see it that way. I think, certainly, Treasurer Bowen  has made the point that the Australian economy continues to outperform our  peers, but obviously, as we move to a period where the economy is in  transition there needs to be a focus on making sure we build a strong  economy going forward. That’s about making the important investments in  infrastructure that we’ve set out.

BENSON: Asylum seeker boat arrivals have been a powerful issue in  Sydney’s west by all accounts. What are people saying to you on that now? Is  it still a big issue in their minds?

BRADBURY: This continues to be an issue, it always is an issue. I think that  what we will see with the polls becoming more competitive there will be a  greater focus on the policy alternatives and whilst it’s all good and well for Mr  Abbott to get up and mouth his three-word slogans, when we see the turn-back-the-boats mantra and the dangers that that might bring, I think it’s really  starting to expose some policy failings in terms of the alternatives. I saw Mr  Morrison earlier in the week concede that firstly they wouldn’t turn boats  around and take them back into Indonesian waters, so they’ll just leave the  boats out there floating, and he also conceded that if bodies ended up in the  water that a rescue operation would be triggered, so I think that what that’s  really signalling to the people smugglers and asylum seekers alike is that,  even if the Coalition were in power, if you sink the boat or scuttle the boat as  we saw happen on so many occasions after the first few turnarounds in  previous years that you will end up being picked up and escorted to Christmas  Island.

BENSON: The Sydney Daily Telegraph newspaper today has a small survey,  a very small survey, not very scientific, a half-dozen people at the Red Cow  hotel in Penrith, but that survey finds 100 per cent approval of you switching  from Julia Gillard to Kevin Rudd.

BRADBURY: Well, it’s funny, I’m just across the road from the Red Cow at  the moment - you’ll be pleased to know there’s not a lot of activity there at  this time of the morning - but look, these decisions are difficult decisions to

take. I’ve not ever taken them lightly and in the end, really, I’m focussed on  getting on with the job and making sure that I’m out there representing my  community and as a Government we are putting our best foot forward in trying  to build a stronger economy for the future.

BENSON: The referendum on local government is intended to go ahead with  the general election, is that registering anywhere on community radar in your  electorate?

BRADBURY: Look, I think it’s fair to say that it’s not an issue that has  attracted a huge amount of attention out in the broader community -

BENSON: Any attention?

BRADBURY: I think certainly amongst those that are connected with local  government they understand how important this is, but in the broader  community I think there’s not a great awareness of it, so whilst it may not be  something that is going to excite a lot of attention out there in the broader  community, when you talk about bread and butter issues that actually do have  an impact on people I think that this is one that does and that’s why it’s  important that we proceed with it.

BENSON: David Bradbury, thanks very much.

BRADBURY: Thanks very much Marius.

ENDS





