Minister for Immigration & Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Operation Sovereign Borders, incident on Manus Island

Monday, 21 October 2013

Doorstop interview, Sydney

Question: Scott is it true that asylum seekers were quote, 'abandoned' at Manus  Island during the disturbance on Friday?

Scott Morrison: That is not our report, no.

Question: Why did you issue an edict to your department to call asylum seekers  illegals when that has caused a lot of discontent in the refugee community?

Scott Morrison: Under the people smuggling convention it defines illegal entry as  people who come without a valid permit for entry into the country. What we are trying  to do is stop people from doing that so I am not going to make any apologies for not  using political correct language to describe something that I am trying to stop. Let me  be clear, I am trying to stop people illegally entering Australia by boat. That is our  objective. People who have entered Australia illegally by boat have illegally entered  by boat. I have never said it is illegal to claim asylum. That is not what the term  refers to. It refers to their mode of entry. So I am going to call a spade a spade. I am  not going to call people in detention centres 'clients receiving services', they are  detained, they will be called detainees. The previous government - I have continued  the practise of transferees being referred to for those who are offshore. So, look we  are doing things differently from the previous government. We are not dealing in half  measures. I am not going to engage in some sort of clever language to try and mask  anything here. I am calling a spade a spade and that is what we are doing. My first  responsibility as Immigration Minister is law enforcement of our migration laws and  that is exactly what I am going.

Question: Did 130 people or so arrive at Christmas Island yesterday?

Scott Morrison: Well as you know we report arrivals when they are taken into  processing by the Immigration Department, at our weekly briefings.

Question: Are you going to be overturning the 457 crackdown that Labor put in  place?

Scott Morrison: Well I have just made a number of statements in that speech and I  would refer you to that and when we have more to say on that then we will have  more to say on that.

Question: What do you think of Tony Burke saying essentially that it was Labor  policy that is responsible for the slowing of the boats and nothing to do with what the  Coalition…

Scott Morrison: Well I think it is a fairly desperate claim from Tony Burke. The only  thing Labor can claim responsibility for from its time in government is more than  50,000 illegal arrivals and more than $11 billion in cost blow outs and the worst  record of border protection failure of any government in our history. Now that's the  mess that our Government is cleaning up as we speak. And the Australian people  know that, and our focus is on that task, and that's where it will continue to be.

Question: Given the fact that military personnel and police were involved in the  disturbance on Friday, are you confident that Papua New Guinea should be handling  the processing there?

Scott Morrison: Well there's nothing to suggest otherwise at this present time, and  the Secretary for Immigration is actually in Papua New Guinea this week, and that's  part of the ongoing process of collaboration, and there's been extensive levels of  support and training and mentoring being provided to Papua New Guinea, and  Nauru, to manage those processes, and I haven't seen anything to suggest that  there are issues associated with that.

The disturbance and incident that took place on Friday was first mentioned at our  briefing, the news then was just very fresh. We had virtually no details at that time,  and some of the details we had were actually incorrect. We clarified that in a  statement straight after that briefing on Friday, and I issued a further statement  yesterday when I'd received a further update on what had occurred. So, it's my  practice to advise when we're in a position to advise.

Question: Do you think you went too early on that one?

Scott Morrison: Well, a question was put to me. We didn't go to the briefing to brief  on that incident. A question was put at those briefings, and at those briefings we  seek to be as candid as we can within the operational constraints that we've set out.  But on this occasion we've provided information, as has been provided to us. Now,  there have been a lot of hysterical claims made by some about this incident, they  were completely over the top and proved to be completely false, and I'm finding that  quite a bit in this area. And I would just counsel people that we'll provide that detail  when it's available to us, and if it doesn't conflict with any operational matters.

Question: On TPVs, is there any change to the ones that came in on Friday, to what  the Howard Government had in place? And do you think that we could have some  kind of challenge either through the parliament or the courts to them?

Scott Morrison: Well, what happens in the Parliament is up to the Parliament. I  notice that the immigration spokesperson for the Opposition has indicated they want  to work in a bipartisan way on this. So, if they want to disallow TPVs, well that's a  matter for the Labor Party. But I will watch with interest what they choose to do,  that's a matter for them, not for us.

The TPVs are substantially as they were under the Howard Government, importantly  though, there is the added requirement for mutual obligation principles to be satisfied  for people who are receiving benefits.

Okay. Thank you.



