25 March 2013

Benchwarmers & proven failures all Labor has left

AFTER the chaos of last week’s Labor leadership fiasco comes more carnage as Julia Gillard’s  benchwarmers get a Ministerial call up and failed Ministers are given more responsibilities. The sad  thing is it does not bode well for the nation.

“Labor’s talent pool was never over-flowing, but the creation of ‘super portfolios’ is a clear nod to  the fact that the Gillard government well has run dry,” Nationals leader Warren Truss said today.

“Accentuating the deep divisions, the experience now languishing on the backbench paints a stark  picture of more senior Labor figures being opposed to the government that Julia Gillard leads than  support it.

“If Simon Crean, Chris Bowen, Martin Ferguson and Kim Carr are honourable men for at least sticking  to their convictions, what does that make Anthony Albanese?

“Rather than do the honourable thing and fall on his sword, Anthony Albanese has not only fallen on  his feet but is doing a tap dance while his coup comrades are in exile. How can he be the Leader of  the Government in the House of Representatives when he does not believe the leader of the  government is the best person for the job?

“Simon Crean warned anyone dealing with Kevin Rudd in the future to ‘make sure every ‘i’ is dotted  and every ‘t’ crossed’, such was the level of betrayal he felt at being left to twist in the wind when  Rudd failed to stump up. The same can be said of fellow conspirator Mr Albanese, who Laurie  Ferguson labelled a ‘gutless wonder’ following the failed coup.

“Still there is not a single Cabinet Minister who does not live in a capital city and, with Mr Albanese  now taking over the Regional Development portfolio in addition to Infrastructure and Transport,  regional Australia should not be expecting anything to improve.

“As for the ranks of those still clinging to ministerial leather… would-be media muzzler Stephen  Conroy is still there, despite news that his NBN fibre optic cable will pass less than 200,000 premises  by 30 June - instead of the 1.26 million he had promised. It’s also $3 billion over-budget.

“Tony Burke, who has tied the country up in green tape and has closed so many fisheries that  Australia now imports 70% of the fish we eat despite boasting the third biggest and most sustainable  fishery in the world, is still there.

“Joe Ludwig, silent in standing up for Australia’s farmers while his department has halved in size and  who has brought northern Australian to its knees with his botched handling of the live animal trade,  is still there.

“Tanya Plibersek, who has slashed $1.6 billion from local hospital board budgets, axed the chronic  dental disease program and the Coalition Government’s mental health initiative - all while she  employs hundred more health bureaucrats, is still there.

“Brendan O’Connor, brought in to fix the asylum seekers mess, but who has overseen more arrivals  per day under his watch than any of his predecessors and who now he wants to stop skilled migrants  from coming to Australia, is still there.

“Peter Garrett, fresh from his pink batts fiasco, is now in charge of Labor’s third attempt at an  ‘education revolution’ while presiding over plunging school results statistics, is still there.

“Bill Shorten, who bows to every union demand to create a last century industrial relations system,  has overseen the biggest decline in Australian manufacturing history with more than 120,000 jobs  lost in the last five years, is still there.



“And Julia Gillard is still there, too.”

[ENDS]

Media Contact: Brett Heffernan on (02) 6277 4482 or 0467 650 020 or brett.heffernan@aph.gov.au

