



Campaign Transcript



PEOPLE’S FORUM

BRISBANE BRONCOS LEAGUES CLUB  21 AUGUST 2013

E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________



Subjects: Labor’s plan for the future; Tony Abbott’s cuts; Labor’s health  and hospitals agreement; Economic outlook; Industry policy; Paid Parental  Leave scheme; Costings; Candidates; Bank deposit tax; WorkChoices;  Refugee convention; Environment; Emissions trading scheme; 457 visas;  Home building industry; Marriage equality.  _____________________________________________________________



DAVID SPEERS: The Prime Minister won the coin toss earlier, he has decided to  speak first. So, Mr Rudd, the floor is yours.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much, David and Mr Abbott, it’s good to see you  in Brissie this evening. It's good to be back home in Queensland and good to be  back here at the Broncos in Brisbane. Elections, folks, as you all know, are about  choices and you might be surprised to know that Mr Abbott and I actually agree  on a few things. We agree that this is a great country. We agree that this is  probably the best country in the world. We've got different views about, frankly,  how we secure our future, but I don't doubt the sincerity of his commitment to the  nation and its future. But tonight, because we're exactly at the half-time hooter,  it's time to think through clearly about where this election campaign stands and I  think it's time we had some absolutely straight talking about where I want to take  the country in the future and the detailed policies which underpin it and where Mr  Abbott wants to go for the future with his policies and perhaps some of the  policies he's been a little too concerned to talk about, in detail.

So what do I stand for? I'm passionate about how we build Australia's future. I'm  in the building business and that means that for us, building and helping to build  the new industries, the new jobs, the new opportunities of the future is what it's  all about, because I want to make sure that you and you have good jobs in the

future, and any kids you might have.

Second thing I'm passionate about is how do we make sure we have a first-class  education system? In fact, the best in the world, because all of you want to make  sure that your kids are going to have the most first-class education possible, so  they don't fall behind kids who are growing up today being educated in the  schools of Asia.

Number three, you want to make sure and I want to make sure that we build a  world-class health system and keep it there. How many of you have been in the  middle of the night worried about your kid getting sick at 2 o'clock in the morning  and wondering if the accident and emergency is properly staffed and properly  funded and whether you can get your child there?

Number four, is how do we build - and I'm committed to building - a National  Broadband Network which it doesn't matter where you come from, poor suburbs,  rich suburbs, country, city, outer suburbs, in the middle of the city that you have  access to affordable high-speed broadband. Why is that so important? I'll tell you  why it's important. It's important because for the 21st century broadband is going  to be like what the electric light and the telephone turned out to be for the 20th  century. It's going to unleash economic opportunities we haven't even dreamed  of before.



And on top of all that, what I want to make sure of is that we have a clean energy  future for all our kids.

Mr Abbott says that he wants to bring about $70 billion worth of cuts to jobs,  health and education. That's for him to explain where they fall, but here is what  I'm concerned about. We're at the halfway point. Up until now, no detail at all  about where those cuts fall in jobs, health and education and I think at this stage  everyone has got a right to know because what I fear is this - we get to election  day, no details out. After the election, the cuts fall. My plans are clear, it's up to  Mr Abbott to explain his.

SPEERS: Prime Minister, thank you. Tony Abbott, your opening remarks.

TONY ABBOTT: Thanks very much David and thanks very much ladies and  gentlemen. It's good to be with you and I hope we can have a very engaging,  candid talk. Now I completely agree with the Prime Minister that it is all about the  future, but a very good guide to the future is what's happened in the recent past,  and one of the reasons why Mr Rudd doesn't want to talk about the past is  because the last six years when he was Prime Minister and his party's been in  Government, haven't been that great. I guess the big question for all of us tonight  is - are we doing better now than we were six years ago? Are we more  prosperous? Are we more confident? Are you more secure? Is our nation more  secure? And if you look at some of the facts well, our power prices have gone up  93 per cent, our water prices have gone up 63 per cent, our gas prices are up 63  per cent. Health costs are up 46 per cent. I don't say that's all Government's fault,

but one of the problems with this Government is that it's often made a bad  situation worse. If you look at the Government's economic management - the  Government inherited $50 billion in the bank. Now, our net debt is close to $200  billion. They inherited $20 billion surpluses, now we've got a $30 billion deficit. So  what I'm going to try to do, what I will do, is grow a stronger economy so  everyone can get ahead. We'll scrap the carbon tax, because that's going to be  good for everyone's cost of living. We'll get the budget back under control by  ending the waste. We'll stop the boats and you know I'd like to be known, should  I win the election, as an infrastructure Prime Minister, so we'll build the roads of  the 21st century. Now like Mr Rudd I think we're a great people, and a great  country, I just don't think we can afford another three years like the last six. Mr  Rudd's right when he says we need a new way. We do need a new way, but the  best way to get a new way is to choose a new government and that's what I'll be  asking all of you to do. I'll talk a lot about deficit, sure. The fiscal deficit, but in the  end, the biggest deficit we've got right now is the trust deficit, because the  government that we've had has let too many people down, too often.

SPEERS: Mr Abbott, thank you very much. Let's get stuck into our questions.  Our first questioner please.

KELLY: Good evening, it's great to have you in Brisbane tonight. My name is  Kelly and I'm a student in human services, currently about to graduate and I also  work in the industry. So my question is for you Mr Abbott. Can you, Mr Abbott,  please address the recent allegations that you will continue to cut public services,  jobs and public services? As many of our public services currently have wait lists  of up to six months, sometimes even more and our housing and homelessness  services are at capacity.



ABBOTT: Well, Kelly, thanks very much. If I could just make one point at the  beginning, I haven't actually cut any public services. I haven't cut any public  services, because I've been in opposition. Now there have been some cuts. At  the Federal level under Mr Rudd's Government, the current Federal Government,  which Mr Rudd's a member of, now leads, it cut $1.5 billion from public hospitals  including a retrospective cut, including here in Queensland. It's cut $3.8 billion  from universities. So let's not please say that I'm somehow Mr cut, cut, cut  because I want to be Mr build, build, build so we have more jobs, jobs, jobs.  That's what I would like to do. Now obviously we do have to find some savings.  We do have to find some savings and I've already outlined some $17 billion  worth of savings that will help pay for keeping the carbon tax tax cuts and the  carbon tax pensioner benefit increases without a carbon tax and how we can pay  for the company tax cut, which is very important, if we are going to build a more  dynamic economy. And that, in the end, is what I'm on about. It's building a  stronger and more dynamic economy because we have a better economy, we  will have a better society and that's what we all want.

SPEERS: PM, I'll give you an opportunity to respond to that.



PM: That question is a really good one because everyone wants to make sure  that we've got good health, good hospital services, great education services for  everybody and decent housing, as well, and affordable housing. Mr Abbott  seems to be suffering from just a little bit of amnesia. When he was Health  Minister he cut $1 billion from the public hospitals budget of Australia. That  affects every hospital in the country. It affects those here in Brisbane, as well.  What have we done since then?

We've agreed to a new hospitals and health agreement with all the States and  Territories which is going to invest a further $20 billion into the public hospital  system of Australia out to 2020. Up until now we don't have a single word of  commitment from Mr Abbott about whether they will honour that agreement with  the States. Not one. Secondly, on the $70 billion worth of cuts, Mr Abbott often  says that figure is untrue, but his Shadow Treasurer and his Shadow Finance  Minister have said this is the real number,  go to their quotes, go to their  statements. Therefore in this gathering tonight Mr Abbott, what people want to  hear is where are you going to cut? Which jobs, which services, which schools  are going to be cut by you, because that's what you're committed to. I think we  need to have a few answers, because you're way ahead in the polls, you're likely  to be elected Prime Minister if there was an election today and I think people  have a right to know where the cuts are going to fall?

SPEERS: I'll give you a chance, there was a question there.

ABBOTT: Thanks David, and thanks Mr Rudd. Can I please ask you to stop  telling fibs? I did not cut $1 billion out of public hospital funding. I did not. While I  was the Health Minister, public hospital funding went up from under $8 billion a  year to close to $10 billion a year. Now at one stage under my predecessor,  there was an adjustment to the forward estimates. It slowed down the rate of  increase, it never involved -

PM: Which you then implemented.

ABBOTT: It never involved a cut. Look please, if we're going to have a good  discussion, let’s try to base it on facts.

SPEERS: Is it a cut, or a slower level of increase?

PM:  It's a cut. If you're out there as a hospital and you've got an increase in  patients or an increase in population, that's how it's funded in the future. If you rip  $1 billion out in terms of the normal growth expectations of a hospital, guess  what happens? You don't have the services necessary to staff the emergency  departments, to staff the theatres and to do the rest. And talk about a crisis in the  public hospital system back then. What happened was the way in which Peter  Costello helped to balance the budget back then was to drive down the  Australian Government's contribution to the hospitals budget of the nation. What

have we committed to under this new plan? Increasing it to a 50-50 share with  the States so you've got fresh investment in A&E, fresh investment in our new  theatres, fresh investment in 14,000 new doctors. That's what we've been doing.

ABBOTT: Kevin, you put a question to me, let me put one to you. If everything  you say it’s true - and it's not - but if it is, how do you justify the cut of $1.5 billion  that your government put in place in last year's mid-year economic and fiscal  outlook statement?  Because this was your government putting on not a future  cut, but actually a retrospective cut, a cut in the current financial year?

PM: Well Tony, what I'd say about that is that every State and Territory has all of  their funding allocations from the Commonwealth always adjusted by the latest  census data. Some go up, some come down a little bit. What you took was a  unilateral cut to deliver to the bottom line. But here's the challenge, we've got a  $20 billion commitment through an intergovernmental agreement with every  State in Australia to make sure we have our world-class health system in the  future. Do you support that? Will there be no cuts to the hospital under that  intergovernmental agreement?

ABBOTT: Of course there will be no cuts to the hospitals, but you've not given us  an explanation as to why the government that you supported and that you once  led and now lead, why you retrospectively cut hundreds of millions of dollars from  last year's budgets in the middle of the financial year?

SPEERS: Very quick response to that and we'll get a move on.

PM: Simply, simply untrue. I've told you what the method for calculation is, it's  there in black and white.  And if Mr Abbott is saying tonight he's going to honour  every one of his dollar commitments with us for hospitals out to 2020, let me tell  you the $70 billion worth of cuts that he's said will happen then fall into the  education sector, then fall into the housing sector, then fall into the community  sector.

SPEERS: We’re off to a good start to the debate, I think we’re going to have a  good debate tonight -

ABBOTT: Let’s have a question from the public, hey?

SPEERS:  We’ve only had one question, this is the point, let's gets back to our  next one.

GABRIELLE: Good evening, my name is Gabrielle. I have a question for both of  you tonight. Handouts to businesses are both immoral and bad economics, which  party is committed to stopping the corporate welfare?

SPEERS:  I'll ask the Prime Minister to kick off on this one.

PM: Well, we believe our businesses in order to prosper and survive need to  have a good strong operating environment. It's one of the reasons in Australia for  the last five or six years the economy has remained in positive growth whereas  around the world you've had economies roll into recession. So, therefore, the  record about which Mr Abbott spoke before is a strong one. If you ask any  economist around the world, any business leader around the world to look at  Australia's economic data they say this economy is in strong condition. Go then  to the question of business and business support which you correctly raise. My  overall view coming from a Labor Government is that we should provide sectoral  assistance to certain industries which we believe to be of strategic importance to  the country. Let me give you two examples. One is I think everyone in this room  would agree that national defence is important. We need to have a national  defence industry which has proper long-term strategic support. We need to be  able to build ships in the future. We need to be able to have that sort of  engineering capability. So yes, that will involve a level of support. Number two is  the car industry. This is critical. We're one of 12 or 13 countries in the world who  can take an automobile design from scratch, take it through the production stage  and through to completion. Most countries in the world can't do that. It's a core  capability of the country, and this is where I make those sorts of exceptions  without apology, but the final point is this. In the car industry alone there are  50,000 jobs which depend on the car industry directly and another 200,000 which  depend on it in terms of the automotive parts and supply industry. It's critical for  the overall availability of jobs and pay packets for Australian households in the  future. So our difference is this, Mr Abbott says he's going to pull out $1.2 billion  from the car industry. A report today in Victoria says that's going to result in  36,000 people out of work. I go back to my core challenge. If you're going to cut,  Mr Abbott, if you become Prime Minister, tell us where the cuts are going to fall.

SPEERS: Mr Abbott, your response?

ABBOTT: Well I kind of agree with you. In the end, I think business should be  profitable and if it's not profitable over the long run it'll find it very difficult to  survive, to employ, to invest. So I think you make a pretty good point. Here in  Australia, though, we've always made an exception for a few key industries and  obviously the motor industry is one of them. Mr Rudd again has slightly misled  people. I have said that we will reduce the automotive transformation scheme  back to the original quantum of money, that we don't think the extra $500 million  that the Government tipped in was justified. That's all I've said in respect of the  auto industry. I want motor manufacturing in this country to continue. I really want  it to continue, because I think we've got the capability to do it well and to do it  right. But if that's to happen, we've got to be more competitive and getting rid of  the carbon tax again will help make our motor industry more competitive, and  we've got to increase the volumes, and that means putting in an export plan.  Toyota have got one. Ford didn't have one, Holden need to do a little more, I  suspect. But finally let me just say, it is possible to have a sophisticated motor  plant in this country without subsidy. Today I was at the Volvo assembly for

trucks at Wacol and that's been going for 40-odd years without a dollar of  government subsidy. Now, if Volvo can do it for trucks, why can't we do better for  cars?

SPEERS: We'll move onto our next questioner.

LOUISE: Good evening, my name is Louise, I'm a student and my question  tonight is for you Mr Abbott. Why do we need a new inequitable maternity leave  scheme when the majority of working Australians will never earn an annual wage  of $75,000, which is the amount some women will receive for just 6 months of  maternity leave?

ABBOTT: Louise, is it? Well thanks for the question, Louise. I really do  appreciate that question, because this is a watershed reform. It really is a  watershed reform. And every time we have a big reform put forward, whether it  be the old age pension, whether it be support for disabilities, people say we can’t  afford it, it’s too good, but if my staff…and Mr Rudd's staff get their wage when  they go on parental leave, why shouldn't the factory worker and the shop  assistant also get their wage when they go on parental leave? If we get our wage  when we go on holidays, when we go on long service, why shouldn't we get our  wage when we go on parental leave? So that's my position. That's my position.  I've been very upfront about it. I first wrote about it in my book 'Battlelines' in  2009 or thereabouts. It was our policy going into the last election and it is  absolutely our policy going into this this election as well.

SPEERS: Mr Rudd, your response to that?

PM: Mr Abbott just compared, in his remarks, the social reform which  underpinned the establishment of the age pension with this particular proposal of  his for paid parental leave which allocates up to $75,000 for 6 months for a  person on $150,000 a year. How many women in the room here are earning  $150,000, just wave at me. Not a lot.

SPEERS: They may not be wanting to disclose their salaries here.

PM: No I understand, but I just think it's worthwhile just to get a sense of where  people stand in the room, because we regard this as unfair and unaffordable. Let  me go to the unaffordability first. On the cost of this thing it runs in, according to  Mr Hockey, at $5.5 billion a year when fully operational. That's a huge amount of  money. That money is equal to, in fact, greater than everything the Australian  Government spends each year on child care payments including the child care  rebate. It's massive. Multiply it out for four years you're talking about $22 billion.  For the Commonwealth, through taxes or whatever, or cuts to other services to  put that forward, it frankly means an undermining of what the Commonwealth  should be doing in other critical functions of government. That's the first point.  But here is my big question about the unfairness. If you equate it to the age

pension, you're saying that an allocation of $75,000 for 6 months for a person on  $150,000 a year can be compared somehow to an age pensioner on $19,000 a  year, not 6 months. What I really don't understand from your policy is this - on the  levy you're imposing on business which you say will fully pay for it, how much will  your levy actually cover? It's $5.5 billion a year, the Parliamentary Budget Office  said today it raises a 1.5 per cent levy raises $2.5 billion a year. That's a $3  billion big gap.

SPEERS: Well let’s leave Tony Abbott to answer that question because it has  been raised in the last couple of days.

ABBOTT: Sure, and the Parliamentary Budget Office, which is the expert body,  which has been set up to cost policies, says that it's fully funded. It's fully funded  by the levy on big business, by not continuing with Mr Rudd's scheme and by  ending things like double dipping because at the moment that can go on.



SPEERS: But how much will the levy cover is the question here?

ABBOTT: Well Mr Rudd's right it will cover about half of the scheme.

SPEERS: 50 per cent?

ABBOTT: But the point is it is fully costed by the Parliamentary Budget Office  and it is fully funded by the levy, by discontinuing the current scheme, the current  inadequate scheme, and through some consequential adjustments such as  ending double dipping.



PM: So it will mean cuts for the other half which is $2.5 billion worth of cuts to  jobs, health and education. That’s where the maths goes.

ABBOTT: This isn’t true, this isn’t true.

PM: Well if it only pays for half of it, where does the other half come from? This  doesn't grow on trees.

SPEERS: Where does the other half come from?

ABBOTT: As I said, my scheme will utilise the money that's been put aside for  your scheme, plus it will have further funding that comes to it from the company  tax levy and from other schemes that will no longer need to continue.



PM: But Mr Abbott that just doesn't add up. You don’t get to $5.5 billion that way,  you just don’t.

ABBOTT: Well I’m sorry the Parliament Budget Office disagrees with you.

PM: I have just one final point on this.

SPEERS: Very quickly

ABBOTT: Does this guy ever shut up?

PM: We're having a discussion mate, we're having a discussion and that is a  standard debating technique when the questions get a bit sharp and here it is, if  you say under your scheme this is a really important point in this election  campaign - if you say under your scheme that someone who is a bloke earning  $1 million, he's entitled to two weeks of this leave pay as well. So someone's  earning a million bucks, does he get paid out of your scheme for the two weeks  of parental leave that he takes, and if so how much? I think it’s a very basic  equity question.

SPEERS: I want to keep moving on. Do you want to answer that one Mr Abbott  or does the millionaire bloke get two weeks?

ABBOTT: It's capped at the level of $75,000.

PM: So he gets something out of the $75,000 if you're on a million bucks.

SPEERS: Let’s get on to our next question please-

ABBOTT: And your public servants when they're on their paid parental leave  whether they're earning a half a million dollars or $250,000 or $50,000 they all  get paid at that rate.



SPEERS: Ok next question

CHRIS: My name is Chris, I'm retired. My question is about the generally low  quality of candidates offered by both parties.

ABBOTT: You're not saying that about Bill Glasson over there, surely?

CHRIS: By and large, it used to be the case that to get endorsement as a  candidate for either party you had to have a record of achievement in your  chosen field and you probably had to have a record of community service.  Generally, you were already well known in your community. Today, it's a different  story. Increasingly we get the odd celebrity, but by and large party hacks, union  officials, representatives of vested interest groups, that's if it's a winnable seat.  As a result, we get people like Peter Slipper, Craig Thomson, Belinda Neill, the  muppet with the dodgy website that resigned yesterday - the list is enormous, it  just keeps going on. My specific question is, do you have a plan to make

meaningful improvements to the selection process so that we get a better quality  of candidate from both sides?



SPEERS: Prime Minister, I'll get you to start on this one, and focus not on  defending all your candidates, but the process to get better ones.

PM: I think it's a really good question. It's fair because we've seen frankly a real  problem with lowness of parliamentary standards and all the criticisms you've just  made in your question, I agree with. So the question is how do you change it for  the future? One of the changes we've just brought in to the Labor Party for the  first time is over the election of leadership and you've probably followed that. For  the first time it actually takes it out of the hands of faceless men, whether they be  in the Liberal Party system or whether they be in our system and actually throws  it right open to the entire membership nationwide so that 50per cent of the vote  comes from everyone out there who chooses to belong to the Labor Party.  Doctors, bakers, candlestick makers, the whole lot. Representing the broad  community rather than those who simply have often through a system of  patronage come through. But I regard that as just step one to reform. Step two, I  believe that we actually have to open up the pre-selection system more as well  so that you have a much broader representation of people voting in pre-selections. Let me give you one example which has been trialled in NSW and it's  worthwhile looking at; for the Sydney City Council, our candidates there, I'm  advised, were pre-selected on the basis of a ballot of local members of the party  and then a ballot of all local Labor supporters who registered. So that you had a  much broader representation again in bringing people forward. What I believe we  need to see for the future is a much more representative Parliament of the  community.

SPEERS: So you'd like to do that for Federal MPs being selected?

PM: Well, I want to head in that direction and we've brought about one big  change, probably the biggest change in our show for the last 120 years, but let  me tell you, your criticisms are right and that's the direction I want to take it in the  future.

SPEERS: Mr Abbott?

ABBOTT: I accept that not all candidates are equally outstanding, I absolutely  accept that and I can think of a couple of my own candidates who haven't exactly  covered themselves with glory so far in this campaign. But I am confident that  people can grow and develop and mature. I dare say the same thing has  happened to Mr Rudd and myself over the years. But we do actually have some  really outstanding people who put their hands up for the national Parliament. I'm  going to mention a couple. Bill Glasson over there, one of Queensland's finest  opthalmologists…



SPEERS: Let’s stick to the process if we can Mr Abbott.

ABBOTT: …Someone who has served his community. He goes out west every  year for a few weeks to help with Indigenous eye problems. Absolutely  outstanding individual. There's a fellow called Andrew Nikolic running in Bass…



SPEERS: If we can avoid listing them off.

ABBOTT: But this is fair, David. Sure, the system doesn't always produce great  candidates, but it does produce some great candidates. It does produce some  great candidates and if you think our country by and large has been pretty well  governed over the years it's because for all their faults, the existing political  parties have turned up a pretty good Member of Parliament. Now, finally, if you  are dissatisfied with the quality of candidates, the best way to help is to join the

political party of your choice, because then, particularly in my party, you will get  to pre-select the candidate, so it will be in your hands and not just in people like  my hands.

SPEERS: Thank you very much - let's get onto our next question please.

GARY: Good evening, my name is Gary. Mr Rudd, I'd like to ask a question  about the Labor Government's new tax on my bank deposit savings. If the banks  are safe and secure, why has the Labor Government decided to impose a new  tax on my bank deposit savings?

PM: Actually, that is not the case. Let me explain how. Right across the world  when the Global Financial Crisis hit, when the Global Financial Crisis hit we had  to do something to make sure that banks could look after themselves when there  was a crisis in the system, or when that individual bank ran into trouble. And then  what happened during the crisis - and I remember this weekend very clearly - in  October of 2008, the banks and the financial regulators came in to see me as  Prime Minister at the time with two questions.

Number one, will you guarantee as Prime Minister of the country every person's  bank deposits? Because we faced an impending crisis and if we didn't do that  then we feared a run on the banks - you may recall back then what the  information was like swirling around the world. The second question I was asked  was would I guarantee as the Prime Minister representing the Commonwealth of  Australia, the inter-bank lending from all of our banks in this country from  overseas, so that credit would still come to pay small business loans and the  rest, to keep the arteries of the economy following.

So in other words, what happened was the banks came to government as the  ultimate insurer and said "would I do that?" Let me tell you folks, it's a scary thing  signing off those sort of guarantees. What happened after the crisis is that all  governments in the G20, the 20 biggest economies in the world, then agreed  there should be in every economy, a financial stability fund, for self-insurance for  those banks, if any one of them ran into trouble in the future. Australia up until

now has been, I think, the only one not to have done so. We've asked politely to  the banks for this to be done. They wouldn't do it, despite their record profits in  the year just passed and so what we have done is take the correct measure to  ensure that they begin building this fund themselves so that if there is a crisis in  the future affecting any one of them, then what happens is that they can draw  upon that stability fund rather than you the taxpayer, through we the government,  frankly, having to underwrite all of them for good decisions and bad. That's the  background of the decision. I know it's been the subject of controversial political  debate. But that’s the reason it was done.

SPEERS: There will be a cost ultimately?

PM: Well, I simply put this question to the banks, if you’re running record profits,  the Commonwealth Bank published $8.4 billion, well good on   them -

SPEERS: They should swallow it in their profits?

PM: They should swallow it, for goodness sake, if you’re running $8.4 billion  profits and the others between them are running huge profits, isn't it time, frankly,  that the punters were left alone, that the individual depositors were left alone and  you engage in self-insurance like most other businesses have to do?

SPEERS: Mr Abbott, what is your position on this bank levy?

ABBOTT: If I could first of all address the general issue. This isn't about a  stabilisation fund as Mr Rudd says, it's just another tax. A tax on banks. Now fair  enough, but call it what it is. It's just a tax on banks. Now, Mr Rudd tried to say  that this was all about protecting the banks from the Global Financial Crisis. Well,  gee whiz, four and a half years ago - why do the banks suddenly need protection  now four and a half years after the Global Financial Crisis?



SPEERS: For a future crisis.

ABBOTT: The interesting thing about our banks is that our banks, thanks in part  to the work of the previous government, were in very sound position. Now yes,  they needed to be guaranteed at that time for a period but let's not try to justify a  tax grab now with reference to the Global Financial Crisis four and a half years  ago.

SPEERS: So there's no need for this guarantee?

ABBOTT: Well, we do have a serious budgetary position and I'm not going to  commit us not to doing this, but we've got to understand what the Government's  done. In the name of stabilising the banking system - and I didn't realise we had  an unstable one - they've effectively just given us another grab for revenue.



SPEERS: But will you declare your position on this before the election?

ABBOTT: Yes, of course we will.

CHRIS: I'm Chris from New Farm. Mr Abbott you said if you win government  you're going to swing the IR pendulum. What's your version of WorkChoices  going to be called and what rights and conditions are you going to attack?

ABBOTT: OK well, Chris, thanks. You know, I was a Minister for Workplace  Relations in the former government and when I was the minister, we didn't go  anywhere near that subsequent policy called WorkChoices. As is now I think

fairly well known, when this policy came before the Cabinet, I was one of two  Cabinet ministers - and we don't normally talk out of school but I think I've been  dobbed in by Mr Howard himself on this one - I was one of two Cabinet ministers  who opposed it. That particular policy is, to use the famous phrase, dead, buried  and cremated. It is never going to happen, we are not going to go back to the  past. We learnt our lesson. We lost an election on it and the last thing sensible  political parties do is go back to policies that cause them to lose elections.

SPEERS: Mr Rudd, do you accept you've won this battle, that WorkChoices is  dead?

PM: I think you look at today's Financial Review, I understand there's a  statement either today or yesterday from Senator Abetz, he's the Shadow  Industrial Relations Minister, and so he's asked specifically about the future  protections for penalty rates and overtime under the Fair Work Act and asked  very bluntly, would those be protected in the future? He doesn't provide any  convincing reply at all.



SPEERS: Well, Mr Abbott, can you?

ABBOTT: We are not going to touch those provisions of the Fair Work Act. We  are not going to touch those provisions of the Fair Work Act. We are going to  touch the right of entry provisions to go back to the ones that the Rudd  Government promised that they would deliver. We are going to touch the  greenfield site provisions because we want to make it easier for new businesses  to start up and more jobs to be created. We are not going to touch the overtime  and penalty rate provisions.

SPEERS: What more does he need to say to convince us?

PM: Just on that, it’s on the question of what the landing point is for the Fair  Work Act? This has been worked through enormously over a long period of time.  If the Shadow Industrial Relations Minister is saying "I'm not so sure" as he was  today -



SPEERS: He (Abbott) is though. He’s the leader -

PM: Well, we see many things being said at different places. This is so  fundamental to folk's here ability to be confident that their penalty rates and  overtime are going to be delivered. So if that is the case I think Senator Abetz  better get into line with the policy. I do remember, I think it was yourself Tony  who said of Mr Howard's achievements on industrial relations reforms, that these  were ‘the finest achievements of the Howard Government’.

ABBOTT: I'd like to see the quote.

SPEERS: Let's get the next question please.

JOSH: My name is Josh, I'm a student. Given the recent harshening of border  protection policy and speculation of either withdrawal or renegotiation of the  International Refugee Convention, how do you intend to maintain Australia's  commitment to good international citizenship when it comes to asylum seekers?



SPEERS: Mr Rudd, first to you on that.

PM: The foundation of the international protection of asylum seekers is the  Convention and no government of which I'm Prime Minister is ever going to  withdraw from the refugees convention. It's just absolutely fundamental. It came  into being after the Second World War for good reason and should remain the  absolute fulcrum of what we do in the future.

Secondly, that’s why in the regional resettlement arrangements we have only  entered into negotiations with signatories to the Convention, because we regard  that as fundamental. The other thing we do under the convention is to ensure  that those who are coming to Australia as refugees - and we've done this for  decades past - are those who are drawn from camps supervised by the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees right across the world. Our  Government's increased the intake from 12 to 20,000 on that. But when I'm  looking at the real challenge that we face with people-smugglers bringing folks in  boats from overseas with a promise that if they pay $20,000 or $10,000 that  they'll have an opportunity to settle in Australia, we've got to make some hard  choices and I've made those hard choices on behalf of the government which is  to say very simply, very clearly and very loudly that if you are coming to boat to  Australia provided by a people smuggler then you will not be allowed to settle in  Australia. You will be resettled in other countries who are part and parcel of the  regional resettlement agreement, specifically Papua New Guinea. I think this is a  very hard area of policy. It's one that doesn't lend itself to 3-word slogans. It's  complex, it’s difficult, it’s hard. Getting the balance right between doing the right  thing by the world and at the same time making sure that you're maintaining an  orderly system of migration. So we will continue to take that number of refugees

into the future from camps around the world where people have often languished  for a long time.

SPEERS: Josh's question is about whether you would ever withdraw from the  refugees convention?

ABBOTT: The short answer is no, but Josh, the harshest thing, the harshest  thing, is to have people dying at sea, because they have made a perilous journey  that they just shouldn't make.

So the most compassionate thing that we can do as a nation is to put in place  policies that stop the boats. Now we had policies in place that stopped the boats  under the Howard Government. Back in August of 2008, Mr Rudd's government  ostentatiously abandoned those policies. The boats started coming again and it's  just getting worse and worse and worse. And since Mr Rudd announced the  arrangements with PNG, we've had almost 3,000, almost 3,000 illegal arrivals by  boat since those arrangements were announced. Now the problem is that like  everything that this Government does, it's not done well. It wasn't a bad initiative,  but it hasn't been prosecuted with any vigour. Almost 3,000 have come illegally  by boat and only about 300 have gone to PNG because having announced  facilities at PNG more than a year ago, they just basically haven't been put there  by this Government. So what am I going to do? I will put back in place the  policies that we know work. That's Temporary Protection Visas so that people-smugglers haven't got a product to sell. It's rigorous and diligently applied  offshore processing at places like Nauru and Manus Island. It's the readiness to  turn boats around when it's safe to do so and it's building much better relations  with countries like Indonesia and Sri Lanka, the source and transit countries.  Now, I agree with Mr Rudd to this point at least, on this point at least. This is a  tough problem, it is a tough problem, but tough governments can deal with it and  a tough government did deal with it. A soft government has proven incapable of  dealing with it.

SPEERS: Josh, thank you. Let's get to our next question.

CASS: Good evening, my name is Cass, I'm a landscape architect. I have an  environmental question for both Mr Abbott and Mr Rudd. Over the years we've  seen mass clearing of native bushland that provide critical habitat to our native  fauna. Hundreds of native animal species are now critically endangered or  vulnerable to extinction.

SPEERS: Let's get to the question if we can.

CASS: How does your Government propose to address and be accountable for  some of these pertinent environmental issues, including the loss of the Great  Barrier Reef, in particular with regards to viewing environmental protection and  quality of protected places as a serious issue and not just lip service?

ABBOTT: Thanks Cass and David. I regard myself as a conservationist. I would  regard myself at least as big a conservationist as anyone in this room. As a  teenager I was a bushwalker, still at the age of 55, I get out with the local Rural  Fire Service, in part to protect property, but in part to make sure our bush  remains in decent condition. Now, I'm also part of a political party with a very  good record here. It was, in fact, the Fraser Government that established the  Great Barrier Reef National Park. It was the Fraser Government which did so  much to protect Australia's part of Antarctica, so I am part of a tradition, a political  tradition, a conservative political tradition if you like with a strong conservationist  bent. I'm all in favour of reducing emissions and I think I can do it better with our  policies than Mr Rudd can with his, but that's not my exclusive environmental  focus. Another one of the signature policies of an incoming Coalition Government  should we win the election will be my standing green army, 15,000 strong, which  will work with volunteers, councils and farmers on the important land care  projects which all too often have been neglected over the last few years.

SPEERS: OK, Mr Rudd?

PM: Thanks very much Cass for the question. My own view is that it's impossible  to be a committed conservationist unless you are fully committed to the fight  against climate change. One follows from the other. If you take the great  ecosystem which is the Great Barrier Reef, let me tell you the one greatest  danger long-term for the Great Barrier Reef is sea levels rising and oceans  warming. It just changes the whole environment and then you have species who  have been around for hundreds, thousands, millions of years simply dying and  never being able to be restored to the planet again. So, therefore, where Mr  Abbott and I do disagree is on the question of climate change. We believe that  the best way to act on climate change is to work globally - that's why the first  action of the Government which I led in 2007 was to ratify Kyoto. The second  thing which we believe was absolutely necessary was to have a mandatory  renewable energy target of 20per cent by 2020, so that you can actually create  certainty for renewable energy companies that they're going to have an  environment in which they can grow and then bring emissions down. And thirdly,  you can't walk away from a price on carbon. The rest of the world including China  is moving in that direction as well. And so for all of us, it's action at these levels,  and for us, we now see emissions after five or six years in government from the  electricity generating sector coming down by 7per cent. First time in the country's  history, coming down through the actions that we've taken, and that's progress.  For our general emissions they are now basically plateauing, so this I believe is  the fundamental challenge and response in dealing with surviving the species  including the Great Barrier Reef.

ABBOTT: You know I hate to, I hate to carp. Mr Rudd has just said that you can't  walk away from a price on carbon, but that's precisely what you did Kevin, in April  of 2010. You walked away from a price on carbon. It's one of the reasons why  you lost the prime ministership -

PM: Tony, you voted it down twice in the Senate. You voted it down twice in the  Senate -

ABBOTT: And you dumped it, and you dumped it, as your policy.

PM: That is just an extraordinary proposition. You and the Greens hopped into  bed and killed the Emissions Trading Scheme.

SPEERS: And Prime Minister, you could have put it to a double dissolution but  you didn't.

PM: We had an election the following year and by the way we now have a  decision to move to the floating price for the Emissions Trading Scheme kicking  in as of the middle of next year. We have got there and what I'm saying is the  proof in the pudding is emissions from the electricity sector are now coming  down. That would not have happened under the Howard Government. Everyone  knows that, because of the hostility to climate change action.

SPEERS: Let's get our next question.

EFRA: Good evening, my name’s Efra. I'm a test analyst in the IT industry. My  question is both to the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. What  measures will your party take to ensure workers on 457 visas are not taking jobs  that Australians could do?

SPEERS: Mr Rudd, first to you.

PM: On 457 visas, one of the reasons for legislative change recently in Australia  by the Government was to ensure that employers in Australia using 457 visas are  required to properly test local labour market conditions before they go overseas  to find someone who fits that job. Prior to that, frankly, there were certain sectors  of the economy where this was too loose. That underpins the reasons for the  changes we have made. We think we've now got the balance right and now all  employers are required to undertake that local testing.

SPEERS: Mr Abbott?

ABBOTT: Well, less than 12 months before the Government suddenly identified  a problem here, the then minister Mr Bowen had said that the 457 system was  working extremely well. Now every system occasionally has a fault and where  there is a fault let's find it and fix it, but I think 457 people are doing a good job in  our economy and the last thing I want to do is anything that might end up  demonising skilled migration to this country. To come on a 457 visa there's got to  be labour market testing so that no Australian can readily fill the job and there's  got to be payment at at least the current market wage. So I don't think people  who come to this country to work and pay taxes from day one are stealing our

jobs. I think they're helping to build our country. So I fully support the 457 system.  Yes, if there are abusers let's identify them and get rid of them, but it is a good  system and it's fully in accordance with the heroic tradition of this country to  welcome people from the four corners of the earth who want to join our team and  who want to join our team and who want to be lifters not leaners.

SPEERS: Let's get our next question.

CHRIS: Good evening, gentlemen. My name is Chris, I'm a builder in this state.  Taxes as high as 40 per cent has made houses unaffordable. This year, we will  build 25,000 less houses than 10 years ago. My question is to both of you  fellows, what do the parties plan to do to revitalise the home building industry to  help it plug some of the gap that's been left by the resources sector?

SPEERS: Mr Abbott, first to you.

ABBOTT: Well, Chris I know this is not a total and full answer, but it's a  beginning and it's the abolition of the carbon tax which the Housing Industry  Association has estimated is adding about $5,000 to the cost of every new home.  So that's a pretty good start. The other thing I'd like to do is to fully restore the  Australian Building and Construction Commission which I helped to put in place  when I was the Workplace Relations Minister through the Cole Royal  Commission, because that led to the achievement of some $6 billion a year in  productivity savings, in cost reductions to consumers in the commercial  construction sector. If we can reduce commercial construction costs, that will  help to flow through to the housing sector as well, it will make houses more  affordable for the lots and lots of young families who are desperate to put a roof  over the heads of their kids.

SPEERS: Prime Minister?

PM: The question is really important, because from memory private residential  construction represents about 6per cent of the total size of the Australian  economy. So if your sector's doing well, the economy tends to be doing well and  if it's not, the economy is not doing as well as it should be. Second point that I  would make is that the key to the confidence in the sector is to make sure you've  got interest rates as low as possible. Right now we have interest rates at their  lowest level in 60 years and if you're on an average mortgage now, you are  paying, if you're on a $300,000 mortgage, you're paying in the vicinity of about  $6,000 less than at the time when the government changed back in 2007. That's  the Reserve Bank's doing, but we try to work with the bank to make sure that is  possible. If you had interest rates out of control, frankly it really is a huge killer for  the sector. The third thing I'd just say is this, we believe in housing and affordable  housing. When I became Prime Minister, there was no Federal Minister for  Housing, there was no one responsible for homelessness either. So one of the  first things we did was re-establish a Minister for Housing and since then what we

have done across the sector is brought about the National Rental Affordability  Scheme, designed to construct 50,000 units of affordable rental accommodation  nationwide. We've done 15 so far, 15 more on the books. The second in the  social housing sector we have funded 20,000 new units to help people who are,  frankly, finding it very difficult to enter the housing market at all and repaired  another 80,000 and on top of that, a further program we've got behind which is to  co-invest with private sector developers in new lots to bring down the  infrastructure costs, so to get those private developments going. Now right now I  agree with you, it still needs an even bigger kick start, but I'm just going through  the specific measures that we've done to kick the sector along, particularly during  the afterburn of the global financial crisis.

SPEERS: Chris thank you, I think we'll have time for one more, maybe two more.  See how quick we can be.

QUESTIONER: Good evening, gentlemen. May I say it's a great pleasure to  have you both here in Brisbane. Thank you for coming and I'd like to say, I like  you both, so it makes it more difficult.

PM: We like you, too.

QUESTIONER: And also thank you gentlemen for the money for the Broncos.  God knows they need it. My question is a social policy question in relation to gay  marriage. Take, for example, Penny Wong for example would be a fabulous  advocate for gay marriage given her circumstances and yet there is very little  activism from her, very little comment from her and I figure that's because of  party lines and party lines generally reflect community attitudes. So what I was  wondering, my question is if over time, community attitudes towards gay  marriage soften, what will be your parties’ responses?

SPEERS: Mr Abbott, first to you on that.

ABBOTT: In the end, all democratic political parties over time reflect the will of  the society that produces them. That's just the way our democracy works and if  there is a strong enough feeling in our community for anything, eventually that  will be reflected in the national Parliament by the major political parties. Now, I  accept this is a contentious issue. There are very strong feelings on both sides of  this particular issue right now. I take a conservative position on it. I take a  conservative position on it myself. I think that we should not lightly change  something which has been this way since time immemorial. But I don't believe  that I can necessarily impose my view on society for all time. All I can do is  candidly and honestly tell people what my view is. I support the traditional  definition of marriage as between a man and a woman. I know that others  dispute this, because I have lots of arguments inside my own family on this  subject now. But my position, it's always been clear, it's always been consistent,  and as long as I'm in the Parliament if the issue comes up, that's the way I will

vote. Whether it remains for all time the Liberal Party and the Coalition's position  well, that will be a matter for our party, for our Coalition, if it were to come up in a  future Parliament.

SPEERS: Mr Rudd?

PM: I respect certainly Mr Abbott's right to hold his views, because in our  Parliament these are usually matters for a conscience vote. What is my view? My  view and a position I took some time ago was that to properly reflect what I think  is the dignity belonging to all people, irrespective of their sexuality, Australia  should now move towards laws for the secular state which support marriage  equality. That’s my view and that's the position I've arrived at. I think it's the right  one. However, there are different views and certainly my view with the Christian  church is the Christian church should be fully free into the future to conduct its  own traditional marriage services relying upon the traditional definition of a  marriage between a man and a woman, but I believe that the right balance is to  allow the church to do that, but the secular state to, in fact, be blind to questions  of sexuality and embrace a position which recognises marriage equality for all.  My one question, though, for Tony for the future is, when this matter comes back  - and your specific question is, what action is to be taken - what I've said is if the  Government is returned there will be legislation before the House. That  legislation will not pass, or have any prospect of passing unless the Liberal Party  is granted a conscience vote on this question. At present that’s not the case. In  the Labor Party we do. If it's to fully reflect, therefore, the whole community,  everyone should be free to stick their hand up one way or the other. That way we  do reflect our community’s and our private positions of conscience.

SPEERS: We are unfortunately out of time for any more questions so we're  going to move to closing statements. As agreed, the Prime Minister speaking first  at the outset, also speaks first at the close. Mr Rudd:

PM: Thanks very much David, and thank you Tony for participating in the debate  this evening. Lifeblood of democracy; sharing ideas, identifying where there's  some commonality and identifying where, in fact, the differences lie and why.  Here in Queensland we've had a bit of experience of the whole question of what  it's like to go to an election and not quite know what's going to happen  afterwards. I refer to the election of Campbell Newman's Government. Campbell  Newman's Government was very plain prior to the election. They did not go out  there and say they were going to sack tens of thousands of public servants, but  they did. They sacked 14,000 public servants including 4,000 health workers.  That means a lot for those jobs and those people. They also went about slashing  and burning in terms of the health and hospitals budget here in the state and  frankly on top of that as well, in the schools I have seen massive cuts into the  state education system. So when I talk about jobs, health and education  becoming the victim of an incoming government which is not upfront about where  it wants to cut, here in Queensland we know a little bit of what that's like. In my

community, I constantly run into folks who have had this happen. Hence, I go to  my second point in summary which is my challenge to Mr Abbott earlier in the  evening about telling us precisely where his $70 billion worth of cuts would fall. I  believe you the voters have a right to know that. He has a view about cutting for  the future. That's his ideological position, I respect it. But the consequences are a  whole bunch of people losing their jobs. 3,000 front-line health workers who  currently work for Medicare Local will be gone and on top of that, you also have a  commitment to cut the Schoolkids Bonus which currently goes out there to  support 1.3 million Australian families and they use that to buy books and  uniforms when it's actually the toughest time of the year. And on the other hand,  we see Mr Abbott say ‘I'm not going to give you that detail until the day before the  election’. I don't think that's right. I think you all deserve to know so that you can  make a choice whether you support him or support my approach. The last thing  is this, where it all comes together I think is in the big debate on paid parental  leave. I think that policy is unaffordable, economically irresponsible and just  unfair. The million dollar person I referred to before, the million dollar male gets  to pick up $5000, $10,000 worth of cash out of this Paid Parental Leave Scheme  that Mr Abbott’s is putting forward. I don't think that’s fair. I don’t think it’s fair that  someone picks up $75,000. I don't think that's fair. So, therefore, for the future  we need to know where the cuts will fall, and what the future will be of the Goods  and Services Tax and what the precise future will be for the Fair Work Act, as  well. What I'm passionate about is how you build a future, not how you cut for the  future. What I'm passionate about is how we build the new jobs and new  industries of the future because the world's changing out there. And how we build  the best schools in the future so that your kids can become the techno whizzes of  the future, fully able to compete across the world and to have a world-class  health system so that the operating theatres can cope with someone walking in  the door. That's what I'm committed to, that's the Australia I want to build.

SPEERS: Prime Minister, thank you, Mr Abbott, your closing remarks.

ABBOTT: Well thanks, David, and could I thank everyone here tonight because I  think we have had a good discussion and I suspect it's been a much better and  more lively discussion than we had in Canberra a couple of weeks back - so  people one, journos nil, perhaps, but it has been a good discussion. Now, like Mr  Rudd, I want to build for the future, but it's all very well to have aspirations. The  real question is how are you going to achieve them? How are you going to  achieve them? And interestingly, Mr Rudd hasn't told us tonight any of the ways

that he intends to do all these things and the reason why he hasn't told us is  because he's actually had six years to do it. First as Prime Minister, then as a  Foreign Minister, then as a member of the Government, then as Prime Minister  again and it just hasn't worked. So if you had your chance and it didn't happen,  why should you be given yet another chance? Why should you be given yet  another chance? Now, I tell you exactly what I will do. I will scrap the carbon tax,  I will scrap the mining tax. We will cut red tape. Yes we will move the workplace  relations pendulum back to the sensible centre and yes, I've been quite upfront

ever since the last election that there will be a reduction of 12,000 by natural  attrition in the Commonwealth public sector payroll. No fibs, nothing hidden. I've  been quite upfront about it, and that's the kind of government that I would hope to  lead. One which says what it means, and does what it says. Not one which is all  talk and very little action and when we have action it tends to be action that hurts  people. That's the kind of government that I don't want to lead. I want to lead a  competent, trustworthy government. I was a competent and trustworthy member,  a senior member, of a competent and trustworthy government in the past and  that's what I want to be in the future. That's what my strong team, my strong  united team, want to deliver to the Australian people in the future.

The thing that has disappointed me, and perhaps disappointed you in this debate  is that really all Mr Rudd has had to say tonight is a scare against his opponents.  Now surely after six years you ought to be able to do a bit better than that. Surely  after being Prime Minister for three years, you ought to be able to do a bit better  than that. If all you've got is a scare, you've got no vision for the future.

Now it's been a great debate. I know lots of other people would have some  questions, so I'm going to mingle for as long as I can to talk to anyone who would  have liked to have asked a question, but didn't get that opportunity. Thank you so  much.

SPEERS: Tony Abbott, thank you. And yes, we do invite you both to mingle and  talk to as many people as you can. Thank you gentlemen both for taking part in  tonight. It certainly has been a more lively and feisty at times debate, as well.  Thanks for your company, too. We'll be back same time next week with a  people's forum like this taking place at Rooty Hill in Sydney's west. Tony Abbott  has agreed to take part. Prime Minister, we hope you will be there as well. For  now, as we invite you to shake hands one more time, we'll say goodnight. Thank  you.

ENDS



Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au

Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor Party, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600

