Accountability Round Table Integrity Awards: 11 December 2013

Alan Missen Award recipient: Melissa Parke MP speech

I too would like to pay respect to the traditional custodians of the land, the Nunnawal and  Ngambri peoples. I also acknowledge Sir Gerard Brennan, Tim Smith Chair of the  Accountability Round Table and other members of the Roundtable, parliamentary  colleagues and staff, and Bernard Wright, the Clerk of the Parliament, who is retiring next  week. I want to pay tribute to Bernard for the enormously valuable contribution he has  made to the work of the parliament and for the dignity and kindness with which he has  carried out that role.

I am greatly humbled - hopefully not in the Rupert Murdoch sense of the word - to be  receiving this award today and I want to sincerely thank those responsible for the  nomination and the Roundtable for its decision. I would also like to thank Sir Gerard for  being here in parliament house today and doing us the honour of speaking at this integrity  awards ceremony.

I was here in June 2010 when John Faulkner and Petro Georgiou received the John Button  and Alan Missen awards respectively and I am honoured now to join their company  alongside my friends and colleagues Mark Dreyfus and Judi Moylan.  I would also like to  acknowledge other parliamentary colleagues Kelvin Thomson, Russell Broadbent, Mal  Washer, and a number of others who could easily be standing here in my place.

When receiving his award, John Faulkner quoted French renaissance essayist Michel de  Montaigne saying “There is no man so good that if he placed all of his actions and thought  under the scrutiny of the laws, he would not deserve hanging ten times in his life”, and  therefore, like John, I regard this award, not as an achievement but as a challenge, as a goal  to live up to rather than laurels to rest upon.

It was a challenge I set myself in my first speech in parliament when I identified 3 main areas  in which I intended to wage the war against indifference, the first being Australia’s place in  the world, the second the issue of sustainability, and the third I expressed as follows:

“Finally, as the sum of my ideals, I believe in the promise of good government. Government  can reflect the best in us and it can, by the collective power we vest in it, be a creative and  enabling force for positive change. Democracy is not something that only happens every  three years on election day; it is a living thing and it must be nourished, tended and  maintained through greater openness, access and interaction between government and the  wider community.”





An example of good government in the last parliament was the passing of the public interest  disclosure or whistleblower protection laws, in which Mark Dreyfus as the Chair of the Legal  and Constitutional Affairs committee and later as Attorney General played a pivotal role,  assisted enormously in this by the indefatigable Prof AJ Brown, Tim Smith, Howard Whitton  and others from the Accountability Roundtable.

I would add to this notion of good government, the importance of good parliament. Over  recent years we have seen the increasing power of the executive vis a vis the parliament.  This is reflected in the control exercised by the leadership of the respective parliamentary  parties over the content of question time and much of the other business conducted in and  outside of the parliament.

The incredibly valuable work done by parliamentary committees, the senate estimates  process, parliamentary groups dedicated to particular issues and by parliamentarians  representing their electorates and raising awareness about causes in countless ways,  including in their party rooms, in international and domestic fora, through speeches,  debates on legislation, petitions, PMBs and so on largely goes unsung. The role of the active  and interested backbencher is vastly undervalued.

I wish I had had the opportunity to meet Alan Missen, who fought relentlessly for human  rights and social justice, and braved the disapproval of his own colleagues as he crossed the  floor some 41 times during his 12 years in the Senate.  I also only know John Button by his  legendary reputation for integrity and humility. The true legacy of these parliamentarians  lies in the fact that they earned and wielded moral capital - their integrity was the strength  they displayed within their own parties, with the opposition, with the media and with the  community.

And as we know, moral capital is a political commodity as valuable and as elusive today as it  was then.

Australian politicians were ranked 39 out of 40 - just ahead of telemarketers - in a poll a  few years ago and it is likely that our standing has not improved in the intervening years.  It  is disturbing that the increasing public cynicism and suspicion towards politicians may also  be  contributing  to  a  general  disengagement  from  community  debate  on  matters  vital  to   our future, such as climate change.

The oft-cited qualities of loyalty, unity and bipartisanship in politics can at times be  corrosive of the public interest when they lead for instance to consensus decisions to ignore  international human rights treaty commitments, to overlook transgressions by MPs or to  avoid establishing transparency and accountability mechanisms that might lead, it is feared,  to mutually assured destruction or inconvenience to the established order. In an article this  year in The Conversation, Labor elder Barry Jones described the position of the major  political parties on asylum seekers as “negative bipartisanship based on fear”.

In  presenting  the  inaugural  parliamentary  awards  in  2010,  Sir  Anthony  Mason  said  he   hoped  the  awards  would  focus  attention  on  the  vital  importance  of  integrity  and   accountability in public life, encourage public understanding and discussion of government  accountability issues and in this way counter the growing cynicism about our parliamentary  democracy.

In  2011  in  the  St  Thomas  More  Forum  lecture,  Chief  Justice  Robert  French  spoke  of  the   concept of public office as a public trust. Today Sir Gerard has spoken of the notion of the  public interest deriving from the fiduciary nature of public office and what constitutes true  political leadership.

These ideas are I think encapsulated well in the prayer said every day by the Speaker’s  Chaplain in the UK Commons:

“May they never lead the nation wrongly through love of power, desire to please, or  unworthy ideals but laying aside all private interests and prejudices keep in mind their  responsibility to seek to improve the condition of all mankind.”

Nelson Mandela was perhaps the perfect embodiment of these qualities but there is no  reason that each of us cannot strive for greater wisdom, dignity and courage as  parliamentarians.

I thank the the Accountability Round Table for its continuing efforts to bring these values to  the fore through the John Button and Alan Missen awards.

