





Campaign Transcript

Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER  ABC 7.30  7 AUGUST 2013

E & O E - PROOF ONLY  _____________________________________________________________



Subjects: Labor’s economic record; Asylum seekers; Labor’s new way; Rupert  Murdoch.   _____________________________________________________________





LEIGH SALES: And joining me now in our Sydney studio is the PM Kevin Rudd,  good to have you, Prime Minister.

PM: Thanks for having me on the program.

LEIGH SALES: The first week of this campaign is clearly establishing already how  important the economy is going to be. If voters and business leaders believe that  past behaviour is the best predictor of future behaviour, then isn't another three  years of Labor going to be signing up for policies chopping and changing, broken  promises on return to surplus and instability in leadership?

PM: Well, you go to the question of economic record. Number one, this country has  enjoyed positive economic growth for the period the Government has been in when  the rest of the world tumbled into recession, point one. Point two, interest rates are  lower now by a considerable margin than they were during the period under the  Howard Government. Number three, inflation is lower as well. Number four, the  unemployment rate is on average pretty good compared with where it was and  brilliant compared with the rest of the world. Number five, wage growth, 4 to 5 per  cent, good for working families, and on top of all that, with still among the lowest net  debt and net deficit levels of any other developed economy in the world.

LEIGH SALES: But you’ve not addressed anything I've raised there which is…

PM: No, you talked about our economic record.

LEIGH SALES: You’ve said at certain points that you will return to surplus and you  haven't, you've had policies chop and change.

PM: Hang on, you said we're measured on your record. I’m directly that question

LEIGH SALES: I didn't say anything about your record.

PM:  I'm sorry you did.

LEIGH SALES: I said you had policies chopping and changing, you have promised  at certain times you have returned to surplus and then not, and there's been great  instability in leadership. If voters look at that and think, well, is that an indicator of  what lies ahead it's going to be hard for them to vote for Labor, isn't it?

PM: What you talked about before is how we had performed. I'm going to the most  basic constant measures of the economy. They are growth, they are employment,  they are unemployment, they are interest rates, they are wage growth, they are  measures of net debt and deficit. And against all those measures the performance of  the Australian economy is robust and strong.

We hear a lot of shrill commentary from Mr Abbott on these questions, very shrill  commentary. But I would say very positively, strongly, and I think based completely  on the facts that our economy compared with anything else going on around the  world at the moment is in strong working order.

LEIGH SALES: Let's take interest rates which you raised. It's simplistic, isn't it, just  to say low interest rates is a good thing because a lot of economic commentators  have said this morning that the Reserve cut interest rates yesterday because it's  concerned about various economic indicators?

PM: The bottom line is if the Reserve Bank was deeply concerned about the  Government's fiscal policy settings, then we would have heard about that a long time  ago. In response to the Government's fiscal policy settings you have in fact all three  global credit rating agencies saying that these are strong, sound, conservative,  heading and trending in the right direction. Only eight such countries in the world  with a AAA credit rating.

LEIGH SALES: But the Reserve has been cutting rates for quite a long time and  some may suggest that that means monetary policy’s having to do the heavy lifting  for fiscal policy?

PM: I think the Reserve, and if you look at their public statements over time, are  concerned about changing global economic circumstances which actually is the  framework we bring to bear in our approach to the economic management task  ahead. And what they are looking at in particular, and what we are as well, are the  new circumstances arising from the slowing of the Chinese economy, the China  resources or mining boom coming towards an end as well as the sluggish nature of  the global economic recovery and the point I make is this - the real economic  question for this election period and for the next three years is, is given these  changes in our international economic circumstances, and they are big and they are  profound after a 10-year long China resources boom, then, because of the terms of  trade we are going to have a big and negative impact on jobs, and on top of that on  living standards unless we manage this transition well over the period ahead. And

our plan to do that is to diversify the economy, not have all our eggs in one basket  and drive that through a new national competitiveness agenda on seven strong  pillars. That is the core economic management question of the future, not Mr  Abbott's preoccupation with debt and deficit because the credit rating agencies have  answered that question.

LEIGH SALES: Let me come in there. Late today I interviewed the BHP CEO  Andrew Mackenzie but after that your office rang to say you were available tonight  so we can't run his interview, we just don’t have time tonight. But I do want to play  you one clip.

PM: You invited me on the program, I wasn’t just elbowing my way on to the  program I think that's fair to say.

LEIGH SALES: Of course, but we have had to hold his interview over, I do want to  play you one clip of it though.

PM: Sure, sure.

-VIDEO PLAYS-

LEIGH SALES: Do you think that Australia is transitioning out of the resources  boom?

ANDREW MACKENZIE: Not at all. I think maybe some of the best days are ahead of  it. I believe obviously as you're hinting that the resources industry has been pivotal to  Australia but as we go forward demand continues to increase and everything is for  Australia to play for.

LEIGH SALES: That obviously is a different view to what we're hearing from the  Government at the moment with them saying that they believe that the resources  boom is basically over, that China is over in terms of the big days of China's growth  and that we're now transitioning to a few phase?

ANDREW MACKENZIE: Well, I mean China is going through its transition as well. I  mean it is slowly moving from being entirely investment driven to being more  consumption driven. It's rebalancing its economy in a way that I think is more  sustainable in growth for the longer term. I'd also say that for many of the  commodities that Australia's resources industry produces, you know, we're looking at  the possibility of an increase in demand of about 75% in the next 15 years.

LEIGH SALES: So Prime Minister, we've heard there the CEO of BHP, the world's  biggest mining company, say that the best days of the resources boom are ahead.  That directly contradicts what you and Chris Bowen have been telling us?

PM: That doesn't contradict us at all.

LEIGH SALES: You say it's over, he says the best days are ahead.

PM: It doesn’t contradict us at all in this sense. The investment phase, as anyone will  tell you is coming to a close and it's the investment phase which has actually brought  in a huge amount of capital.

As the investment phase fades and the production, expanded production phase  kicks in, there's going to be continued benefits from it. But if you want a clear  indication that things are changing just look at the change in our terms of trade.

The bottom line is this. For a decade plus, I keep going back to this, we have had in  this economy an enormous addition to our national wealth coming out of let's call it  the China mining boom. That is beginning to change. Intelligent economic policy  says let's look around the corner, see that happening and adjust accordingly, hence  why I say we must diversify the economy, hence why I say the important way of  doing that is through a national competitiveness agenda, seven strong pillars, to do  with infrastructure and skills and the rest which you might find…

LEIGH SALES: You’ve made that point. No, but you have already spoken of the  seven pillars and there is a lot that I would like to get through…

PM: You might find that tedious…

LEIGH SALES: No, but you’ve already made the point, so...

PM: You might find that tedious but is the core frame for the economic debate. The  one that we face in the public all the time, particularly through certain newspapers, is  about debt and deficit which the global credit rating agencies have answered.

LEIGH SALES: Let's zip through some other issues. I mentioned consistency earlier  on. In 2010 Labor supported a 2 per cent cut in the company tax rate - excuse me -  therefore do you welcome the Coalition's promise today of a 1.5 per cent cut in the  company tax rate?

PM: I think we all know the history of what occurred there in terms of Coalition  responses to that proposal at the time. As for this one I find it remarkable that on the  one hand Mr Abbott is coming out with this proposal which he's kicked around…

LEIGH SALES: I'm just asking if you back it?

PM: No, I don't, and the reason I don't back it is on the other hand he's giving a 1.5  percentage point levy on to business to pay for what might be his paid parental  leave. Secondly, the policy…

LEIGH SALES: But broadly, do you support a cut in the company tax rate?

PM: Our economic circumstances at present do not permit that and we are dealing  with the fundamental discipline of how do you manage our finances in a responsible  manner over time given the sluggish nature of the global economy without cutting  jobs and without seeing large-scale cuts to basic services in health and education.  Therefore you've got to get these things in balance. And the other thing I noticed  today, apart from the fact that no-one really seems to be scrutinising the $70 billion

absent in terms of any detail on cuts to jobs, health and education by Mr Abbott, is  we now see floated up in the pages of the Fin Review an increase to the Goods and  Services Tax and on top of that an expansion of its base, I presume that only means  expanding it to food. So, that's their approach to how you manage tax policy. I think  that has a huge impact for cost of living pressures for Australian families.

LEIGH SALES: If we can turn to asylum seeker policy, the Opposition Leader Mr  Abbott held a press conference tonight just an hour or so ago where he pointed out  today marked the 50,000th arrival by boat since you changed the Howard  Government's border protection policies. How would you describe that record?

PM: The Government, when it was elected in 2007 was elected on a series of  commitments which we then proceeded to implement. And as we discussed during  our last interview, external circumstances change particularly in terms of instability in  a number of countries, not least the civil war in Sri Lanka in the period 2009-10. And  what we saw was enormous change in terms of the number of people wanting to  come to this country. Therefore, you must adjust policies over time. There's nothing  fixed in stone about a particular policy settings around the facts around you change.

LEIGH SALES: But that answer presumes that in the Howard years there were no  external factors that came to bear when we know there were wars in Iraq and  Afghanistan that were displacing tens of thousands of people. There are always  international external forces…

PM: Which is why they constantly changed their policy.

LEIGH SALES: There are always external forces at play. The difference was the  change in the domestic policy.

PM: The frame in your question, Leigh, is that about policy consistency. Mr Howard  changed policy on asylum seekers on multiple occasions in response to changing  circumstances. Guess what? So do we. That's what the national interest demands of  the Government of the country.

And as for our challenge today it is this - how do you get the balance right between a  humane approach to dealing with asylum seekers, to dealing with refugees and to  ensure that we are honouring our international obligations on the one hand but not  allowing a set of policy circumstances and international circumstances to result in  hundreds and then thousands of people drowning at sea and that's why we attack  the core of the people smugglers' business model.

LEIGH SALES: What yard stick are you using to evaluate whether your PNG and  Nauru policies are working?

PM: Overtime, and remember when we launched this policy only three or four weeks  ago, we said that this would take some time to take effect, that people smugglers  would challenge the business model and we see lots of evidence of that in recent  times as well. That over time we expect there to be a reduction in the number of  people smugglers seeking to bring people to Australia by boat.

LEIGH SALES: Do you have benchmarks in terms of numbers of timeframe,  numbers?

PM: And parallel to that, as I've said, and particularly for your audience's benefit, that  as this policy is successfully implemented you would see then an increase in the  parallel terms in the number of refugees we take from the official humanitarian  program, from camps all across the world. We’ve increased it from 12,000 to 20,000  so far, 20,000 to 27,000 in the future, if we get this policy properly implemented and  therefore we're dealing with the humanitarian dimensions, the practical questions of  maintaining our border security and making sure that we're doing everything possible  to stop people in their thousands drowning at sea.

LEIGH SALES: When you announced the election you unveiled Labor's slogan A  New Way. You’ve been in government for six years, the public has had six years of  your way, why would voters accept now you're going to have three years of a new  way? They've had your way?

PM: Can I put it to you in these terms. I've just, in our discussion on the economy,  put to you pretty clearly what I see to be the new set of economic challenges we  face.

LEIGH SALES: But it's the same people dealing with it.

PM: Hang on, the new set of economic challenges which we face which requires a  new set of policy approaches to deal with them.

LEIGH SALES: But it’s the same…

PM: This is a decade-long boom which is coming to an end and it would be  irresponsible of me to say to all people watching your program that therefore we  should simply continue policy as it's been given the changing circumstances.

LEIGH SALES: But Prime Minister it's the same party,

PM: A new way to deal with the economy

LEIGH SALES: It's the same MPs in the parliament, it is the same donors who fund  your party, it is the same unions who back you, it's not a new way.

PM: You just referred then to the Australian Labor Party and a new way of managing  the Labor Party is to change the rules for the election of the leader. We did that in  the last few weeks. On top of that we need a new way also of dealing with the proper  funding of our schools long term, hence the Better Schools plan. We also need a  new way for dealing with people with disability care, hence what we are doing with  DisabilityCare Australia.

This is what I talk about as a new way but there's one overall point about a new  approach to politics in this country and it's this; Australians are sick and tired of wall-to-wall negativity. They want people to be positive and you know what else they

want? On the economic agenda I put forward before, which you weren't keen for me  to run through again, the seven pillars of our new national competitive agenda.

LEIGH SALES: I'm not keen for you to run through it again now either for the third  time.

PM: No, I haven't actually gone through it at all in this interview, Leigh, and you know  that. For it to be brought about effectively, the new way is this; Business, unions, and  government around the table working together instead of at each other's throats.  That represents old politics and an old and negative approach.

LEIGH SALES: If the public's tired of negativity and division, would you invite Julia  Gillard to join you on the campaign trail to try to sell Labor's record and policies in the  same way that you helped when she was PM?

PM: Julia would be welcome to participate in the campaign in any way she chose fit.  And as you know, and I've been asked about Julia in recent days, I've been very  direct and very frank about the positive role she's played in our party and the  contribution she's made to DisabilityCare policy, education policy and the  measurement of academic standards of schools. Great achievements.

LEIGH SALES: Let me ask you one final question, on your stoush with Rupert  Murdoch this week I don't recall you complaining about bias or corporate agenda  when he backed you in 2007?

PM: If you look carefully at the events of 2007 what you will see, Leigh, written right  across the newspapers at that time was a whole series of negative attacks, negative  articles including the most personal attacks on me and my family in the years leading  up to that election. You seem to have forgotten those in that discussion. I could list  those for you one by one which went to my wife, her business, and the rest of our  personal affairs as well. So let's put that into a bit of context.

The second point is this, I have not said anything about Mr Murdoch doing X, Y and  Z. What I've said is he owns 70 per cent of the print media in the company, fact one.  Fact two, day one of the campaign through his principal mast head in Australia they  say this government must go. Thirdly he says so through his own direct statements  that he wants Mr Abbott to replace me as Prime Minister. That's fine. That's his  democratic right, it's a free country. But the question I posed through this is simple as  follows: What is underneath all this? Is it to do with the national broadband network  representing a commercial threat to Foxtel? I've seen some commentary on that and  I've only just been looking back on the files today and discovered that in fact Mr  Abbott's NBN policy was launched at the Fox Studios here in Sydney. I would like to  hear some answers as to what discussions Mr Abbott may have had with Mr  Murdoch on the future of Australia's national broadband network.

LEIGH SALES: PM thank you for your time tonight. Hope to see you again in the  campaign.

PM: Thanks very much, Leigh.

ENDS



Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au



Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600



