THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY  ABC RADIO NATIONAL

Tuesday, 11 June, 2013

SUBJECT: TRAGEDY AT SEA, SRI LANKAN RETURNS, LABOR PARTY LEADERSHIP

FRAN KELLY: And talking of that human tragedy a fresh wave of asylum seekers has overwhelmed  the Customs and Border Protection surveillance and interception capacity over the past week to the  point where the bodies of at least 13 people drowned at sea after their boat capsized last week will  be left in the water because all boats and personnel in the area are needed to carry out other rescue  operations.

The Immigration Minister Brendan O'Connor joins us now. Minister, welcome to Breakfast.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, will these bodies be retrieved today or ever?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Well I'm not sure whether they're in a position to be retrieved…

FRAN KELLY: Ever?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I'm not sure whether these bodies will be in the position to be retrieved but  these are operational decisions.

They're very difficult decisions I'm sure, made by masters of vessels when they're looking to rescue  people. I think most people would understand it's always about the rescue of those that are living  before the recovery of bodies.

Ideally you would look to do both and indeed in other instances our Customs and naval personnel  have done both, but these are decisions best left to those that are in the operation, not people  sitting behind a desk.

Now this will be of course reviewed, the Minister for Home Affairs has already made clear there will  be a review and there's also of course a coroner's inquiry in which it will be open to the coroner to  examine these matters as well.

FRAN KELLY: But that's a review of the process that led to this and the AMSA response and what  went on. If we're talking about the bodies and of course everyone understands that the operational  decision, those in control of the vessels need to rescue first, recover later.

But, if this was as others are pointing out in the last 24 hours, if this was a ferry with Australians on  board that had capsized, there's no way those bodies would just be left. There's no way a  government Minister would not take some action there is there?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Fran I find that - firstly speculation by people who have no idea what's  happening at sea and I also find it quite offensive for people to suggest that our personnel do not  value the lives and indeed, the lives that are there to be rescued and the bodies that might need to  be retrieved.

I mean I have seen acts of valour by our personnel which deserves extraordinary commendation.

I recall the bravery on 15 December 2010 when that awful tragedy of the vessel foundering on the  rocks at Christmas Island where they both managed to save 40 people and at the same time  retrieved bodies and did so by endangering their lives.

So I think for anyone to reflect on this decision and to conclude that our Customs and naval  personnel do not care about those people, I think that is utterly wrong.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, I think that's a misinterpretation of what people are saying. As I said,  everybody understands that the masters of the vessels need to operate the rescues first and the  recovery later, but what seems to be the response by the system - let's call it that, the Government  and the services involved, is no guarantee that these bodies will ever be retrieved.

And I just note to you that this is making headline overseas and the British version of the Huffington  Post the headline is ‘Australia did what? 55 bodies left in the sea’. I mean it's a very difficult…

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That in itself is not true. We know of bodies that were sighted. I think it's  important the review happens.

We also know that they had to make a decision to spend time retrieving those bodies or seeking to  rescue those that may well have been alive.

FRAN KELLY: With respect Minister that is not what's being questioned here that decision. What is  being questioned here is whether outside of that rescue operation of the boats that are in trouble  now, whether something more needs to be done to retrieve these bodies.

For instance this occurred I think 65 nautical miles off Christmas Island. Has the Government  considered sending a recovery team out there separately?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: That's something you may wish to put to the Minister for Home Affairs and,  as I say, that's not something I'm aware of.

I'm just making it clear that the Customs and Border personnel always treat people with dignity and,  in fact, I think they're a fine example of how we deal with people and deal with very difficult  circumstances.

And now there will be a review, and I think this can be an examination of how this operation has  taken place but I guess I'm, in the broader sense, just wanting to remind your listeners that our men  and women on those vessels do an extraordinary job in very difficult circumstances.

FRAN KELLY: And I understand that and agree with that, and this highlights, really, the pressure on  our maritime borders, the pressure on those carrying out that surveillance, because they're so busy

responding to other boat arrivals, and I think the figures are 19,000 people have arrived by boat  since August, around 300 boats in the year, all since you put in place offshore processing.

Far from being a deterrent, the no-advantage policy seems to have increased the numbers.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I don't think you can draw that conclusion.

What you can conclude is if you don't implement all of the recommendations of the expert panel,  then I think there's going to be difficulties, and I think Philip Ruddock knew, and he conceded that  offshore processing alone won't work.

2013 is an entirely different situation to that of 2001 and 2002, and I think therefore it's important  that we look to implement all of the policies, including a safe flyback to Malaysia, which is on offer,  which is on the table, which is being stymied by the Opposition.

FRAN KELLY: On 7:30 last night, a former employee of the Immigration Department claimed that the  Labor Government is basically - set a quota of Sri Lankans to be returned under the enhanced  screening process, which we've spoken of before on the program with you.

He says - regardless, almost, of the validity of their claims. Is there a quota of numbers? Was it 200?  Is it 400 a week to be returned to Colombo?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: No, of course not. He wouldn't be privy to that information in relation to how  we deal with processing.

The fact is this is done properly. We have, I think, a relatively rigorous process.

FRAN KELLY: Well, not as he described it. He said he witnessed the process, he was part of the  process, and one question was asked to people.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: I have to say to you that I have the protocols before me as to what is put  forward, and we are very careful in ensuring that people are able to explain situations in order to  determine whether, in fact, they engage our international obligations.

But let's just remember what we're talking about here. We had 6000 arrivals of Sri Lankans in the  last three months of last year, and, of course, we talk about boats coming and leading to the  maritime deaths.

When we started to screen people, we actually saw a decline of 90 per cent, which means the  chances of people dying at sea, of course, will vastly reduce because of that process.

Some people were returned, and there were others who were not returned because it was possible  - not that it was definite, but it was possible that they engaged an international obligations.

I think that's the reasonable approach in the circumstances, and I think that's led to saving lives at  sea.

FRAN KELLY: Just finally, Minister, former Labor pollster Rod Cameron said last night the  Government's heading towards an electoral disaster of absolute epic proportion. He says the PM's  credibility is absolutely zero in the electorate, and this is what he said about Kevin Rudd:

[Excerpt]

ROD CAMERON: Well, there's only one credible person to switch to, and that's Rudd, and there's no  doubt that Rudd would increase the Labor vote substantially, perhaps 10 points.

[End of excerpt]

FRAN KELLY: Minister, is Rod Cameron right or wrong, in your view?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: The only challenger for the PM's job that I'm aware of is Tony Abbott, and  he'd be a dangerous option for the country and he has no plans for our future.

What Mr Cameron is correct about is if we're not unified then we're going to have major difficulties  going forward.

FRAN KELLY: Unified behind the Prime Minister?

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Of course. We need to be together focusing on the issues that matter to  Australians, not talking about ourselves.

Disunity is death in politics, and therefore it's absolutely critical that people work together and focus  on the things that matter, whether it's the education reforms or DisabilityCare.

We've got a great record. Almost one million jobs have been created, we've got the best advanced  economy - performing economy in the world, according to the OECD.

We have low unemployment, relative low debt. We have a good story to tell. We cannot tell it if  we're talking about ourselves.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, thank you very much for joining us.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR: Thanks Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Brendan O'Connor is the Immigration Minister.

ENDS

