









Transcript

Hon Christopher Pyne MP  ABC News Radio  15 April 2013



SUBJECTS:  School Funding; Education; Polling

E&OE................................

Marius Benson: Christopher Pyne, you’ve characterised the Government’s funding plans as robbing  Peter to pay Paul.  But Peter in this case is the universities.  They lose $2.5 billion while Paul, the  schools, get $14.5 billion.  So a big net gain there for education generally?

Hon Christopher Pyne MP: Well not quite right Marius.  The truth is the cuts since last years budget  to education and including redirections planned as part of this shake-up is $11 billion.  Not just the  $2.8 billion in higher education announced on Saturday.  So the Government’s cut $2.8 billion in  higher education; its cut $3.9 billion last year in the MYEFO which included universities, schools and  apprenticeships and training; its cut $600 million in the laptops in schools programme; and then the  redirections for the future include literacy and numeracy programs, teacher quality programs, the  abolition of the Rewards for Better Teachers program and low SES programs.  So there are very  wide-spread cuts totalling $11 billion and the Government’s contribution to this $14.5 billion shake-up of funding is 9.4 which means amazingly they are making a saving in education through this  announcement.

Benson: So the criticism has been that the Government won’t be able to pay for this but you’re  saying they won’t have anything to pay for.  They are coming out ahead.

Pyne: Well the truth is they are making a saving in education.  So rather than investing new funds in  school education which we had expected they would do they are actually cutting education overall  by $1.6 billion.  They’ve got their budget into such a terrible state that they are now robbing  education to prop up their deficit and debt strategy.

Benson: One specific figure you’re critical of is the allocation under this plan of $300 million to WA,  to Western Australia.  How much extra funding will Western Australia receive under a Coalition  Government for schools?





Pyne: Well the Coalition, if this plan falls over at COAG on Friday, we will keep the current quantum  of funds plus indexation on the current rate.  Now that has been 6 per cent on average over the last  ten years.  So in fact the Coalition’s position is more generous than Labor’s because Labor is offering  4.7 per cent indexation and asking the states for 3 per cent.  6 per cent is higher than both of those  so in fact under the Coalition if Western Australia or any other state doesn’t sign up to this  arrangement they will have certainty of knowing their funding system, which at the moment is  completely opaque with the current Government’s announcement, plus they will have a higher rate  of indexation.

Benson: You don’t have detailed education plans out as yet but you’ve got general plans out in your  ‘Our Plan’ booklet on all the Opposition policies.  In that on education you say we will work with the  States and Territories to encourage state schools to choose to become independent schools.  Do you  mean there independent schools in the sense of private schools, state schools to become private  schools?

Pyne: No to become independent public schools like the Western Australian model.  So the Western  Australian system has a new brand of school, it’s called ‘independent public school’ where the public  school has more characteristics of a non-government school.  In other words the Principal has more  authority.  They’re a one line budget item in the Western Australian budget.  They get to hire their  own staff; make decisions about extra-curricular and curricular activity; decide priorities in the  school; engage parents more closely in the governance of the school and they are a great success.  In  fact Western Australia is the only jurisdiction where there is a movement since 1977 from the non-government to the government system of schooling because independent public schools have been  such a success.  More than 50 per cent of all children in Western Australian public schools are in  independent public schools.

Benson: So public schools would then still remain public schools?

Pyne: Of course.  They would definitely be public schools but they would be called independent  public schools.  They would have more independence from central office; they will be able to make  more decisions locally and the indications have been that this has been better for outcomes and  parents like it.

Benson: There’s a new Neilson Poll out today which shows that you’ve increased your lead.  You are  now ahead after preferences 57 to 43.  That comes after what was seen as quite a good week for  Labor.  Are you surprised at that result?

Pyne: Well I am actually Marius surprised at that result and I think what it shows is that in spite of  the Prime Minister and the Government achieving some good outcomes in their China trip, the basic  flaws in the Government are still very apparent to the public and they are a government that’s not  focussed on cost of living; job security and good economic management and startlingly, with the  arrival of the asylum seeker boat at Geraldton, not able to protect our borders.

Benson: Christopher Pyne thanks again.

Pyne: It’s a pleasure.

ENDS.

