

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ABC RADIO AM  TUESDAY 3 DECEMBER 2013

Subject: Temporary Protection Visas

TONY EASTLEY, HOST: The Federal Opposition has defended its decision to  support the Greens' motion disallowing temporary protection visas.

Labor's Immigration Spokesman, Richard Marles, has been speaking to Louise  Yaxley in Canberra.

RICHARD MARLES: Temporary protection visas are bad policy, and they're  particularly bad policy in circumstances where we now have in place the PNG  arrangement. The PNG arrangement is the one piece of policy which is stopping  boats coming from Indonesia, and it's doing that because it's effectively taken  Australia off the table.

TPVs have the potential to put Australia back on the table and act as a magnet  for people to come here by boat. So rather than being a disincentive, they have  the potential to be an encouragement for more people to get on a boat.

LOUISE YAXLEY: Now Mr Morrison says that they would be used for those who  came before the PNG arrangement was put in place, there are up to 30,000  people.

MARLES: Well, that's at odds with the stated rationale for TPVs in the  explanatory memorandum of the regulation that the Government put in place,

when they said that its principle reason was to act as a deterrent for people  coming to Australia by boat.

Now if you are applying it to people who are already here, people who arrived  before the 19th of July, before the implementation of the PNG arrangement, well  then it acts as neither an encouragement nor a disincentive, because it applies to  people who came in different circumstances.

If the Government is not intending to issue a TPV to a person who is yet to  arrive in Australia, well then TPVs cannot act as an incentive or a disincentive.  The reality is that from the time that the PNG arrangement has been put in  place, the whole policy of TPVs became redundant.

YAXLEY: Is there any form of temporary visa that Labor would support?

MARLES: We have concerns about TPVs as a policy. TPVs actually didn't work  as a deterrent during the Howard years. The statistics show that when TPVs  were introduced in the Howard years it in fact saw more people coming by boat,  and indeed more women and children coming by boat as they sought to achieve  some form of family reunification, because that was not allowed.

So we do have concerns about it. And of course, for people who are already in  Australia, what it does is cause considerable stress and anxiety to those people  who are unable to create any permanency within their lives. And there's nothing  good about having a large group of people in Australia who are getting the  protection of the country, who have been found to be genuine refugees, but in a  halfway house way.

There is nothing good about having those people in the country, because  ultimately the entire community has to deal with the stress and anxiety that they  are experiencing.

YAXLEY: But isn't the PNG solution that Labor came up with, that the Coalition's  kept, which sends people offshore and doesn't provide them with a permanent  solution, have the same impact?

MARLES: It's actually not true in terms of it not providing a permanent solution.  People who are found to be genuine refugees will be resettled and offered  permanent protection by Papua New Guinea. But what the PNG arrangement did

was take Australia off the table, and that is what has made the difference.

The last thing we want to do, through TPVs, is to put Australia back on the table.

YAXLEY: Now how much political damage will this do to Labor, given that it ties  the ALP to the Greens?

MARLES: We're not operating in terms of our decision on the basis of whether  we vote with the Greens or against the Greens. We're simply assessing the  merits of this issue.

EASTLEY: The Opposition Immigration Spokesman Richard Marles speaking to  our reporter Louise Yaxley in Canberra.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0401 443 524



