Joint Doorstop Interview, Longreach, Queensland July 27, 2013

Subjects: The Coalition's commitment to upgrade the Australian Stockman's Hall of Fame; election timing; the Coalition’s Real  Solutions plan; Kevin Rudd's border protection failures; the Coalition’s vision for Northern Australia; the Coalition’s Plan for Fast

Broadband and an Affordable NBN; wild dogs; the Coalition’s Green Army policy; Labor’s carbon tax con.

EO&E...........................................................................................................................................

TONY ABBOTT:

It’s great to be here in Longreach at the Stockman’s Hall of Fame. This is an iconic place for outback Australia. This, in so in many  respects, is the heart of our country, maybe not the population heart but it is in some ways our spiritual heart because of the

contribution that the ethos of the bush, the mateship, the adaptability, the endurance - that ethos has played such a big part in our  Australian character.

It is good to be with Bruce Scott the local member, the Member for Maranoa, who has been a great supporter of the Stockman’s

Hall of Fame and through Bruce’s encouragement I want to announce that an incoming Coalition government would provide $5  million towards the Stockman’s Hall of Fame to, amongst other things, create an Outback Entertainment Centre and also a fitting

monument to the cattle industry’s indigenous heritage because black stockmen, white stockmen, black and white men and women  have been a very important part of building this part of our country and played a very important part in contributing to the bush

ethos which has been so important in our national character.

Just a couple of things I think I should say today before I ask Bruce to say a few words and then take some questions.

Really, Mr Rudd, stop playing games with the Australian people - call the election. Call the election. End the suspense. Name the  date. Call the election. It is high time the government of our country was given back to the Australian people and the only way for

that to happen is for there to be an election.

People are sick of the hung parliament. They are sick of a minority government. They want to see strong and stable government  restored to our country and the only way that can happen is with an election. So, bring it on. Let the people decide.

We have got a government which does appear a little paralysed and undecided at the moment. It seems that the government is

divided because the Cabinet is unsure about the future economic strategy of our country. This is a Prime Minister and a  Government that has very good ideas about deceiving the people between now and polling day but it has no sure ideas for the

economic management of our country.

What I know, and what I think the Australian people in their hearts know, is that we need to live within our means. That is why it is  so important that the Budget is returned to surplus as quickly as possible. The Australian people know in their hearts that we all

pay; our children and our grandchildren will all pay for the spending spree that this Government is embarked upon and it is little  wonder that they are constantly embarked on a spending spree when amongst many other things they simply cannot control our

borders.

Now, after 50,000 illegal arrivals by boat; after almost 800 illegal boats; after tragically more than 1000 deaths at sea; after $10  billion-plus of border protection budget blowouts, Mr Rudd says he has a plan. Well, the people smugglers have a plan too and

their plan is to show more will, more determination than the Prime Minister of this country. So far, more than 1,200 illegal arrivals  have turned up since Mr Rudd announced the so-called PNG solution and not a single one of them, not a single one of them has

yet gone to PNG.

Now, if Mr Rudd was fair dinkum, they would be going to PNG in droves but they can’t because almost two years after the  Government first announced a detention centre at Manus, the capacity is still just 300. No one can take this Government seriously

when it comes to border protection.

After two years, they have still have only got room for 300 illegal arrivals on Manus and already there have been 1,200 since Mr

Tony Abbott Federal Member for Warringah | Leader of the Opposition

Page 1 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Longreach, Queensland > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

Rudd said that every single one of them would go to Manus and not one has.

So, I say to Mr Rudd, get serious, get serious and if you are not serious, you can’t continue as Prime Minister of this great country.

So, Bruce, I might ask you just to say a few words and then obviously I will take some questions.

BRUCE SCOTT:

Thank you, Tony and Ben. Can I say to you Tony first of all to host you here at this Stockman’s Hall of Fame Precinct into  Longreach, into Western Queensland is a great privilege for me but it is also a recognition of your commitment to the people of

rural Australia. The $5 million that has been committed if we were elected at the forthcoming election is a very real commitment in  tough budget times that we would be confronted with, but it is commitment not just to the Hall of Fame but the people of rural

Australia. It’s a demonstration that they won’t be forgotten if we are elected, whenever that election is held this year.

I want to also say, what I said up there at the launch, that we stand right here on the Tropic of Capricorn and you also have a very  real plan for northern Australia. As I said, north of this line a million Australians live. South of this line in Australia, 22 million

Australians live. Your commitment, I think the resolve that you have to lead us as a prime minister of this nation will, I think, will  come to the fall also as we roll out that plan for northern Australia which has been crying out for decades to be developed. I think

your commitment, your absolute commitment to rural Australia is underpinned by your presence here and the commitment of $5  million to this Stockman’s Hall of Fame and thank you for being here.

TONY ABBOTT:

Thanks, Bruce. Do we have any questions?

QUESTION:

To a local question, Mr Abbott. A lot of areas of western Queensland don’t have any mobile coverage whatsoever and most of

western Queensland will not see any improvements with either the Labor or your NBN. What commitment will you make to  improve telecommunications in western Queensland?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, with respect, that is not actually correct. At the heart of our plans for a more affordable and faster National Broadband

Network is an improvement of the mobile phone network as well. By getting fibre quickly to distribution points we can get the fibre  to towers which means that the mobile network is dramatically improved right around our country. You see, we are not focusing on

fibre to the premises, we are focusing on fibre to distribution points which will enable our mobile phone system to be upgraded  much, much more swiftly and much more reliably whatever happens under this government’s policies.

BRUCE SCOTT:

If I could just say something about mobile phones because I know I get those same questions from the good ABC here in

Longreach. We have been out of government for almost seven years and when we were in government we provided some $145  million to provide mobile phones in those small communities like Winton and Tambo and places like that, Quilpie, where the

market commercially wouldn’t sustain it. So, we have a commitment to rollout and we did have that commitment to a mobile phone  black spots programme. We have been out of government for seven years and this government has not spent one dollar. In fact,

they abolished that programmer that would have seen a continuation of a rollout of mobile phones into areas where the market  wouldn’t normally provide a commercial return for the operator.

QUESTION:

Would you commit to roll that out again if you were to win government at this election?

TONY ABBOTT:

We will be finalising all of our policies in the run up to the election but you can be absolutely confident that under the Coalition,

mobile phone coverage is going to be much more swiftly and much more effectively addressed than under the Labor Party,  because the Labor Party has made the terrible mistake of committing, over-committing, to digging up every street in metropolitan

and regional Australia to deliver fibre to every premises whether they need it, want it, or can afford to pay more for it. By contrast,  we are doing the more sensible thing of taking the fibre network to distribution points and amongst other things that is going to

enable far more mobile phone towers to operate in the places where they need to be.

QUESTION:

Page 2 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Longreach, Queensland > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

Mr Abbott, another local question. There is a lot of focus on cattle, but wild dogs are eating their way through whole communities

out here. It has been largely left to state and local governments to manage the problem but dogs do cross all borders. Would your  government acknowledge that and finance a national campaign?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, certainly we won’t allow greenies and others to dictate our policy and when you have got a situation where these ferocious

feral dogs are devastating our sheep flocks, obviously you have got to take action. So, we won’t let greenies dictate our rural  policies and we won’t allow state and local boundaries to prevent a strong campaign to eliminate, or at least to much better

control, these feral dogs which are doing such damage.

QUESTION:

Mr Abbott are you concerned about the United Nations criticising your asylum seeker policy?

TONY ABBOTT:

The short answer is I take reputable bodies seriously but, in the end, the important thing is to protect our borders and to stop the  boats and I am not going to be deterred by any agency or body from doing what is necessary to stop the boats and reestablish the

border security that was preserved under the former Coalition Government. The Coalition government has a very strong track  record here. Mr Rudd, by contrast, has had every imaginable policy and none of them have worked.

QUESTION:

Again on the election, Mr Abbott, do you think you can win in a battle of personality against Mr Rudd?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, look, in the end the government of our country is not about showbiz. Electing a national parliament, electing a national

government is not a version of celebrity Big Brother. I know that Mr Rudd wants to play these games, but I am just going to get on  with showcasing our team, showcasing our plans, our Real Solutions plan and while Mr Rudd has had every imaginable position

on just about every imaginable subject, the fact that he is pretending to abolish the carbon tax, the fact that he is making  announcements on border protection, the fact that he is faking Labor Party reforms justifies all of the criticisms that I have made of

this government and justifies and vindicates the political strategy that the Opposition has had for the last three years: same strong  team, same clear plans, predictability, certainty, stability and strength. That is what you will get from the Coalition.

QUESTION:

But Mr Abbott those policies haven’t been costed. You haven’t released policies that can be costed. You have said you are not

going to do it until the election is called. Is that playing with the Australian people, not putting your policies out there now?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, with respect, if you went on to our website you would see 50-plus policies and policy commitments. Just in the last few days,  you have seen from us some important refinements to our border protection policy, you have seen our policy for a Green Army, to

improve land care right around our country, there has been our National Broadband Network policy, our workplace relations  policy, our deregulation policy, our health and medical research policy and these are just policies that have been formally released

in the last few weeks. Every single one of our policies will be fully costed and our full fiscal plan will be on display for the judgment  of the Australian people in good time before the election.

QUESTION:

Bush people are finding it harder to give their children a secondary education and rural rates at university are falling every year.

How would your government address that problem?

TONY ABBOTT:

Well, again, this is something that we are going to be saying more about between now and polling day. I absolutely accept that  people from remote parts of our country don’t get the same access to higher education as people from city areas and even these

days many regional areas. We do need to make it easier for country people to attend higher education if that is their choice and  one of the things that we have been successful in doing, even under the current government, is stopping some of their most

outrageous changes to the various forms of assistance for students wanting to attend higher education. Only the Coalition

Page 3 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Longreach, Queensland > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

stopped an absolute attack on the right of country Australians to attend higher education.

Thank you.

[ends]

Â© Tony Abbott MHR 2010 | Authorised by Tony Abbott MHR, Level 2, 17 Sydney Rd, Manly NSW 2095

www.tonyabbott.com.au

Page 4 of 4 Joint Doorstop Interview, Longreach, Queensland > Tony Abbott

12/11/2013 http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/22487/20130903-0148/www.tonyabbott.c...

