MEET THE PRESS

10 NOVEMBER 2013

INTERVIEW WITH CHRISTINE MILNE

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Senator Milne, thank you for your time today. Can  we start with what you’re actually proposing, in this overhaul to the way we vote in the  Senate?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Yes, today I’m announcing that we will be referring to the Joint  Committee on Electoral Matters a term of reference to report by March next year on the  whole issue of above-the-line, optional, preferential voting - which would stop this massive  tablecloth that’s causing so much confusion to voters. But also to look at issues restricting the  number of parties that one person can be the registered officer for, given that in this election  we had one person who was a registered officer for four parties. But also looking at issues  around donations, and also expenditure - particularly advertising expenditure. In the last  week of this Federal election campaign Clive Palmer, for example, spent $2.7 million, and  the Labor Government spent $1.5 million, just in that last week. So that gives you some idea  of the kind of influence that advertising dollars can have.

PAUL BONGIORNO: So these reforms - from the point of view of the Greens, and also, one  would imagine, the Coalition and Labor - it’s a no-brainer. Something has to be done, and  done urgently.

CHRISTINE MILNE: Yes, I think so. And certainly out there in the community, people are  saying they really want those backroom preference tickets abolished, and I couldn’t agree  more. It’s one of the worst aspects of being part of a Federal election campaign - all of the  parties getting together, trying to work out the preference deals. And the arrival of Mr Drury,  and the way he stitched up those preference deals - that proliferation of parties with the same  registered officer, these tight preference deals - and the community comes along to vote, and  they have no idea that - when they put their vote for one party, how the preferences are going  to end up electing someone entirely different - to the point where you have someone with  less than a 0.25% of the vote being elected, and other people stranded, with much higher  vote. I think the community wants the power back in their own hands, to make sure when  they vote they can go above the line. And I think, you know, this optional preferential above  the line - so you could vote, for example, one to six in a half-Senate election, in terms of the  parties of your choice - would get rid of that complicated thing which has led to the micro-parties being elected, and the community being so confused.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Should this be done before the Senate changes next July?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, I think it should be done as soon as possible. In pure political  terms, of course, it would be sensible to move on it now, because it’s hard to see how the  Government would look at such a reform, once the micro-parties are in the Senate, when  Tony Abbott is going to be so reliant on them. It’s going to be the classic case of the micro-party’s tail wagging the Abbott dog. And so here you go - we need to do it, I think, quickly,  which is why we’ve said let’s have the Committee report on this before March.

SARRAH LE MARQUAND: Miss Milne, you’ve said that the Greens might be willing to  support Tony Abbott’s paid parental leave scheme, but only if that’s capped at $50,000,  rather than the proposed $75,000. As a leader of a progressive party though, isn’t this an  opportunity to challenge the discrimination that working mothers face? I mean, all workers  are entitled to receive sick leave, and annual leave, at full pay - why only should parental  leave be capped?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well certainly, we agree that this should be a workplace entitlement,  and I think that would be a big reform in Australia - to have it recognised as such. But how  we pay for it becomes the issue. And what Tony Abbott has proposed is a levy on big  business. But that won’t cover the whole cost. Some of it has got to come out of the  taxpayer’s pocket. And so, from our point of view, we think a scheme which caps it to cover  at least 90% of people is a fair thing. And that’s really where we’re coming from - to make  sure that we get this workplace entitlement, but not to make it as generous as the Prime  Minister would want.

SARRAH LE MARQUAND: You also said this week that you doubt Tony Abbott has the  courage to call a double dissolution election to get his carbon tax repealing through. But you  know, a lot of commentators say that it was Kevin Rudd’s decision to do just that, regarding  the ETS - it effectively sounded the death knell for his Prime Ministership back in 2010.  Given Tony Abbott had a front row seat to that, do you really think that he would risk making  the same mistake?

CHRISTINE MILNE: I think when you look back at what Kevin Rudd did, it was that he  abandoned carbon pricing altogether, having said it was the greatest moral challenge of all  time to address climate change - and then abandoned it, in favour of the mining tax. When  the Greens went to him with a compromise in February that year - and I remember it well, in  2010 - they weren’t interested, because they’d abandoned it altogether. And I think the  electorate’s frustration was not so much the double dissolution, but more that, having said he  wanted to address it, he abandoned it altogether. And that’s why there was a surge of support  for the Greens - because we’d stood there throughout, saying we must take strong action to  address global warming, and the science, and the fact of what’s happening to the planet right  now, absolutely vindicates that stand.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Senator, yesterday the Government announced changes to the way in  which entitlements - travel entitlements particularly - for politicians would be administered.  Although it does seem to me that Senator Ronaldson gave the game away when he said  nothing much has changed - people will still be able to repay within 28 days. Are you happy  with the reforms?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Oh look, they are a step in the right direction. But they don’t go nearly  far enough, because they don’t address the fundamental - that is, people are still going to  make their own judgments about what they think is appropriate. And we’ve already heard  from a number of people, including Barnaby Joyce, as to - he thinks what he’s done is fine,  and he’s not intending to change. The issue here is you need to have somebody who is  overseeing the system, beyond a self-reporting, if you like, of MPs. So that’s why we’ve said  we need a National Integrity Commissioner. But we need a national ICAC. I mean, that is the  whole thing - to prevent and oversee corruption, both in the Commonwealth public service,  and with MPs and offices and entitlements. And that’s where I think we would really get  some serious action, and that’s what the Greens are going to move to do.



We welcome any steps towards tightening it up. But I don’t think this is going to do more  than basically window-dress the issue. I think Tony Abbott knows the public’s really  concerned about this, and doesn’t like taxpayers’ money going and subsidising all of these  travel claims. The issue is you need an over - someone to oversee it. You need to ring up and  say “Is that appropriate?” If the person says “No, it’s not”, well then, that’s the answer.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: Senator Milne, if I can take you to `the asylum seeker issue now.  The Tony Abbott Government  has been somewhat reluctant with releasing information with  respect to border protection - citing it’s due to operational issues. Do you think that that is  acceptable?

CHRISTINE MILNE: No, it’s not acceptable. What we’re seeing with the Abbott  Government is a trend towards secrecy, a trend towards trying to prevent the Australian  public actually knowing what’s going on. And this is extraordinary, for a group of people  who beat up the asylum seeker issue into a complete frenzy before the election - tried to  pretend that we were virtually going to be invaded. This was an issue of border security. Now  after the election, it’s a case of “Just don’t tell the people, and they won’t be aware it’s  happening”. We need to have that information, which is why we’re going to move in the  Parliament for the documents pertaining to all these towbacks, stopping the boats - all of  these issues to be actually brought before the people. And it’s an extraordinary situation when  you can learn more from Indonesian newspapers than you can from your own Minister. And I  think it’s awful to see members of the armed services having to stand there, being told they  can’t answer any questions, that they’re just standing there as a prop for the Minister. I think  that’s most unfortunate, and quite disrespectful.

PAUL BONGIORNO: But can the Senate force the Government to give that information?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well I thinks we can. We can call for those documents to be released.  We need to know how many times boats have been intercepted, how many times they tried to  take people back to Indonesia, what were the circumstances. I think the Australian public has  a right to know. After all, Tony Abbott tried to say this was a crisis. The only crisis we have  is a humanitarian crisis. It’s time we started talking about people seeking asylum as people.  And one thing I’d like to know about is, what about those two boys on Manus Island - who  were put in that isolation area, one on 24-hour suicide watch? What are we doing to children?  Why were those children sent there? They have no legal guardian - would we as parents  think it was okay to send children away, with no-one looking out for them? They’re the sort  of questions the community wants answered. But I think secretive, misleading, almost  disrespect for the journalists and the community - this is becoming fairly symptomatic of the  Abbott Government.

KATHRYN ROBINSON, PRESENTER: Senator Milne, there are reports this morning that  Tony Abbott has issued edict to all MPs, saying you can’t employ your families - ‘sack your  wives, sack your kids’ are the lines. Do you think Parliamentarians should be able to employ  their husband, their wife or their kids?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, I think the Prime Minister’s made up his mind on this, and given  that edict. Of course, over the years, I’ve known people who have employed family members.  And it’s a pretty hard live being an MP, especially if you come from other parts of the  country - as in, very distant from Canberra.



But having said that, there are also quite generous entitlements about the number of times  spouses and children can come to Canberra to join their partner. And after all, it is not the  role of taxpayer to employ the whole family, and we’ve had a few scandals on that in the  past. So I think, generally, we have to stick with ‘people need to be the best-qualified person  for the job’, and I think the Prime Minister’s made up his mind on this.

KATHRYN ROBINSON: But with respect to the Greens on that, if the best-qualified person  for the job just happens to be a spouse, would you say to one of your Parliamentarians that  they are not to employ that person?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, we generally have a policy not to employ members of the  family, and that’s been consistently our view for a very long time. But I’m not going to stand  in judgment of other people who do. That is the view of the Greens, that we don’t think that  is appropriate, but I think the Prime Minister’s made up his mind on this, and I do think  people need to be aware that it is not the role of taxpayer to pay for the family to travel  around the country by putting them on the payroll. There are entitlements that enable that to  occur, and I think that’s possibly the way that it needs to continue.

PAUL BONGIORNO: Senator, the Attorney-General, George Brandis, wants to put freedom  of speech as one of the first items of business he has. He’d like to repeal the provisions of the  Racial Discrimination Act that prevent people from giving offence. He believes that this is  against freedom of speech. What’s your view of that, and what would or could the Greens do  about it, if it comes before the Parliament?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, I think it’s a shocking indictment of the Attorney-General, that  the very first thing he intends to do in the new Government is to repeal this legislation. It is  about hate speech. We are a country which values tolerance, which values inclusion - and  this legislation has been important to stop hate speech. We have got laws that protect freedom  of speech, but equally, we have defamation laws, when people go over the top in terms of  what they can and can’t say about people. And the same thing should go with hate speech.  And I think this goes to the heart of - what sort of country are we? What do we want to  project to the rest of the world? And my concern is that the Abbott Government is showing  Australia to be looking small, frightened, inward-looking, and mean-spirited - and that  doesn’t matter whether you’re talking about asylum seekers, whether you are talking about  the way we are approaching our relations with people in the region - whether it’s the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, whether it’s taking away superannuation  entitlements to low income earners and allowing the rich to have more. Right across the  board, we are seeing the Abbott Government - small, secretive, mean-spirited, backward-looking, instead of futuristic, outward-looking, inclusive, kind, trying to reduce the gap  between the rich and poor, not expand it. And I think George Brandis’ actions actually go to  this, Paul. I think they do. I think they say to Australia, this is about mean-spiritedness and  we’re not going to tolerate hate speech.

PAUL BONGIORNO: So is it always hate speech? I mean, some people can easily take  offence. You may be criticising, for example, somebody of a certain race because of what  they’ve done, rather than because of their race. They could say “I’ve taken offence”.

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, that’s up to the courts, to sort that out, and they have done a  pretty good job up until now. And that’s the legal system, that makes those interpretations,  and nobody’s going to have much time for vexatious litigation.

PAUL BONGIORNO: So will George Brandis -

CHRISTINE MILNE: But I think you do go to that.

PAUL BONGIORNO: So will George Brandis be able to get these amendments through the  Senate?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, we won’t be supporting them. That’ll be up to others. I don’t  know what Labor’s position on this is, but in terms of the Greens, we will not be supporting  George Brandis’ changes. And we’d call on George Brandis, and the Prime Minister, to  actually value our multiculturalism - to try to value increasing tolerance and decency in the  community, not actually facilitating vilification.

SARRAH LE MARQUAND: On that note, Ms Milne, most voters would agree that the last  Parliamentary term was particularly toxic, arguably due to the fact that it was a minority  Government, being helmed by the first female Prime Minister, who was being actively  undermined for most of that by Kevin Rudd. Given those variables won’t be in play for the  next Parliament, are you hoping that we might see a less inflammatory mood?

CHRISTINE MILNE: Well, I hear the Prime Minister saying that. But I think it’s  extraordinary for someone like him to say that, when he has been the chief driver of a lot of  the nastiness and vilification through the last period of the Parliament, and just recently he’s  said that he wanted this to be a respectful Parliament, and then was particularly derogatory in  his remarks about Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott, for example. So I think Tony Abbott  has got a lot to answer for, in terms of the way that he treated the people in the last  Parliament. I think it would be a good idea if it was a more respectful Parliament, but I think  the leadership will not necessarily come from Tony Abbott.



