





Radio National - The World Today

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

31 January 2013

Subjects: Syrian claims that Israeli jets have launched an attack on  Syria

NEWSREADER: Now to the Syrian claims that Israeli jets have  launched an attack on Syria close to the border with Lebanon. The  escalation of the conflict follows Israeli warnings that Syrian missiles  and chemical weapons could fall into the hands of militants. The UN  Secretary General Ban Ki-moon has condemned what he calls the  unrelenting horrors in Syria's violence.

While international donors at a conference in Kuwait have pledged  $1.5billion in aid, Australia's government has just pledged $10 million  to Syria and additional humanitarian aid.

Europe correspondent Mary Gearin spoke to Australia's Foreign  Minister, Bob Carr.

BOB CARR: We're looking at mass crimes. Mass crimes. And that has  got a horrible resonance out of Bosnia, out Rwanda, out of the  Democratic Republic of the Congo. And it has underlined the urgency

of getting that ceasefire in place, and that means overcoming the  Russian and Chinese objection to that. And getting the transition to a  plural democratic Syria that will come with the departure of Assad  and all sides accepting the transition plan agreed at Geneva in the  middle of the year.

Now short of that, I will push with as much energy as I can the plan  to have medical supplies for the country and hospitals inside the  country and medical personnel inside the country protected.

QUESTION: Given these recent reports and the fact that it's more  than three months since you said we have to trust in spirit of the  Arab Spring, surely it could be argued that the international  community has to do more than supply humanitarian aid and that -  can't we be doing more with this position on the UN Security  Council?

BOB CARR: No, this is the peace plan that was developed by Kofi  Annan when he was working for the UN and for the Arab League - a  joint special envoy is valid now as it was late last year. And that is, I  should say, in the middle of last year. Tragically, it has gone on that  long and that is to get a ceasefire and to get adherence to a  transition inside the country.

I would urge Russia, without impugning Russia, to think again about  how its legitimate interests, can be expressed in this part of the  world. And I urge Russia to work with America. I think this the  realistic way forward to get that ceasefire - involving the departure  of Assad with protection for other elements in the coalition that  stands behind Assad, legitimate elements. To get Assad out of the  way and to get a transition that will protect all parts of the Syrian  community, including its minorities.

QUESTION: What else is the Australian Government preparing to do  in Syria?

BOB CARR: We're increasing our aid to flow to refugees out of Syria.  We are the fourth largest contributor, I think. Australians can be  proud of that. And the tents in Za'atri refugee camp, the food being  distributed, the child protection that is provided there, because  tragically so many youngsters across the border without parents is  very largely there because of Australian support.

We're increasing aid by another $10 million and that will assist  refugees who have ended up in Lebanon, Jordan, I think Iraq as well,  and Turkey, helping the refugees who have been forced out of their  country.

NEWSREADER: That's the Foreign Minister, Bob Carr, speaking to our  Europe correspondent, Mary Gearin.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



