

The Hon. Christopher Pyne MP  Federal Member for Sturt  Shadow Minister for Education, Apprenticeships and  Training

Manager of Opposition Business, House of  Representatives  22 July 2013

SUBJECTS: PNG ‘Solution’, Election Date

E&OE...............................



(Greetings omitted)

Kieran Gilbert: Can I start by clarifying what is the Coalition’s position when it comes to the PNG  deal?

Christopher Pyne: Well we always welcome rigorous off-shore processing but it has to work and  you have to be able to trust the people implementing it to implement it successfully.  Now Kevin  Rudd  is  very  good  at  announcements,  he  is  very  poor  at  delivery  whether  it’s  pink  batts,   whether  it’s  school  halls,  now  this  so-called  PNG  solution.  Now  since  Friday  we’ve  found  out   there  are  three  hundred  available  places  on  Manus  Island.  That  it  is  a  tent  city.  And  the   Government  wants  people  to  believe  that  it  will  be  able  to  build  thousands  and  thousands  of   houses  on Manus  Island in a  very short  space  of  time.  We’ve  also  found out that women and  children  won’t  be  going  to  Manus  Island  because  they  can’t  be  inoculated  against  malaria  on   Manus  Island.  We’ve  also  found  out  that  only  single  males  will  be  sent  to  Papua  New  Guinea   and  if  people  are  found  to  not  be  refugees  the  Prime  Minister  of  PNG  says  that  is  Australia’s   problem.  So there isn’t the capacity, the ads that are running are actually lies when they say if  you come to Australia you won’t be settled here.  That isn’t true.

Gilbert: But the Government has said that women and children won’t be sent immediately but  they will be once facilities and procedures are in place to accommodate them.  So the single  men, for example if you look at this boat the first boat that arrived since the announcement  eighty three on board, I think it was about thirty or a bit over single Iranian men.  They’ll be sent  within a few weeks.

Pyne: Supposedly.

Gilbert: The remainder, families will be sent once the facilities are there.

Pyne: Well maybe.  Now the Minister for Immigration, Tony Burke, has been bringing women  and children back from Papua New Guinea.  So they have been sent there and they are now  coming back.  Now you have to look at what the Government says and what the Government  does.  They have an election fix at the moment.  They want to get through the next six weeks  with the people believing that they have a solution for boats. Now they’ve brought fifty  thousand unauthorised arrivals here in the last five years.  They came into power, they got rid of  a solution that was working under the Howard Government, they replaced it.  We’ve had fifty  thousand unauthorised arrivals since.  They’ve announced a policy on Friday, the PNG Prime  Minister has already said that there is a limit.  At least three thousand is the limit.

Gilbert: But they do have a deal don’t they.  They’ve got a deal with PNG.

Pyne: Well they’ve got a two page arrangement.

Gilbert: But already you are seeing signs out of Indonesia.  Asylum seekers saying they won’t be  making the trip.  People smugglers saying well look you might have shut our business model for  the time being.  That sounds promising.

Pyne: As soon as they find out this is just another Kevin Rudd con.  Do you know what will  happen?  Women and children will become the customer of preference for people smugglers.    Because if women and children aren’t being sent to Manus Island and we now know that that is  true, that they won’t be sent, since Friday the detail has started to leak out again.  Kevin Rudd,  the big announcement, all talk no action -

Gilbert: - (inaudible )…temporarily isn’t it?

Pyne: Well so they say.  But they also said they’d stop the boats.  This is there seventh iteration  of an anti-people smuggler policy.  We’ve had East Timor, Manus Island Mark 1 which has fallen  over, the Nauru solution which is on fire on the weekend and has burnt to the ground.   You  can’t trust Labor to stop the boats.  The only way to stop the boats is to turn the boats around  where it is safe to do so, bring back temporary protection visas and have rigorous offshore  processing.  Now they are making an attempt at rigorous offshore processing but yet again the  devil is in the detail and the detail is that it is not true that if you come to Australia you will be  settled in PNG.  And the Government’s $2 million tax-payer funded ad campaign is a base lie.

Gilbert: But the Government has repeated that commitment whether you say it is legally  binding by PNG or not.  They’ve said the asylum seekers who arrive by boat have no possibility  of being processed here.  So whether they are resettled in PNG or elsewhere that’s a pretty  clear policy statement.

Pyne: Unless you are a woman or a child Kieran.  So on Friday the Prime Minister said if you  come here by boat you will not be settled in Australia.  Now we find out if you are a woman or a  child you will be settled in Australia.

Gilbert: Does the Coalition see any prospect of using this PNG deal if you do win?  The polls still  say that you are in front albeit a lot closer…



Pyne: - well I’d be very surprised …

Gilbert: … do you think there is scope to use this in office?

Pyne: Look they have a two page arrangement with Papua New Guinea.  The High Court has  already knocked over the Malaysian Solution and the Malaysian Solution was a lot more detailed  than what the Prime Minister gave us on Friday.  This is just more Kevin Rudd flimflam on  Friday.  Kevin Rudd said in 2007 that you would turn back the boats, now he says you can’t turn  back the boats.  Now we are supposed to believe that he is sending people to Manus Island  where there is a tent city, where there are no houses, where they are bringing women and  children home, where it is so infected with malaria that you can’t inoculate children against it.   And their claim that if you come to Australia by boat you will not be settled here has turned out  to be a grotesque lie.  That in fact if you are a woman or a child you will be settled here and  therefore women and children will become the people smugglers’ clients of choice.

Gilbert: Let’s go to the - I want to ask you about the ALP Caucus meeting today.  Labor reform is  going to be the focus of their meeting today.  It will get the tick obviously this close to an  election.  But when it comes to dealing with problem areas, Kevin Rudd is gradually ticking off  the areas he needs to manage, well it appears the electorate appears to be warming to what he  is saying?

Pyne: I think the electorate are prepared to give Kevin Rudd a go.  I think that has been reflected  in the polls.  I think when they work out as they are - and I spent last weekend at footy matches  and sporting matches with my children and friends and people that I know - they are already  working out that Kevin Rudd is just spinning them more all talk no action.  He said he was going  to terminate the carbon tax, he hasn’t terminated the carbon tax.  He’s put the car industry at  risk through these Fringe Benefits Tax changes.  He’s said he is going to stop the boats now we  are discovering the devil has been in the detail and the truth is he is going to do no such thing.   The problem for Kevin Rudd is that he always makes historic overreaching statements which he  can never match.

Gilbert: What’s your expectation of your best guess of the election date?  It won’t be August 24  obviously.

Pyne: I think they’ll go to the polls as soon as possible because the longer Kevin Rudd remains in  office the more obvious it will become that he is all talk and no action and that you can’t rely on  his word.

Gilbert: Manager of Opposition Business, Christopher Pyne, appreciate your time this morning.   Thank you for that.

ENDS

