





Radio National - Breakfast

Transcript, E&OE, proof only

25 January 2013

Carr talks about the main points of discussion at the World  Economic Forum being held in Davos, Switzerland.

JOHN DOYLE: Foreign Minister Bob Carr has been conducting a series  of meetings with foreign ministers and former world leaders on the  sidelines of the annual World Economic Forum in the Swiss town of  Davos.

He joins us again on Summer Breakfast at the end of his - I assume a  very long day - to give us an inside into the issues troubling the  world's power brokers.

Foreign Minister good morning.

BOB CARR: Good morning John.

JOHN DOYLE: Now what's been discussed in the Davos corridors?  Britain's future in the EU must be - well, must be one of the talking  points?

BOB CARR: Well that's been big, and other current issues are Syria,  the possible resumption of the Middle East peace process in the  wake of the Israeli elections and the inauguration of President  Obama for his second term.

But I've got to say one thing that strikes me is the reference to  climate change. Christine Lagarde the head of the IMF said it is the  biggest economic problem for this century. Ban Ki-Moon made a  similar statement. Barack Obama revived the issue in his inaugural  speech of course. You can't get away from it. I just think the time  we've wasted in Australia accommodating climate change denial is  quite striking and contrary to the way the rest of the world is veering  on this issue.

JOHN DOYLE: I think that's right. And the difficulty is of course when  you look at the economic cost of infrastructure damage alone, it's in  trillions of US dollars.

BOB CARR: Yeah, not for nothing did The Economist magazine two  years ago refer to global warming as quote, mankind's craziest  experiment, unquote. And it can be discussed in terms not only of  the loss of species, the degradation of life on the planet, but of a  crippling financial burden as the world accommodates to adjust to  something we have inflicted on ourselves by a colossal addiction to  fossil fuels.

And it was just interesting for me as an Australian coming from a  jurisdiction where climate change denial has filled the air, to find that  the world leadership continues to take it seriously and register it as  the highest - the foremost of its concerns, even above the slow world  economy and specific economic agenda items.

JOHN DOYLE: And yet, Minister, Australia now stands I think as if not  the largest exporter of coal in the world, then the second largest.

BOB CARR: Well that's true. We've got a coal-based energy sector  and our coal is relatively cheap; it's price-competitive at least. And  it's the higher quality of alternative coal and our response - our  moral response is that we are pricing it and we are leading a global  push for a comprehensive network of agreements. And that's  emerging anyway.

I mean, as you look at what China has announced even before the air  quality crisis in Beijing, it's clear that that huge nation, that populous  nation knows that it must price carbon and initiate carbon trading  schemes. It's doing precisely that, it's moving as so many other  countries are in precisely the direction Australia has chosen to move.

JOHN DOYLE: And speaking of China, when we were last talking we  briefly mentioned China in the context of North Korea. Now I noticed  recently - it might've been yesterday or the day before - that the  North Korean Government has outlined plans to carry out a third  nuclear test aimed at the United States. That would obviously be  something concerning the people with whom you're speaking?

BOB CARR: Well I've spoken to Ban Ki-Moon as recently as this  evening. And of course he has [indistinct] condemned the DPRK's  announcement. This means that they're now signalling that they will  break on a third occasion the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. The  treaty was [indistinct] in 1996 and there has been a unilateral  moratorium on nuclear testing.

The test that they are signalling, and the two tests they conducted in  2006 and 2009 is very destabilising for North Asia and indeed for all  of East Asia because it confirms North Korea - this unique regime - is

continuing to work away at advancing militarisation and enhancing  its weaponisation, at giving itself a reliable nuclear weapons  capacity. And that is deeply disturbing of course for Japan and South  Korea, and we've got to rely - you mentioned China - we've got to  rely very largely on China's capacity to influence the behaviour of this  regime.

JOHN DOYLE: Well I assume the Chinese Government will be  embarrassed by the news from Pyongyang?

BOB CARR: Don't exclude the fact that it was announced in the wake  of the Security Council resolution on their ballistic missile test of last  year, and it's a response that would confirm the very peculiar nature  of the hermit kingdom and its leadership.

On another front when it comes to North Korea we're proceeding to  build support for a full scale investigation by the Human Rights  Council of the gulag that exists in North Korea, and since I announced  that this was an interest for Australia I've been pleased to welcome  the statement by the UN Commissioner on Human Rights.

But she believes a commission of inquiry by the Human Rights  Council into the North Korean gulag is appropriate. Japan and the  Europeans have lent their support to the concept. So I anticipate  Australia will have a lead role in this, but I anticipate as well it will  receive broad support by the international community.

In the meantime we've got estimates of the number of people  confined in concentration camps in North Korea. They range as high  as a quarter of a million in conditions of random executions,  universal starvation and manifest use of torture.

JOHN DOYLE: Just changing the subject slightly Minister, I assume  you've had some talks with incoming US Secretary of State John

Kerry. Now I do recall in a presidential campaign not so long ago  where Republican opponents criticised him for (a) being a sailor and  (b) being able to speak French. Have you managed to speak with  him?

BOB CARR: I spoke with him in April in Washington. On my first  official trip to Washington I spoke to him in his capacity as chairman  of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and he and I shared a  keen interest not only in global warming but in the quality of a  world's oceans. He was about to hold hearings of his committee on  that subject - about to chair hearings of his committee on that  subject. He's got a keen environmental awareness.

I'll be having my first talk to him after he settles into the office on 3  February - no, he's starting on 4 February with a customary arrival  ceremony - and he's slated to have a telephone consultation with me  shortly thereafter. I look forward to working with him and discussing  above all the issues that concern us in this region.

JOHN DOYLE: Just finally Minister, we've just heard news of the  number of Syrian refugees which threaten to - well, quite possibly  destabilise in some way, Turkey. Are you concerned about this at all?

BOB CARR: Yeah, I've come late this afternoon from a meeting with  the Foreign Minister of Turkey. He spoke about 10,000 Syrians on the  borders with Turkey at any time seeking permission to cross. He  spoke about the $500 million that Turkey has invested in housing and  educating the refugee population that is with them from Syria.

[Indistinct] is that the most destabilising impact of this surge of  refugees from the humanitarian crisis in Syria is going to be in Iraq,  unreported by and large. But the fact is that in Iraq you've got a level  of bombing and conflict that is now back at the level it was at the

worst stage in the war. And the Shia Sunni division in Iraq is likely I'm  told to be sharpened by the pressure of refugees from Syria.

Jordan of course is feeling the burden. Turkey and Lebanon. So the  evidence of the pressure on the Middle East as a result of the spill  over of the sectarian civil war in Syria is now very clear. It's a very  great concern to Turkey though, I can assure you.

JOHN DOYLE: Yeah indeed. Minister thank you so much. Look, we do  just have one more minute and if I could ask you if there are  concerns about the fallout from the Israeli elections talking of the  Middle East, it would seem that the Likud party would go into  coalition with parties on the right and this is going to set back Middle  East peace plans I would have thought.

BOB CARR: Yeah, I wouldn't comment on the new alignment in the  Knesset but I would say again as we've consistently said - and said  from a position of being a friend of Israel - that more settlement  activity will bring us to the point where a two-state solution is simply  impossible, and that will leave Israel administering an area with a  burgeoning Arab population. And that is not in their security interest,  nor is it in the interest of a world seeking an end to the cycle of  violence in the Middle East.

So whatever coalition government emerges from the political  process in Israel in the next week or so, the overall issue is whether  there are going to be more settlements and therefore more  institutional barriers to the two-state solution without which there  won't be a secure Israel and there won't be a Palestinian homeland.

JOHN DOYLE: Nor a secure Middle East.

Foreign Minister thank you so much for taking the trouble to join us  on RN Summer Breakfast this morning.

BOB CARR: My pleasure John, thank you.

JOHN DOYLE: Foreign Minister Bob Carr joining us from the Swiss  town of Davos where he's attending the World Economic Forum until  Saturday.

Media enquiries

 Minister's office: (02) 6277 7584

 DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



