



Campaign Transcript



TRANSCRIPT OF DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER ANTHONY ALBANESE  INTERVIEW WITH RAFAEL EPSTEIN  ABC Melbourne  13 AUGUST 2013

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

_____________________________________________________________



Subjects: Melbourne infrastructure; Melbourne Metro project; East West Link;  Westconnex; Coalition’s review of GST;  NBN; Stephen Conroy; Mental health;  HIV AIDS; Tax; PEFO; Asylum seekers; Tony Abbott’s comments in Lindsay;  Polls  _____________________________________________________________





EPSTEIN:  Anthony Albanese is as I mentioned the Deputy Prime Minister, the  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Broadband and the Digital Economy. It’s a  very busy card. Minister thank you for coming in.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Good to be with you.

EPSTEIN: Just a few things to talk about before we get to peoples’ calls. One of the  significant differences between the Coalition and the ALP in Victoria - you’ve  pledged money for a rail tunnel, Tony Abbott has pledged money for a road tunnel.  There’s a big criticism for you from the Victorian Government and that is that you’ve  pledged money for a road in western Sydney. It’s a lot further down the list, I think it’s  the Westconnex, it’s a lot further down the list when it comes to the independent  umpires called Infrastructure Australia. We don’t need to worry about their name but  they’re the objective body who assess these things. That road in western Sydney is  all the way down there. Even further beneath it is the East West Link. You’re giving  money to the road in Sydney but not to the road in Melbourne, why not?

ALBANESE: No, we’ve said it’s subject to the business case and the business case  is being done. And what we’ve done is fund $25 million up front to the business case  on the Sydney road project can be done. What we’ve done here in Victoria is put $3  billion into the budget for the Metro project. The Metro project is a precondition to  building other rail lines.

EPSTEIN: The Metro is the rail tunnel.

ALBANESE:  Yes. Including Doncaster, if you want to put a line to the airport. We  haven’t come up with this idea, it came from the Victorian Government. We sat down  and negotiated with the Transport Minister and the Premier’s office and the  Treasurer’s office. We came up with a model of equal funding.

EPSTEIN: Rail tunnel aside, the Sydney road project, freeway out in the western  suburbs, it is lower down the list. You appear to have pledged $1.5 billion for that.

ALBANESE:  What we’ve done is made provision for it subject to the business case  and subject to it stacking up. But we’ve put forward $25 million.  What we did on the  Metro, we put $40 million on the table for the planning to happen for the Metro in the  2009 budget. So we did that. With regard to the East West road link, we’re not  saying no to that, we’re just saying we want to see the business case because the  last time a proper business case was done it had a benefit cost ratio of 0.5, it was  done by Sir Rod Eddington who happens to be the Chair of Infrastructure Australia.  So what that meant was essentially for every dollar of investment it created 50 cents  return.

EPSTEIN: The Victorian Government says that has changed substantially, there’s  now a substantial rate of return on the road.

ALBANESE:  We want to see what that is. Historically one of the reasons rail is  done well through projects like the regional rail link, where we’ve got over $3 billion  being invested today, is that you have that uplift value tends to happen around  railway stations.

EPSTEIN:  You’ve given me a recitation of all the things that have happened and I  can’t quibble with that. Still, the criticism from Denis Napthine, the Victorian Premier  is -



ALBANESE:   It’s nonsense criticism.

EPSTEIN:  But the road project in Sydney is much lower down the list.

ALBANESE:  Yes.

EPSTEIN:  And it has got more money than the Victorian road project.

ALBANESE:  Provision has been made. Victoria in the last budget got over half a  billion dollars for the M80 road project extension, where we’ve already put in around  about $980 million; the ring road essentially. We put money into managed  motorways, three separate managed motorways projects that have been approved  by Infrastructure Australia. We had $3 billion for the Melbourne Metro project. We’ve  already put $3.225 billion to be precise into the regional rail link, the largest ever  federal investment in Melbourne infrastructure. We have tripled infrastructure  investment per person here in Victoria from around about $60 per head to $180 per  head. The Victorian Government are not in a position to complain. The Victorian  Government, what they need to do, is simply submit their business case, they had it  and they wouldn’t submit it.

EPSTEIN:  It’s there now with Infrastructure Australia. I’ll move onto some other  areas. We’d love to hear what your questions and queries are, I’ll get to your texts  soon. The Prime Minister since about Wednesday of last week has been pushing  very hard on the idea that under the Coalition the GST will rise. Both Tony Abbott  and Joe Hockey have said repeatedly today that it’s pure fiction and pure fear  campaign. This is Joe Hockey speaking earlier today in Melbourne.

JOE HOCKEY GRAB:               There will be no change to the GST full stop. Okay,  anything else?

JOURNALIST GRAB:                There seems to be confusion in the Coalition ranks  as to whether -

JOE HOCKEY GRAB:                No, there is none. There will be no change to the  GST full stop.

JOURNALIST GRAB:                Will it still be part of the review?

JOE HOCKEY GRAB:               There will be no change to the GST full stop.

JOURNALIST GRAB:                It appears to be part of the review.

JOE HOCKEY GRAB:                   I’m just saying again there will be no change to  the GST full stop. Okay, anything else? Any others?

EPSTEIN:  It’s pretty unambiguous Anthony Albanese, there will be no change to the  GST full stop.



ALBANESE: Why are they having a review? And why are they including the GST in  the review. I mean what’s interesting is that today’s PEFO, the pre-election forecast  have shown that the Government’s budget figures in the economic statement were  accurate. What we know is that the Opposition have to find $70 billion at least in  cuts.

EPSTEIN:   I want to ask you about costings, I want to get onto costings and you’ll  get a chance but the Coalition say repeatedly that the GST won’t go up in the next  term, that it’s included in the review but actually isn’t that a responsible thing to do? If  you are going to look at the tax system, you should include the GST. The Henry Tax  Review didn’t include it and many people say it was hampered because it wasn’t  included.

ALBANESE:   It didn’t include it because it’s a regressive tax and because the  Government had no intention of considering putting the GST onto food. What is the  point of examining something unless you are considering taking those  recommendations seriously and implementing them?

EPSTEIN:  It can’t go up without agreement from the States though?

ALBANESE:  That’s not right. That’s not right. You can just change the federal  legislation. And of course the States, because they are beneficiaries of the GST,

many of them have already been out there talking about the need to increase it or  widen the goods and services for which it applies, particularly into food and other  essential services.

EPSTEIN:  Isn’t it a bit desperate, I mean there are actually lots of policy differences  you could target. Going for the GST scare campaign shows that you (inaudible)?

ALBANESE:  You raised it.

EPSTEIN:  I did. But it certainly is raised every chance the Prime Minister gets and  every chance the Treasurer gets. They raise it as well.

ALBANESE:  You raised it and it is reasonable that given that it is the Opposition  that put this on the table - not us it’s the Opposition that have made this an issue. So  they want to put themselves in a position whereby they say oh yes, we told you we  were going to have a review and include the GST in it after the election. And what  we know is that they - we’ll get onto cuts - but the money has got to come from  somewhere and at the moment they’re not putting out their bottom line.

EPSTEIN:  Look, we will get onto the costings. I want to give some callers a chance  to have their say - I can see there’s a few NBN calls - so we’ll chat about the NBN  and then we’ll get on to the pre-election economic fiscal outlook - PEFO - which is a  marvellously mangled acronym but still. KJ I think has called from Lysterfield. Hi KJ.

CALLER:   Hi Raf, hi Mr Albanese.

ALBANESE:  G’day.

CALLER:  I’m just wondering why the sales pitch to voters from the NBN is so  heavily focused about the speed? Because I think it solves a lot of other problems  around, like helping people who can’t get broadband actually get it, that aren’t really  part of the national debate. And I think a lot of it is because the Government is not  really talking about those benefits.

EPSTEIN:  So you’re saying they are marketing it wrong? You like it but they’re  emphasising the wrong things?

CALLER:  I think so, yes, it’s a much more compelling case to talk about people in  the city who just can’t get broadband.

ALBANESE:  Well there’s a range of benefits from the NBN, speed is just one of  them. Another is reliability. Fibre is much more reliable than copper. There was a  debate between copper and iron in 1910 in the Federal Parliament. Copper was  better then, it certainly isn’t better more than 100 years later. But what I want to talk  about with the NBN is the benefits to education, the benefits to health, the benefits to  aged care in terms of people being able to stay in the home for longer, the benefits  for smart manufacturing, for agriculture. It will transform the economy. It will  transform everything that we do.

EPSTEIN:  There’s another NBN question from Richard who has called from Dookie.  Hi Richard.

CALLER:  My question is why do the Government deem that 100 to 1000mbps is so  important whereas we can’t get better than our basic wireless at 1mb because it’s  better than the metro comparable of half a megabit per second.

EPSTEIN: So is your essential problem that what you have already is pretty poor?

CALLER:  It’s pretty poor, but to get the NBN satellite, interim satellite, we have to  be as bad a half a megabit per second, which the Government says is metro-comparable. I don’t know where in metro it’s that bad.

EPSTEIN:  Okay so you’re saying you don’t qualify for an upgrade unless it’s so  woefully inadequate it’s almost useless. Is that essentially what you’re saying?

CALLER:  Absolutely.

ALBANESE:  What we say is that you need to do it right and do it with once. That’s  why we talk about the speed, rather than to go to the alternative model which  essentially allows for 25mbps, ours is 1000 download and 400 upload. The   alternative plan doesn’t even talk about upload. Speed is important because internet  usage will increase. A year seven kid today will by the time they get into year 12 will  be using six times the amount that they are today.

EPSTEIN:  On speed, the sorts of speeds you are talking about Malcolm Turnbull  says they will be able to download 15 movies at once. Do I need that sort of speed at  home? That seems like gold-plating and excess speed that I won’t need.

ALBANESE:  He’s wrong of course. What you need is a range of services, and what  the NBN will enable you to do - this is one of the great divides, it’s not just about  downloading, it’s about things like provision of healthcare so that someone in their  home can upload their blood sugar levels, their blood pressure, can upload that data,  talk to a nurse in real time so that it’s reliable -

EPSTEIN:   I don’t need 1000 gig for that though, do I?

ALBANESE:  No but you will need substantial reliable connections. What you need  the really high end is for businesses and other people who are essentially uploading  or downloading extensive files. And more and more if you look at the growth that’s  occurring, it’s a bit like building a bridge that is two lanes and then having to go back  later on and retrofit it. It will cost you more.

EPSTEIN:  I don’t want to get too bogged down in the detail but the upper end of  speeds to 1000 gig, how much is that going to cost me?

ALBANESE: One gig. Well the market will determine the cost. What we’re doing is  building the infrastructure and then you have competition from private sector  providers over the top of that.

EPSTEIN:  But isn’t it important that say I pay $80 to $120 a month now for the  current thing, or I can download maybe one movie at a time. If I want that upper end  of the scale is it going to be the same cost, is it going to be double, triple?

ALBANESE:  Well what you know now is that for people who are accessing the  NBN, they’re doing it at the same cost or cheaper than they were ADSL. So NBN is  already, you know through the practical examples that you have plans out there that  are marketed by, through competition, which are delivering service for equal or less  cost.

EPSTEIN:   I’ll get to a few of your text messages; I’ve been neglecting them.  Hooray for a rail tunnel, rail gets traffic off the road. Freeways invite more cars. And  another text, Raf, Albo’s GST comments reveal just how little real life business  experience he has. If you’re looking to raise money, then you have a review and look  at all the options. Even if you don’t implement all of them, at least have a look at  them all. What a ridiculous thing for him to say. That’s from Craig. A texter has raised  one of the questions he says you did not answer last night - you were debating on  Lateline with Malcolm Turnbull about the NBN. The 1000 gig connection we’re  talking about, Malcolm Turnbull said it would cost $20,000. He says that’s indicative  monthly charge for that connection. Is that right or wrong.

ALBANESE:   Absolute nonsense. Absolute nonsense.

EPSTEIN:  Okay, I don’t want to go much further into the NBN.

ALBANESE:  A figure just plucked out of the sky.

EPSTEIN:  We won’t go into the other details there, it’s on the Lateline website if  people want to pursue it. Just a quick question before I go to more calls, Stephen  Conroy used to be the Minister with your portfolio. He has gone away for two weeks  to the States on a conference. Is that poor form for a senior senator from Labor in  the middle of an election campaign?

ALBANESE:  I assume probably what has occurred is he has had a commitment to  go to a conference prior to the election being called. I don’t know how long he has  gone for. But he’s an adult, he can make his own decisions.

EPSTEIN:   Is that what, deserting the ship? He dislikes Kevin Rudd so much?  What’s going on?

ALBANESE:  No, he’s obviously probably made the arrangement not knowing when  the election would be.

EPSTEIN: He doesn’t have to go.

ALBANESE:  Well he has made that decision, I’m not aware of all of the  circumstances, I haven’t discussed it with him.

EPSTEIN:  Do you approve of him being away?

ALBANESE:  I approve of him having the right to make his own decisions, is what I  approve of.

EPSTEIN:  Couldn’t do with a senior former front bencher campaigning? I don’t  know, are seats just a given in Victoria you don’t have to worry about them?

ALBANESE:   In terms of the campaign, we have lots of people on the ground  campaigning pretty hard. I’ve been with Mike Symon this morning and this afternoon  I’ll be launching the campaign in Aston.

EPSTEIN:  I don’t doubt it. John has called with a different sort of question. Hello  John.

CALLER:  Hello thanks very much for taking my call. My question is to Mr Albanese,  I’m a person suffering from mental disabilities plus HIV. What can you say Mr  Albanese is going to do to help my quality of life because it really, when you can’t  work, been knocked down a couple of times from Centrelink (inaudible) and it has  been too hard for me to continue.

EPSTEIN:  Can I just clarify, you’re on Newstart and you said you’ve got a couple of  medical conditions - HIV and what else did you say?

CALLER:  Post-traumatic stress disorder.

EPSTEIN: Okay so you just want to know what you can do to improve your lot?

CALLER: Yes.

ALBANESE:  Thanks for the question. And one of the things that I think is pretty  positive about what has happened in the political debate since I’ve been in  Parliament is much more attention on mental health issues, and a recognition that  this impacts on individuals such as yourself, but also on society. So there’s a range  of measures. We had the most significant mental health package in Australia’s  history in the last budget, the budget in 2012. We worked with professionals to make  sure that occurred. We prioritised it and put it in the Cabinet so that you have that  voice for these issues around the table. And certainly I’m very sympathetic with your  plight and we need to make sure that we provide that support and assistance  because so many people suffer from mental health issues.

EPSTEIN:  John does that answer your question?

CALLER:  What about the HIV? I never hear campaigns about HIV, a terrible  disease.

ALBANESE:  I think with respect no government in the world did more to address  HIV AIDS than the Hawke Government. Right at the beginning of the process when  other governments were finding it difficult to talk about issues that can be seen as  relating to sexuality - of course it is much broader than that - but the Hawke  Government and in particular a great Australian Minister Blewitt saved literally  thousands and thousands of lives. So I think our record is very strong. I attend HIV

AIDS functions every year in Sydney. And I’m very active in ACON, and other  organisations I’ve had a lot of contact with.

EPSTEIN:  Sean has called with another query. Hi Sean.

CALLER: Hi Raf, my question is on income tax for the Deputy Prime Minister. He  was just referring to the Hawke Government which introduced the workers of  Australia could claim $300 without receipts in ’86, 27 years ago. When is the $300  ever going to be indexed Deputy Prime Minister?

ALBANESE:  Well that would be a matter for the Treasurer.

EPSTEIN:   Fair question though isn’t it? It’s not much is it $300 worth of expenses.

ALBANESE:  No it’s not.

CALLER:  Well $300 today is a lot less than 26 years ago.

ALBANESE:  Sure and that is a reasonable point that you make. But a reasonable  point for me to make is that I’m not in a position to change tax policy on this program  this afternoon. That is an issue that you raise. I’ll take it on board and raise it with the  Treasurer.

EPSTEIN: Thank you for calling Sean. I want to ask you about PEFO, the Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Outlook. I’m sure you will have a go at the Opposition  but there’s one detail in there, Treasury are working on costings of 1100 people per  month still coming to Australia by boat. Is that a recognition from Treasury that what  you have announced on PNG isn’t going to work? What does it mean if Treasury is  working on 1100 people per month still coming?

ALBANESE:   What that is, Treasury are pretty conservative people, I know that will  come as a shock to you. One of the things that they try to do is to build into their  costings, arms-length from Government, scenarios, and they make those decisions.

EPSTEIN: But Kevin Rudd and Tony Burke did say it could actually link potentially to  savings. That doesn’t look like a saving in Treasury’s mind?

ALBANESE:   That’s a decision that Treasury make. What I want to see happen is  people not get on boats, people not risking their lives and for us to increase the  intake in terms of asylum seekers.

EPSTEIN:  Just a little bit of news that I will play for you, this is from Tony Abbott.  This has just come through. The Opposition Leader has described his candidate for  the western Sydney seat of Lindsay as having sex appeal, Fiona Scott is running for  the seat which is held actually by David Bradbury the Assistant Treasurer. Jackie  Kelly was the last Liberal to hold the seat between after 1996 I think, and Tony  Abbott told journalists that Ms Scott and Ms Kelly have a lot of similarities. I’ll just  read to you what he said: They’re young, they’re feisty, I think I can probably say  they have a bit of sex appeal and they are just very, very connected with the local  area. That’s obviously getting a bit of traction because he’s talking about his own

candidate having sex appeal. Anthony Albanese, is that just all part of the fun of the  campaign trail? Anything more than that?

ALBANESE:  I think I’ll raise my bat and let that go through to the keeper.

EPSTEIN: No, you don’t want to have a go at that one?

ALBANESE:  I think what people want is a candidate who will best represent them.  David Bradbury is a great local member and I think it is the quality of the candidate  and what they are able to achieve and David Bradbury is an outstanding Assistant  Treasurer. He’s a great local member and a great advocate.

EPSTEIN:  Any regrets with the return to Kevin Rudd? He said at the start of the  election that it was an election about trust. All of the public polls have the Prime  Minister Kevin Rudd going backward on trust.

ALBANESE:   No they have him as the preferred Prime Minister.

EPSTEIN: That’s a different measure though.

ALBANESE:   They also have a very competitive situation with regards to the  election. The truth is, we weren’t terribly competitive a few months ago. That’s the  reality. We made a difficult decision but it is the right decision. We’re in a position to  win this election. We are now campaigning in seats like I will be launching the  campaign this afternoon of Rupert Evans.

EPSTEIN:  His negative approval and his trust figures. No one likes to focus on  polls, but surely it’s a worry if there’s a negative approval and his trust numbers are  going down?

ALBANESE:  You’ve seen a substantial personal negative attack against Kevin  Rudd by some sections of the media, as well as by the Opposition. The Opposition  started their negative ads on TV the night that Kevin Rudd became the Leader of the  Labor Party. They have consistently done that through. What we need to do is to  focus on the positive and focus on what the real issues are such as today, you raised  with me PEFO. What people will know is they will know about Tony Abbott. They  know in their guts, he’s got to make cuts. Tony Abbott has to make cuts in order to  make up for all the promises that are there uncosted. You can’t skate through an  election campaign without putting your budget figures out there and he’s failed to do  that. And today on infrastructure Warren Truss has said that he will make all the  promises that are there - like the M80 and the other road funding - are all up for  grabs.

EPSTEIN: I don’t have time to respond to that, there’s many more questions I could  put to you. But look, thank you so much for coming in.

ALBANESE: Great to talk to you.



ENDS





Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111   www.alp.org.au

Authorised by G. Wright, Australian Labor, 5/9 Sydney Avenue, Barton, ACT, 2600

