UNCLASSIFIED



THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT



6 June 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH FRAN KELLY - ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST

SUBJECT: Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security inquiry into complex asylum  seeker cases; Federal Election.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

KELLY: The Attorney-General, Mark Dreyfus, has portfolio responsibility for ASIO and he's in  our Parliament House studios now. Minister, good morning.

DREYFUS: Good morning, Fran.

KELLY: Was this a dangerous security lapse for Australia in your view?

DREYFUS: I think what your listeners need to bear in mind is that this individual was in  detention at all times from when he arrived in Australia. He's now in detention. It's in a  higher security detention and there's no evidence that he committed any offence during the  months that he's been in Australia. That's what…

KELLY: No, but for nine months he was behind as Jamie Briggs said there, a 1.8 metre pool  fence. Is that a fair characterisation of the security around this man?

DREYFUS: It's a lower security facility but it's nevertheless immigration detention. There's  monitoring and I repeat there's no evidence that he committed any offence while he's been  - at any time - while he's been in Australia. And I think what we're seeing here from this  opposition is just more of their politics of fear and hysteria. And really they should not be  seeking to make a political plaything out of national security, particularly…

KELLY: But should they be seeking to draw attention to the fact there seems to have been a  lapse at the point of the agencies at least. I mean is this a dangerous lapse, that's what I

asked you. ASIO describing as a clerical error, the fact that for some months they didn't even  know this man who was here, in a low security detention centre was on Interpol's red list as  a murderer and a terrorist.

DREYFUS: That's the sort of language that, some of the language that you've just used then  Fran, is the sort of language the Liberals have been using, and…

KELLY: What was wrong, I invite you to correct me, what language that I used there that was  incorrect?

DREYFUS: I think dangerous lapse is one of the words that the Liberals have been using and  it's this sort of hysteria that I don't think assists. The Prime Minister's asked the Inspector  General of Intelligence and Security to look into this matter. I'm going to wait to see what  the Inspector General says about communications between ASIO, the AFP and the  Department of Immigration.

KELLY: Whichever way you look at it though, Minister, ASIO has admitted to the Senate  system that there was a clerical error and that is why they did not know for some months  that this person was on Interpol's red list. Does that trouble you?

DREYFUS: I've been talking to ASIO about why that clerical error, as it was described by the  Director General of ASIO in Senate Estimates last week, why it occurred. And I'm looking  forward to the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security making her investigation.

I point out that Scott Morrison who's been critical of the Inspector General or the inquiry,  knows so little about the Inspector General and her functions that he thinks she is a man.  And as well, he was making the dreadful error yesterday of suggesting that it's not within  her power to look into the Department of Immigration. It distinctly is.

KELLY: Well if you can't answer the question of does it trouble you, can you tell us what the  clerical error was? What does the clerical error mean in these circumstances?

DREYFUS: Well it's as described by the Director General of ASIO and I'm not going to go  further into it. He said that there was a clerical error made by ASIO.

KELLY: Is ASIO saying this clerical error occurred because of the pressure from the backlog of  reviewing cases that because of the number of asylum seekers to be processed?

DREYFUS: Certainly not. The Director General in the same session of the Senate estimates  confirmed that in his opinion the security vetting arrangements and the triaging as he  described it are adequate and that's something that's been confirmed as recently as last  Monday by the bipartisan Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence and Security and who in  their report said that the security vetting that ASIO is carrying out is adequate.

KELLY: The mistakes don't seem to stop there. ASIO made the clerical error that meant this  man was not known in terms of the crimes he was convicted of in Egypt or not known to the  department for some months - to ASIO. Then the AFP were told and then the Immigration

Department was told. This was all last year, but this man was still kept in low security  detention until he was moved to Villawood until April. Why wasn't he moved earlier if ASIO  and the AFP had advised the Immigration Department last year of this man's background?

DREYFUS: I think the important thing here Fran is that he was in detention at all times.

KELLY: No but Minister to be fair, as soon as the Minister for Immigration did know, the man  was moved to a higher security detention centre at Villawood. Are you saying that even if  the Government had known of this man's pass convictions he would have been left at  Inverbrackie at low security detention facility?

DREYFUS: It's a matter for Immigration to make the decisions about what level of security is  appropriate, what form of detention. But, as I say this man was in detention at all times. I  think you'll find that he had been moved at the time and the minister was advised that he  had moved. But I don't think poring over the detail here and now when there's going to be  an inquiry by the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security [inaudible], I think we  should wait to see what she says in her inquiry and in particular look at any suggestions she  makes for improving communications between ASIO, the Federal Police and the Department  of Immigration.

KELLY: Well, Tony Abbott is as you pointed out is not so relaxed about this. He's just arrived  at Parliament House. He's had this to say about what he calls a security lapse. Let's have a  listen:

ABBOTT: Plainly there has been a serious breach of national security and  obviously the Prime Minister would not have been dragged kicking and  screaming to an inquiry if there wasn't a problem.

KELLY: That was Tony Abbott speaking this morning. On the first part of that Attorney-General, plainly there has been a serious breach of national security. Do you accept that?

DREYFUS: No. This talk of an enormous national security breach or an enormous national  security disaster gets all of this…

KELLY: A serious breach of national security. Isn't this a serious breach?

DREYFUS: No I'm talking - I don't accept that and I'm going to wait until we see what the  Inspector General of Intelligence and Security has to say. And I'd point out that this is a very  newly discovered interest in national security from Tony Abbott. He hasn't had a single  briefing from the Director General of ASIO since the election. That's nearly three years, and  that's the level of interest that he's got in national security matters. The only…

KELLY: That may be the case but I'm asking you as Attorney-General that if you don't  describe - you just said you don't describe the fact that ASIO did not know we had a  convicted terrorist and murderer on our shores in our detention facilities for some months  after he was there. Once they did know they alerted the police and the department and that

man was left in a low security detention facility for many months and you don't think that's  a serious breach of national security?

DREYFUS: I'm going to wait to see what the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security  has to say about this. And I repeat, the individual concerned was in detention at all times,  there's no evidence that he committed any offence. And I think the Australian people are  interested in outcomes here, not speculation or wild statements and incorrect statements  being made by the Opposition in their campaign of fear and hysteria designed to score  political points. That's not what we should be doing about national security. National  security's too important for that.

KELLY: Mark Dreyfus I'm going to invite you to engage in a hypothetical so I guess I know  what you'll say. But the question obviously does arise of what would happen to this man. He  is in detention. The Shadow Attorney-General George Brandis points out we can't send him  back to Egypt because Egypt has the death penalty and Australian policy is that we don't  send people to countries where the death penalty is in place. What's likely to happen to this  man?

DREYFUS: Well, we'll be assessing all of the circumstances, all of the national security  considerations. ASIO are going to be assessing as well and we'll be making a decision based  on those inquiries.

KELLY: Hasn't he been assessed? We've known that he's been on Interpol's red list since last  year. Has he not been assessed yet?

DREYFUS: Well I'm not going to say what stage the assessment has reached because in part  that's a matter for the Department of Immigration, their considerations, they've got to  assess such claims for asylum that he is making and in part it's a matter for investigations by  ASIO. And all of those in train as is appropriate and decisions based on what is determined,  decisions based on those investigations will be made when all of the information is  collected. But in the meantime he's in high security detention in Sydney.

KELLY: Could he ever be released into the Australian community?

DREYFUS: Well you're asking hypothetical questions Fran. Without all of the information  being in my hands or without all of the information being in the Immigration Minister's  hands and there's a whole range of potential outcomes here depending on what those  investigations determine.

KELLY: And Mark Dreyfus just on another matter before you leave us. There was a poll this  week in your safe seat Melbourne seat of Isaacs showing a swing against you of more than  15 per cent. I think you hold the seat by more than 10 per cent. Do you accept that polling?  Does that match with what you’re hearing on the ground or any polling you may have done?

DREYFUS: There was a wildly divergent poll conducted in south-east Melbourne in three  seats which would suggest there were some problems with the poll, but I accept that I’ve  got a lot of work to do, the Government’s got a lot of work to do and I’m looking forward to

the contest and the choice that the Australian people have to make on 14 December. It’s a  choice between a government with a strong record, a strong record of reform, a  government which has produced a strong economy and regrettably a Coalition Opposition  which has produced no detailed policies.

We’ve had I think an NBN policy that’s second rate, they don’t have a climate change policy  and they’re clearly hiding an agenda of massive cuts to services just like we saw from the  conservative state governments in New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria.

KELLY: Your fellow backbencher Laurie Ferguson stood up in caucus this week and said  asylum seekers was the biggest issue harming Labor in western Sydney. Do you think it’s an  issue in your seat of Isaacs?

DREYFUS: Much less so. I’ve got a community of newly - very many of the people in my  community are newly arrived immigrants, large numbers of refugees in parts of my  electorate and I don’t hear when I’m walking down the street in my electorate in south-east  Melbourne or elsewhere in Melbourne, the sorts of concerns that are being expressed there  by Laurie Ferguson, but I do accept because he’s in western Sydney that there are concerns  about asylum seeker policy.

KELLY: Will you hold your seat?

DREYFUS: I’m going to work as hard as I possibly can Fran to make sure that I hold my seat  and I’m looking forward to the contest that we’re about to have to the comparison of policy,  because that’s what’s important here.

The Opposition practically has no policies and what we need between now and the election  is a detailed comparison of policy for journalists to be asking questions, for everybody in  Australia to be asking questions of the Oppostiion. When they use their slogans the question  that needs to be directed to them is how. How are you going to achieve that? What are your  policies?  What is the detail of your policy?  Because that’s what the selection should be  about.

KELLY: Mark Dreyfus, thank you very much for joining us on Breakfast.

DREYFUS: Thank you Fran.

ENDS





-----------------------------

To unsubscribe click on the following link:  mailto:leave-mediarel@lstsvr1.ag.gov.au





If you have received this transmission in error please

notify us immediately by return e-mail and delete all  copies. If this e-mail or any attachments have been sent  to you in error, that error does not constitute waiver  of any confidentiality, privilege or copyright in respect  of information in the e-mail or attachments.

