

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Emergency Management  Special Minister of State  Minister for the Public Service and Integrity



TRANSCRIPT



21 April 2013



TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH KATHRYN ROBINSON, IAN McPHEDRAN, CLAIRE  HARVEY & PAUL BONGIORNO - MEET THE PRESS

SUBJECT: Boston bombings; national security; asylum seekers; ASIO; Government  appointments; marriage equality; Budget.

E & O E - PROOF ONLY

ROBINSON: Our guest this morning in Melbourne is the Attorney-General, Mark Dreyfus.  Good morning, Mr Dreyfus. Thanks for your time this morning.

DREYFUS: Good morning.

ROBINSON: The tragedy of Boston - we've seen the suspects, two disenfranchised,  radicalised teenagers, who grew up for the last 10 years in the United States. How big a  wake-up call is this for us in Australia?

DREYFUS: It shows that we do have to be concerned, but Australians can be confident that  we have resourced -since those dreadful events of September 11th, 2001 - we've resourced  counterterrorism in Australia, we've resourced our security agencies adequately.

They're working together in a coordinated way. Just last Monday, I went to inspect the new  ASIO building in Canberra, which ASIO are going to move into later this year, and you  couldn't want better proof of the commitment that our Government's got to resourcing our  counter-terrorism effort, our security agencies.

ROBINSON: Is there anything in particular that you've been looking at, though, that deals  with this unknown threat of terror? It's two young boys - allegedly - and a backpack,  disenfranchised youths, are we looking at that sector?

DREYFUS: I think we can say two things about this: in the last 10 years, we have brought to a  halt four major potential terrorism incidents that were going to target, in some cases, public  events, in another case an army base, the Holsworthy army base in Sydney. 21 people have  been convicted of terrorism offences, and are serving long jail sentences in relation to those  four attempts or four planned terror events that were stopped in their tracks.

But as well - and this goes to your question about what is sometimes referred to as lone-wolf, or people who are disconnected from any organised group - we've got a very large  program that's directed at countering violent extremism.

And that's about working with communities. That's about working with community leaders;  it's about getting young men out on the sporting field, getting them out playing soccer,  playing footy, playing rugby, because that's where we want them - not sitting at computer  screens looking at videos about jihad.

McPHEDRAN: What about organised events, Attorney? We have this week Anzac Day,  we’ve got the A-League final today, we’ve got other events coming up, and I understand the  Sunday papers are reporting today that the A-League final won't even have scanners for  every bag in the ground. Can people be satisfied that you're doing enough about protecting  organised events?

DREYFUS: Well I think we can point to the fact that, since September 11th, 2001, we've held  a whole range of very large organised events in Australia. You can point to the  Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth, or the 2006 Commonwealth  Games that were held in Melbourne, and all of these events have gone through without  incident.

As I say, we are properly resourcing our counter-terrorism effort. We're making sure that  our security agencies are talking to each other. And of course, they're talking to their fellow  agencies in the United States, the United Kingdom, to make sure we've got up-to-date  information.

McPHEDRAN: But people are nervous. I notice people now are much more nervous about  individuals with backpacks and so on. Are you doing enough, practically, to protect people  at major public gatherings? I'm not talking about official gatherings like CHOGM, I'm talking  about the City2Surf fun run.

DREYFUS: I think it is right that people be vigilant. That’s why we say, when you see  unattended bags, you’ve got to draw it to the attention of authorities. But we’re doing what  we can and what we should be to make sure that our security agencies are properly  resourced.

What you can't do is ever give an absolute guarantee, and I wish I could. I wish any  Government agency could. We can't do that. What we can do is take the precautions that  are appropriate, resource our security agencies as well as we can.

The alert level for Australia remains at medium. We haven't seen any reason to change that  alert level since 2001. It's an alert level to be concerned about because, of course, it means  that it's a rating that says a terror event could happen at any time. But because of that alert  level, we're making sure the resources are there for our agencies.

HARVEY: Attorney, you spoke about young men sitting at home watching videos about  jihad. We now know the older bomber in this case was a fan of a radical Australian cleric  who lives in Sydney called Sheikh Feiz Mohammad. Now the NSW Police have told the  Sunday papers today that they talk to him regularly. What's ASIO doing about this man?

DREYFUS: I think you might also see that those videos were some years old, and Sheikh Feiz  Mohammad, in recent months, particularly in the latter period of last year, when there were  some quite dramatic demonstrations in Sydney, condemned the use of violence and  certainly, as a community leader, he's someone that's getting behind the countering violent  extremism program that we have in many communities across Australia.

It's obviously important that we reach out to all communities in Australia to make it  understood that we deplore violence, that violence has no part of politics in our country,  violence is not an option, violence is not something that anyone - young men or anyone in  Australia - should be looking to engage in. And that's about, as I say, getting young men out  in the sporting field rather than sitting around talking about how they might carry out acts  of violence.

HARVEY: Now the FBI has said that they were asked by a foreign Government several years  ago to look at this older bomber in the Boston case. There was a suggestion last night that  Australia might have been one of those governments, and I suppose the implication from  that is that it might have something to do with that link with the cleric here. Is that right?  Has Australia ever asked the FBI to look into this man?

DREYFUS: It's the longstanding practice of our Government, as with former governments,  that we don't comment on intelligence matters. I can say that we have very, very good  communications with the American security agencies. But I'd also point out that the only  link was that one of these men responsible for the bombing had downloaded a video that  had been recorded some years ago by the man in Sydney.

BONGIORNO: Attorney, there's been a fair bit of controversy in recent weeks, especially  with the hunger strike of 27 assessed refugees, and of course there's about another 30 still  in custody. We know they're refugees. However, ASIO thinks that they're a security threat.  Does the Boston bombing mean that there'll be no humane way of sorting out what to do  with these 55 people?

DREYFUS: It is important that we treat all people in Australia humanely. You could say,  particularly, people who've been assessed as having refugee status, which is the position of  the 55 people you're talking about who are in detention. And we have acted humanely by  setting up, for the first time, a review process so that all of those people who are in  detention, who are refugees, who've received an adverse security assessment from ASIO,  can have their cases reviewed by, in this case -



BONGIORNO: But we don't know, to this day, whether that review process has actually seen  any of them released. Have any of them been released as a result of your review process?

DREYFUS: The review process has just got under way. Former Federal Court judge, Margaret  Stone, is conducting that review, and the first step for her was to produce a form of reasons,  so that those who are in detention because of the adverse security assessments can see  why it is that that adverse security assessment was given.

BONGIORNO: Are you attracted to letting them out on bail conditions?

DREYFUS: I think we have to be aware of the very difficult position that these people are in,  which is that, at present under Australian law, they are refugees. But because of the adverse  security assessment, they've been placed in detention. And other than this review process,  they don't have a right of appeal. They are facing indeterminate detention, which I think is  not something that anyone would feel is a humane outcome for them.

Concerningly, all the Opposition has had to say about this is that they don't think there  should even be a review process. And I'm looking for this review process to see if it can  provide an opportunity for, not only the review of all of these cases, but a regular 12-monthly review which gives some prospect, at least, to people in detention, that they may  be able to be released.

ROBINSON: Well Tony Abbott has warned the Gillard Government against making any major  appointments, including that of the new Governor-General, ahead of the election. This is  what the Opposition Leader had to say on Sky News earlier this morning.

ABBOTT: The Coalition reserves its right to reconsider appointments that are made by  this Government well in advance of those appointments being taken up. I am  conscious of the fact that the Governor-General's term expires, I think, in the middle  of March next year, and I would have thought -

JOURNALIST: It's some way in the future, then, isn't it?

ABBOTT: It is. It is, and I would have thought that that would certainly be one of  those appointments that ought to be left to an incoming Government, if there is an  incoming Government.

ROBINSON: Well the Attorney-General, Mark Dreyfus, is our guest this morning, coming to  us live from Melbourne. Attorney, isn't it time - going on from Tony Abbott's comments  there - isn’t it time to stop making appointments such as the role of the Governor-General,  when we are so close to an election and, according to the polls, it's an election that your  Government is unlikely to win?

DREYFUS: Look, we're not that close to the election. The business of Government has to go  on. There needs to be continuity and stability in Australian Government. The Australian  Government makes thousands and thousands of appointments each year to a whole range

of courts and tribunals and statutory boards, as well as very important positions like the  Governor-General, and there's a long lead time on these appointments. I've got no intention  of ceasing making appointments because Tony Abbott wants to destabilise the Government  of our country.

We'll go on making appointments in the ordinary course up to the beginning of the  caretaker period, when the writs are given for the elections. And look, we've made  appointments that I'm very proud of, on merit. There's a long lead time for a lot of these  appointments. We need to keep going with them.

And I'd stack our record up, any day, against the partisan appointments made by the  Howard Government - the ones I'd have in mind would be the ABC Board with that trio of  Janet Albrechtsen, Ron Brunton and Keith Windschuttle - whose only real qualification was  their conservative politics.

HARVEY: Attorney, I'm glad you brought up stacking, because you guys seem to be doing  pretty well on that score yourself. It turns out the Labor Government’s offered the post of  New York Consul-General to two ex-Labor premiers - not only John Brumby but also Steve  Bracks. That's a bit rich, isn't it?

DREYFUS: Well I don't have any particular knowledge of who it's been offered to. The  appointment will be made in the fullness of time. Again, I'd say I'd stack our record of  appointments up against the Howard Government's any time. And I don't accept that we've  made particularly partisan appointments.

In fact, Brendan Nelson, a former Liberal leader, was appointed by our Government to a  post in Brussels, and now as director of the War Memorial. Alexander Downer appointed by  our Government - a former Liberal leader - to a Government position. Peter Costello,  former Treasurer, appointed as guardian of the Future Fund. I don't think there's any  problem from our Government about partisanship.

BONGIORNO: Attorney, this week New Zealand led the way in ditching, I guess, the last  frontier of discrimination against gay couples, by allowing them to enter a legal marriage.  Sarah Hanson-Young, our Greens Senator, is going to bring amendments into the Parliament  so that Australia will recognise the legally valid marriages of gay couples that are entered  into overseas. Has that amendment got any hope of being supported by the Labor  Government?

DREYFUS: No. That's the Greens Party sidestepping what is the actual issue, which is when  we get to marriage equality in Australian law. That's what we should be voting on. That's  what we have voted on already, once. And because Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party are  not prepared to allow a conscience vote in their party room, that vote failed. And I'd call on  Tony Abbott - and that what Sarah Hanson-Young should be doing, she should be calling on  Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party as well - to allow a conscience vote. Because I think that  with a conscience vote -

BONGIORNO: So what is the legal status of gay couples who have married overseas, in  Australia?

DREYFUS: They're legally married under New Zealand law, and one of the things that our  Government’s done is to make it possible for all gay and lesbian couples wishing to marry  overseas to get what's called a Certificate of No Impediment, which is something issued by  the Australian Government to make it possible for them to go and marry overseas in  countries where there is now marriage equality, where you can legally marry. But we need  to get to, here - and you might tell from my tone I'm a supporter of marriage equality - we  need to get to, here, the same position they've got to in New Zealand.

McPHEDRAN: But Attorney, one of the key opponents of this is your Prime Minister, Julia  Gillard. Surely we need leadership on this issue, otherwise the Kiwis are going to steal, or  march on another issue, and all the pink dollars are going to flow across the Tasman. I mean,  isn't this ridiculous? Don't we look stupid in the eyes of the world?

DREYFUS: It's our party policy that this is a matter for a conscience vote. It's a matter on  which people hold strong opinions. But Tony Abbott is not prepared to allow a conscience  vote, and I think everyone in Australia should say to Tony Abbott and the Liberal Party,  "Time's up. Let the people in your party room vote according to their consciences on this  issue."

And I think if you looked at the numbers last time, it'd go pretty close, if not actually get  there, towards marriage equality in Australia, if we were to have another vote, and there's  no reason to wait until after the election to do that.

McPHEDRAN: And how long do you think it'll be before we do have marriage equality in this  country?

DREYFUS: I think that it will be within a quite short time. It's obviously subject to  Parliamentary processes, when the vote can be had again, but I think that the mood has  shifted. I think that time is now right for us to move to marriage equality in Australia, and  New Zealand, as you say -

BONGIORNO: Are you saying there that if Tony Abbott shifts before the election, it could be  done before the election?

DREYFUS: There's no reason why this can't be brought on for a vote before the election.

ROBINSON: Well Attorney, I might bring our focus now to the upcoming Budget, and in light  of Boston, I guess - is there any part of the Defence or security agencies' Budgets that are  going to be quarantined now, in light of what's gone on in America?

DREYFUS: I'm not going to play rule in, rule out about any part of the Budget, but what I can  say very clearly is look at our record of funding the security agencies, of, as I’ve pointed to,  the example of the ASIO building, which ASIO is going to move into later this year. It's a  magnificent building. It provides ASIO with the ability to move all of their staff into the one

building, and provides them with fantastic resources to enable them to perform the  coordination tasks that they need to perform with our other security agencies. I don't think  anyone should be in any doubt, or lack any confidence, of our commitment to funding our  security agencies.

ROBINSON: Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus, thank you very much for coming on Meet the  Press this morning.

DREYFUS: Thank you.

ENDS

