

Julie Bishop MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS



2GB Sydney with Michael McClaren  21 July 2013

Subjects: Election date, Kevin Rudd’s PNG solution, Australia-Indonesia relationship, gender war, regional  FTAs, live cattle exports, Labor’s debt

E&OE…

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Good morning Julie.

JULIE BISHOP Hello, how are you today Michael?

MICHAEL MCCLAREN I’m fine thanks. How are you?

JULIE BISHOP Very well indeed.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN My mail is that the election will be August the 24 th  and we’ll probably see

Kevin Rudd go to the Governor General on Monday to confirm that. Have you heard anything?

JULIE BISHOP Well according to Sportsbet the odds are shortening for the 24 th  of August or the 31 st



of August, but the Prime Minister should put us all out of our misery. Call an election so we can return  certainty and stability to the heart of government by electing the Coalition.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN I don’t know if that’s exactly what he’s got in mind but I like the line.

Talking about certainty and stability, let’s look at a few issues this morning that people are uncertain  about, that there certainly is a lack of stability about that there certainly is a lack of stability about, and  I suppose it’s most poignant to start with the issue of asylum seekers.

Kevin Rudd’s had a number of positions on this, hasn’t he?

JULIE BISHOP Well I think this latest announcement about the Papua New Guinea ‘fix” is their  seventh or eighth. You might recall that they had a processing freeze on Afghans and Sri Lankans  back in 2010. Then there was the farcical East Timor solution. Then there was the Malaysian solution  that was struck down by the High Court. Then I think they had another processing freeze. Then they  had their Houston Panel and now they’ve got this deal with Papua New Guinea.

Now we’ve heard all this before. Through each of Labor’s twists and turns on border protection Mr  Rudd says he’s going to stop the boats and put the people smugglers out of business, but then in the  next breath he admits that well in fact it won’t stop the boats in the short term maybe not for years.  And one thing we do know, Kevin Rudd is good at making grand announcements but he’s bad at the  delivery. The implementation will be the key here and I don’t trust him to implement this ‘fix’.

The Australian people have no reason to trust him because everything he touches turns into a  disastrous mess. Think of the mining tax. Think of the home insulation scheme. Now, this latest  Fringe Benefits Tax disaster.

Kevin Rudd is the one who unpicked the Howard Government laws back in 2008 and started up the  people smuggling trade. 47,000 later, over 1000 deaths at sea, a multi-billion blowout in costs and he  expects us to trust him to fix it this time?

MICHAEL MCCLAREN I see the point you’re making. This is one I raised with the listeners on  yesterday morning’s program and I note that in The Drum, that ABC thing online, Barry Cassidy writes  a piece saying, ‘which Kevin Rudd will the voters remember?’.

On this very issue there are two very different Kevin Rudds. There is the Kevin Rudd as you know, as  you’ve outlined from 2007 up until about 48 hours ago, that was the people smugglers best friend as  the Coalition have nicely pointed out, ‘he rolled out the Rudd carpet for them’. But all of a sudden  Kevin’s got out the other side of the bed it seems and now it seems he’s gone further to the right than  even the Coalition’s willing to do.

JULIE BISHOP Well Mr Rudd is very good at spin and deceit. He’s very poor at policy and  implementation. You might recall we were told the Malaysian Solution was watertight legally, yet it  was declared illegal by the High Court. Mr Rudd claims that this agreement with PNG is on sound  legal grounds but it’s only a two-page document and we’ve got no idea of the cost of this agreement  with Papua New Guinea.

The Australian taxpayers are going to face enormous cost in supporting people who arrive by boat in  Papua New Guinea and that could be for many many years. This ‘agreement’ also represents a huge  challenge for Papua New Guinea in accommodating potentially thousands of people.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Well where are they going to go? Where are they going to go Julie? Because  I mean of course Manus Island as we know it is basically full. It’s certainly substandard. The  development will take many years one would imagine and probably half a billion dollars or something  like that to fully complete. Where are these people going to go? For example 81 arrived just a few  hours ago.

JULIE BISHOP Well Michael the processing facility on Manus Island is far from capable of dealing  with large numbers of people. For the last 12 months the Australian Government has been assisting  with work on the island and I think there’s only capacity for about 500 people after 12 months of work.  There’s also the health concern that children under seven can’t be sent to Papua New Guinea. So Mr  Rudd hasn’t explained how he’s going to manage families that arrive with young children.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Is that because of the malaria?

JULIE BISHOP Well there are a whole range of issues, but Manus Island is in a tropical area and yes  there is malaria on Manus Island. But he’s not going to allow seven-year-olds and under go there, so  what happens when a family arrives with children under the age of seven?

So I’m really concerned that the Australian taxpayer hasn’t been informed of the detail, particularly as  they are refusing to say how much this will cost. Is the Australian taxpayer going to be on the hook for  thousands of people living in Papua New Guinea for the rest of their life?

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Well that’s a very poignant question to pose because Kevin Rudd on this  issue of cost, as you know Julie Bishop, has said it will be budget neutral. But when we look at the  budget for asylum seekers in the last five years, basically since the Coalition Government left office in  2007, it was at something, at $200-odd million or something like that per annum. It’s now what $2.5  billion and growing. It’s had an almost 10-fold increase.

Now we’re told that’s an extraordinary level and it’s due to come down. But if Kevin Rudd claims this  is going to be budget-neutral, does he mean that the cost will be budget neutral with a budget at $2.5  billion per annum?

JULIE BISHOP Well he’s very good at spin, but he’s very tricky and he won’t be honest with the  Australian people about this. First of all there’s the cost of the 47,000 people who have already  arrived since he changed the Howard Government laws in 2008. Some of these people are still being  paid by the Australian Government. They haven’t got jobs. They’re still being supported by the  Australian taxpayer. Now the people who have been coming since he made the announcement are  apparently going to be sent to Papua New Guinea, all at the cost of the Australian taxpayer.

Then there’s a question about those who are found not to be refugees. Labor says that some of these  people coming aren’t refugees, so they have to be sent back but Iran is refusing to take people back.  So what happens to the Iranians who have come here and are found not to be refugees? Will they  stay in Papua New Guinea, being paid for by the Australian taxpayer? People who aren’t refugees  who can’t go back, or can’t be sent back to their home, who is going to pay for them?

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Well this goes to the point I guess, when you look at Iran and more broadly of  our relationship with Indonesia it’s something I know you’ve been very busy working on, as have  members of the government of course.

But let’s look at that in conjunction with this issue as a bit of a tangent here. Indonesia is being used  of course as a launching pad for people from Iran, Sri Lanka, who knows where else, Burma,  whatever. Surely it would be in Indonesia’s best interest as well if we stopped the people smuggling  trade?

JULIE BISHOP Well the whole point is we’ve got to stop people coming into Indonesia who have no  intention of staying in Indonesia, who are just using it as a transit post to come to Australia. Secondly,  we have to stop the people smuggling trade in Indonesia, dismantle that, as the Howard Government  did, and then finally we have to stop them getting on the boats because that’s such a dangerous  journey.

Over 1000 people have died at sea, that we know of, and this is another point Michael. I’ve been  calling on the government to release the official figures of how many people we believe have died at  sea. The Houston Report, which is 12 months old now, estimated about 1000 people. Since then  we’ve had more deaths at sea.

We know that boats have gone missing and are unaccounted for and we also know that boats have  been intercepted by Indonesia, in Indonesian waters. Yet the Government is refusing to give us an  idea of the scale of this tragedy by releasing the official figures and they must do that. But coming

back to your point - of course we need to cooperate with Indonesia to dismantle the people  smuggling trade that’s going on inside Indonesia.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN What do you think you could do to do that?

JULIE BISHOP .. and also Australia must change the laws in this country to, as the Indonesians put it  ‘take the sugar off the table’. We have to turn boats back where it’s safe to do so. We have to change  the laws so you can only get a temporary protection visa here if you are found to be a genuine  refugee. You don’t get permanent residency, so when the situation in your home country improves,  then you can go back home.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN On that very issue - I mean I have only very recently moved but for the whole  of my life I lived in Western Sydney and there is a very large Sudanese population in Western  Sydney, a growing population. I note that in Israel for example, under this notion of temporary  protection visas, now that South Sudan is a recognised state and that we know the Western world  amongst other forces through the UN have pushed very hard to ensure that it’s created. The  Sudanese who were in Israel have been sent back, now that there is a homeland.

Now I don’t know how many people on temporary protection visas, or people seeking refuge or  whatever are wandering around our cities but is there any scope in a Coalition Government to send  people back now that for example the civil war in Sri Lanka has ended? South Sudan is a recognised  state.

JULIE BISHOP This is the problem Michael, this is what happens. Kevin Rudd in 2008 took away the  visa category of temporary protection and put in place permanent residency. So the war in Sri Lanka  has been over for several years, and I’ve been to Sri Lanka, and people who claim they are fleeing  from persecution in Sri Lanka should not be given permanent residency in Australia.

If they truly believe they are being persecuted, and I don’t accept that there is evidence of that, they  could go 30km over the border to India and seek safe haven, but instead, they are paying people  smugglers $10,000 to take a 3000km sea journey and then they turn up here without papers. I mean  this is something that we’ve got to stop and if there were temporary protection visas Sri Lankans who  claimed to be persecuted during the civil war could now be returned home to help rebuild their  country.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Absolutely. You do wonder, don’t you? Why the world, through the UN and all  of that, puts so much effort into trying to resolve conflicts only that when they are resolved people  don’t go back to live in the peace and safety that many have shed their life to achieve.

JULIE BISHOP Well take Afghanistan, we still have soldiers over in Afghanistan, trying to help build  the nation after the conflict with the Taliban, getting rid of Al Qaeda to ensure that Afghanistan doesn’t  again become a safe haven for the Al Qaeda network and other terrorists and extremist groups.

We’ve got soldiers from Australia, from the United States, from Great Britain, trying to build the nation.  Now people who have come from Afghanistan, fleeing the Taliban when the government of  Afghanistan is in charge of the security, surely people should be going back to Afghanistan to help  build that nation, their country.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN I agree 100 per cent. I’m glad you’ve said that.

Julie Bishop, if I can just ask you this question in regard to Indonesia. You obviously speak a lot with  high profile Indonesian figures. What was the reaction firstly with Kevin Rudd’s ‘konfrontasi’ comment  and secondly, do you sniff a bit of a conspiracy in the fact that Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono did not  have a joint press conference in Indonesia when journalists could have grilled both of them on the  issues of - well if boats are towed back under a Coalition Government will more ensue?

JULIE BISHOP The Indonesians are very diplomatic people and there are always reasons for why  they do things, such as there would be with other diplomats. I think Kevin Rudd’s suggestion that  Coalition policy would trigger a war with Indonesia or military conflict with Indonesia was utterly  disgraceful. For a serving Prime Minister of Australia to suggest that Coalition policies in Australia  would trigger a military conflict with Indonesia, that’s what he meant, that’s why he mentioned  'konfrontasi', when Australian soldiers died in a conflict with Indonesia and Malaysia. For him to raise  that was just disgraceful. Indonesia to its credit ignored it and I think that says it all.

In relation to joint press conferences, I think people can read that for what it is. I think that Kevin Rudd  has pushed the relationship with Indonesia. We know that Labor have not treated Indonesia well in  the past - that announcement of a ban on live cattle without so much as a phone call to Indonesia has  made the relationship rather tense in that area. We are working very hard to reassure Indonesia that  under a Tony Abbott Government we will be a reliable and trusted exporting partner. We will be a  reliable and trusted trading partner to Indonesia.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN So you don’t suspect that Kevin Rudd had a word to the Indonesian  authorities and said ‘look, we’re coming over but we just don’t want to risk blowback with a joint press  conference’? Because of course as Greg Sheridan pointed out if SBY was asked on the spot, if the  Coalition came in and they towed back the boats would konfrontasi ensue? Of course he’d have to  say no and Kevin Rudd would be there sucking his bottom lip.

JULIE BISHOP Well I think that’s something that people can conclude. Let me put it this way - I am  guided very much by the statements that Foreign Minister Natalegawa said on Sky News the other  day when he acknowledged that the Coalition was in communication with the Indonesian  Government. He acknowledged that they were aware of our policy and he indicated that they would  wait to see essentially if they had to deal with us, should we be in government, then they would want  more information about our policies.

That’s quite right because we are in opposition. It would be most improper for us to try and negotiate  an agreement or a treaty with a foreign government so I’m guided by these statements of Minister  Natalegawa, made freely on an interview on Sky News, rather than a late night kerb-side interview in  very unusual circumstances, apparently cooked up by Senator Bob Carr, where he was saying what  Indonesia’s policies were, where Bob Carr was saying what Indonesia’s policies were.

I am very confident that we will have a strong and cooperative relationship with Indonesia. I’m very  confident that our policies will work and that should Tony Abbott be elected as leader and the  Coalition team get into government then we will be able to restore integrity to our immigration system  and to our border protection system.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN I think a lot of people are confident of that.

Now of course I’m speaking with Julie Bishop, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Shadow Minister  for Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Julie can I ask you - let’s change tact at this point in time. The whirlwind about women in politics has  managed to sort of die down ever since Julia Gillard has become a backbencher. What did you make  of all that? Of course you’re probably behind Julia Gillard, the most senior woman in the lower house.  Do you see politics through this sort of gendered prism that some in the Emily’s List do?

JULIE BISHOP I never have and I never will. This so called gender war has been exposed as the  fraud that it always was when Kevin Rudd took over Julia Gillard’s job, did to her what she’d done to  him, and all of the Labor women who’d been so appalled by the way Julia Gillard was treated lined up  behind Kevin Rudd.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN They wanted to keep the Comcar.

JULIE BISHOP The sisterhood lined up behind Kevin Rudd. So much for supporting their first female  Prime Minister who they said had been treated so shabbily and been subject to all this sexist

behaviour. Instead of standing firm with her they lined up behind Kevin Rudd who had just stabbed  her in the back and taken her job.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Penny Wong got a promotion.

JULIE BISHOP He spent the last three years undermining Julia Gillard at every turn. I don’t have to  say anything negative about Kevin Rudd because his colleagues have said it for us. People who know  him best, the people who work with him, say that he is unfit for office.

In fact, Gary Gray who is in fact one of the Ministers still serving with him, just two weeks before he  took over the job, said that Kevin Rudd was unfit to be Prime Minister. That’s what his own colleagues  say about him.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Well what does it say then about his colleagues? I mean we know about, I  think we know a bit about Kevin by now. Well some of us do I think anyway. What does it say about  his colleagues though? That they are willing to put this man into power, knowing as they claim what  he’s like, knowing how inefficient he is.

I mean he claims to be the sort of diplomat supremo, yet he seems to stuff everything up when he  goes abroad. These people, I think, are more condemned by their actions than Kevin Rudd. I mean  Kevin’s acting out of self-interest, maybe he doesn’t know any better. These people are blatantly  acting out of self-interest.

JULIE BISHOP No, Kevin knows what he’s doing. He’s a very manipulative, cunning, clever politician.  He knows exactly what he’s doing. These people had made the judgment that Julia Gillard was so  unpopular that they’d lose their seat. So it was all about saving their spot in the Labor Party so they  backed Kevin Rudd.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN But the Australian people don’t get a look in.

JULIE BISHOP No that’s right and that’s why we’ve been saying it’s about time the Australian people  got a say in who was the Prime Minister of this country. Now Julia Gillard was dumped because she  couldn’t sell Labor’s message. Kevin Rudd was dumped because according to Labor he was chaotic,  he put the whole place in turmoil. He was divisive. It was dysfunctional.

But nothing’s changed Michael. That’s the trouble with Labor, nothing changes. They resort to this  tactic of dumping an unpopular leader just prior to an election hoping that they can trick the Australian  people into believing they’ve learned their lesson, all of a sudden they’re going to be a new different  Labor, but they never change.

They’ll keep running up debt. They’ll keep borrowing money. They’ll keep wasting money. They’ll  keep the carbon tax. It doesn’t matter whether it’s floating or fixed price. They’ll keep a carbon tax  which will drive up the cost of living. They’ll keep introducing these crazy schemes like the mining tax  that doesn’t raise money and now this fringe benefits tax debacle, an absolute disaster.

Anthony Albanese and Labor said, oh this is going to hit the fat cats who drive BMWs. No it doesn’t.  This is going to hit nurses and teachers and policemen, and government employees who are getting a  little bit of a tax break on an employer provided vehicle and without warning, without consultation  they’ve hit this industry. People are losing their jobs, once more because of a disaster occurring under  Labor.

I call him Cyclone Kevin. He’s like a cyclone. He’s been hovering out over the ocean for the last three  years, every now and again coming across the mainland causing havoc and going back, drifting out to  sea. Now he’s crossed the mainland again. He’s a category 5 and he’s leaving a wake of destruction  behind him.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN I was going to ask you Julie, what category is he?!

Now of course on that issue of the fringe benefit tax changes and of course that is linked in to the  carbon tax change, although we know it’s not really changing but look lets go with the rhetoric for the  moment.

Remember, I’m sure you do, a few years ago Paul Howes, when put on the spot about all of this, said  he’d pull his support and his union’s support for the carbon tax if it cost one Australian job. Well its  cost a few Prime Ministers their job, but more than that with this Fringe Benefits Tax change we’ve  seen in Melbourne its directly cost 70 plus people their job just the other day. Where is Paul Howes,  where is the AMWU in their vocal, distancing themselves from this poisonous policy?

JULIE BISHOP Well this is what’s so dispiriting about Labor and the union movement that backs  them. You just can’t believe anything they say. For the last two years they’ve been telling everyone  that a carbon tax is good for jobs, and good for families and good for the economy and now they’re  saying no it’s bad for jobs and bad for families and bad for the economy, so they’re going to move to a  floating price.

But they’ve tied it to the European carbon price which is notoriously volatile and the whole European  scheme has been wracked by corruption and the price could go up and up. According to the  Government’s own figures it could double in the next couple of years and their figures show it’s going  to go to $350 a tonne over time.

So he had to find some money to cover the hole in the budget and they’ve hit this salary packaging  benefit and as I said it’s going to hit teachers and nurses and police and people in the industry are  losing their jobs. It reminds me of the pink batts scheme. Have we got time to go through the pink  batts scheme?

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Of course we’ve got all the time you want.

JULIE BISHOP Another disaster. Kevin Rudd- once more the grand announcement, no detail. He  doesn’t do the hard policy work to ensure that these things can be rolled out safely. And tragically four  young people lost their lives under this Kevin Rudd initiated scheme. We seriously can’t afford  another three years of Kevin Rudd.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN They don’t want to come on and defend their record. We’ve asked, for  example, my former local member Julie Owens to come on. You would assume Ms Owens isn’t that  busy but she couldn’t ever find a Friday or a Saturday night to have a chat.

JULIE BISHOP Well I’m happy to talk to you Michael.

I must say Tony Abbott and the team have been announcing policies and in the days and weeks  leading up to the election, whether it’s on the 24th of August or whether it’s on some date in October,  we will continue to announce policies on roads, on health, in fact Tony Abbott was in Queensland this  morning and he made an announcement about Coalition support for a children’s hospice in  Queensland.

We’ve got a plan to develop Northern Australia. We’ve got a plan on how we’re going to create two  million jobs, with the private sector, we've got plans on how we’re going to pay off Labor’s debt again,  how we’ll repeal the carbon tax to ease the cost of living pressures and how we’ll regain control of our  borders and dismantle the people smuggling trade.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN On the issue of the plan to develop Northern Australia can I just ask you  because you’ve raised that Julie. Would it perhaps not be more sensible before that policy is enacted  to consolidate Southern Australia?

What I mean by that is, we’ve been reading a lot of late about the effects that globalisation and high  wages and a high dollar etc. are having on our fruit growing industries particularly down the Goulburn  Valley and elsewhere.

Now, if we’re going to irrigate and agriculturalise, if I can use that term, the North of Australia but at  the same time watch the rather rapid now degradation of elements of the agricultural sector in the  south wouldn’t it be more sensible perhaps to consolidate what we’ve got in the south? Get it back to  a position of health, look at some of our trade deals which no doubt are hurting certain export  exposed industries and then from those mistakes completely learn and develop a strong system in the  North that will be as best as we can foolproof?

JULIE BISHOP Michael that’s a very good point but I believe we can do both. What we have to do is  grow the size of the Australian economy and of course ensure that current and existing sectors of the  economy can flourish.

In the case of the agricultural industry in southern Australia, what we must do as soon as possible is  conclude more free trade agreements with China, Japan, South Korea so that we can get our produce  into these countries where there are growing populations, growing middle classes.

We are being left behind because competitor countries are concluding these trade deals and getting  their products into these countries with lower tariffs, in some cases tariff free, duty free. For example,  New Zealand has concluded free trade agreements with China, Taiwan and Hong Kong. They’re  getting their beef, their seafood, their dairy products into these huge markets at much cheaper rates  than Australia.

The United States has concluded a free trade agreement with South Korea. They’re getting their beef  into a lucrative South Korean beef market at a much lower tariff which will go down to zero and we’re  paying something like 40 per cent.

This government has been asleep at the wheel and we are absolutely determined to conclude these  agreements that will benefit Australia, will be in our national interest and give us the opportunity to  compete on the world stage and get our fair share of the market.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Now see it’s on the issue of free trade deals that, it’s where I split with the  conservatives to a degree and I’d like you to explain a little further their merit because what I see in  them is, it’s a two-way street.

We are being told, I think it’s true, that Asia’s middle class Is growing with more money they will want  better products - the kind of food and the quality of food that we have been used to here for many  years, many of us. My logic says if they want that, they’re going to buy it. Just like our coal, if they  need it to keep the furnaces they’re going to go source it and buy it.

But with a free trade deal of course it’s give and take. If we’re going to get in there with cheap, if not  no tariffs on beef or corn or whatever then of course we’re going to have to be taking some of their  widgets or whatever with no tariffs as well.

Is it the case that we are going to win out of this? Or, could we get into these markets without a free  trade deal because we have products that they need but they are selling us some products that  perhaps, with discretion, we just want.

JULIE BISHOP Well you would never enter into a Free Trade Agreement unless it was in our national  interest but it is give and take, there are imports and exports of course, but Australia is a very  successful trading nation. In fact, our standard of living depends on our ability to trade our goods with  the rest of the world and our services. We are very good at this but we need to get the opportunities to  get into new markets, or enhance existing markets.

Our competitors, and they’re countries like Canada and New Zealand and the United States, are  signing up these deals to get their goods in more cheaply, the same sort of goods that we want to sell  into these countries. So in the case of our commodities - our iron ore, gold, nickel, copper, coal, yes  they do want our commodities and they will pay for them but we’re not the only country on earth that  has iron ore for example, so we have to be competitive. Likewise we’re not the only country that  produces cattle, produces beef. We have to be competitive.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN But our wages Julie are so much higher than most that we’re uncompetitive  on that level.

JULIE BISHOP And that’s why we have to go for our quality and our reliability and that brings me  back to the issue about the live cattle trade to Indonesia. Whatever you might think about selling cattle  to Indonesia, the fact is they want fresh cattle. They want to be able to kill their own beef for the  protein because they don’t have refrigeration. 90 per cent of accommodation in Indonesia doesn’t  have refrigeration. So they want to be able to kill their cattle daily, fresh.

When the Gillard Government just imposed this ban on cattle going into Indonesia without warning it  disrupted their food supply. It was a terrible thing to do to a country like Indonesia, to immediately  disrupt their food supply.

We have to re-establish our reputation as a reliable supplier. People will pay for our goods if they  know they’re good quality and they know we’re reliable.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Do we have a Free Trade Agreement with Indonesia?

JULIE BISHOP No we don’t. The Free Trade Agreements were commenced under the Howard  Government after the Doha Development Round, that was the multilateral round, it virtually collapsed.  And other countries have quickly in the meantime signed up all these Free Trade Agreements so they  can get these goods and services into other countries.

Australia under the Howard Government commenced a number of Free Trade Agreements. We  concluded them with Singapore and the United States and others but the important ones with China,  South Korea and Japan have not been concluded. The United States is a very important Free Trade  Agreement and that’s been good for us.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN I completely concur with the US Free Trade Agreement because in essence  we have a fairly similar culture, a fairly similar level of wages, we have some comparable industries  and politically we’re both democratic.

Where I’m not fully sold on that idea yet is with a country like China where of course the average  wage is vastly below ours. There are many state controlled industries which don’t have to compete  like our capitalist industries do out here in the free market. You and I both know there is a level of  corruption there which makes it a little more difficult to do free and open business.

It’s a beautiful, wonderful, huge market. Of course there’s billions of dollars but I just look at for  example, Indonesia, and say well we don’t need a Free Trade Agreement to get our beef into  Indonesia. Why do we need one to get it into China?

JULIE BISHOP Well China is already our major trading partner, that is a fact. The two-way trade is  something like $118 billion. That’s a massive trading partner for Australia. As a result of China taking  our resources and our energy and our minerals, Australia’s economy has continued to be growing at a  rate that has not otherwise occurred.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN But we’ve achieved that without a Free Trade Agreement. See that’s the point  I’m making.

JULIE BISHOP This is my point. We need to broaden and diversify our trade into China because  we’re not the only country that supplies iron ore. We’re not the only country that can supply coal. So  we need to have insurance in place that we can diversify our trade with other countries and also  within China with other goods and services.

So I think that Australia has to be much more outward looking, see the globe as our marketplace and  be actively searching for new markets so our manufacturers, our small businesses, our exporters can

have the confidence that the government is on their side in getting them opportunities for new markets  overseas.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Ok, just last one on that before I ask you one final question. If indeed we go  ahead with an FTA with China, of course there are some great benefits to certain industries here.  What might be some of the downsides for Australia? In other words, what industries here might suffer  if tariffs or whatever is removed from certain import items?

JULIE BISHOP Well we know that China is a manufacturing country and we would have to balance  the interest that Australia has with what China was looking for. Now I’m not privy to the details of the  China Free Trade Agreement because it’s confidential and between the governments, but I can  assure you we would not sign up to a Free Trade Agreement that was not in Australia’s national  interest.

You look at the composition of their economy, look at the composition of our economy. What do they  want from us, what do we want from them, and you’d negotiate a position that was to our benefit and  they’d negotiate a position for their benefit. It would be give and take. But I think that it’s important for  us to underpin our exporters, our manufacturers and our businesses with some free trade agreements  to ensure that we do get access to these huge markets that are emerging in North Asia and South  East Asia.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Yes we certainly want access to them. Now, you’ve been more than generous  with your time Julie. Let me just ask you one final question, if I may? And that is of course when you  look at these ubiquitous opinion polls, there seems to be a poll every day.

It seems that Kevin Rudd’s great admirers come from those particularly those who have never voted  before and will vote for the first time or who are under the age of 30-odd. What’s your message to the  people out there who might be listening to this now? Who would be considered the youth voters.  What’s your message to them in the lead up to the election?

JULIE BISHOP Young people want to be reassured that the government is stable and certain and  knows what it’s doing, and that they don’t have to worry about governments interfering in their lives  and governments getting things wrong.

Tony Abbott and the Coalition are experienced. We’ve been members of the last competent  government that Australia had under John Howard and we can deliver the certainty and the stability  and the competence and the experience that they deserve and expect from their Federal  Government.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Any message on debt?

JULIE BISHOP We will pay down debt. The debt that Labor has been driving up is affecting our  economy. It’s affecting our cost of living. We will live within our means. We will stop the wasteful  spending. We will pay down Labor’s debt and we’ll get our finances back into surplus.

Young people, old people understand that you can’t spend what you don’t have. You’ve got to live  within your means. You cannot borrow on the national credit card forever. That’s what Labor does.  What the Coalition does is manage the national finances and live within our means. It’s not our  money. It’s the taxpayer’s money and we will respect the use of taxpayer’s money.

MICHAEL MCCLAREN Yeah very sage words.

Julie Bishop, Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade.  Good luck in the upcoming election, August the 24th or whenever the dear leader decides to take us to  the polls.

JULIE BISHOP The Emperor for Life!

It’s been my pleasure Michael and I’d love to talk to you and your listeners again in the lead up to the  election.

- Ends -



