The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Operation Sovereign Borders update  Friday, 01 November 2013

Press Conference, Sydney

Scott Morrison: Well, welcome again for this week's briefing for Operation  Sovereign Borders. I'm pleased to report that illegal boat arrivals are significantly  below trends and expectations. Commander Campbell as usual will outline recent  activities as part of his regular report. Now while the Government is pleased with the  significant decline in illegal boat arrivals we are not taking anything for granted. Nor  are we making any claims about prospective activity remaining at these low levels.

I can say though is that the consistent application across all our spheres of activity  under Operation Sovereign Borders is now shifting the balance strongly in our  favour, against the people smugglers.

For the first time in five years, we are now getting the upper hand over the people  smugglers and we do not intend to yield this ever again.

This is not due to any one measure or any one policy, but the combined effects of all  measures, the professional and swift implementation of those measures and the  strong resolve of this government on our borders that does what it says.

Unlike under the previous government, the new government's strong position on our  borders has become a constant on this issue, not a variable, or a vulnerability, as  was previously the case. Critical in our implementation is our commitment to  universal application of the measures. It does not matter if you're an ethnic Hazara, a  stateless Rohingyan, whether you have an education or not, whether you are male,  female, accompanied, unaccompanied, child or adult, the policy is the same and it  will not change.

This week, Commander Campbell and I travelled to Jakarta to meet with the Minister  for Law and Human Rights, Dr Amir Syamsuddin representing the Coordinating  Minister Djoko Suyanto to follow up the leaders' meeting between Prime Minister  Abbott and President Yudhoyono in late September.

I had previously met with Bapak Amir in Sydney several weeks ago. The meeting  followed a month of dialogue between our officials, led by the Prime Minister's  Special Envoy Major General Molan and our ambassador to Indonesia Greg Moriarty  and I must commend the ambassador and his team for the great job they have done  over the past month.

The meeting was attended by almost 40 senior officials from all key Indonesian  agencies, including Mr Suyanto's own Coordinating Ministry, the Foreign Ministry,  the Justice and Human Rights Ministry, Immigrasi, the Indonesian armed forces  headquarters, the Indonesian National police or POLRI, the Army, Navy, Air Force,  marines, the national search and rescue agency Basarnas, the maritime security  coordination board Bakorkamla, the state intelligence agency, also known as BIN.  Now, while I do not intend to provide a commentary on the operational details of  matters discussed at the meeting, I am pleased to report that Australia's cooperation  on people smuggling issues has never been better than it is today.

At the meeting I restated Australia's appreciation for the commitment and  cooperative efforts of Indonesia to stop people smuggling in our region, and  emphasise - as the Prime Minister did at his meeting with President Yudhoyono -  that Australia and Indonesia have a shared interest in resolving this problem, that is  not of Indonesia's making, yet whose cooperation together with our other regional  partners is critical to resolving this problem. We have opened a new phase in our  cooperation with Indonesia and I am extremely optimistic about what will be  achieved in the weeks, months and years ahead.

Our cooperation will be characterised not only by its operational substance but our  continued joint regional leadership of the Bali process, and the bilateral engagement  agreed by our leaders at their meeting in September.

Now, this cooperation carries a very strong message all on its own. That smugglers  and their passengers face a combined effort from the governments of Indonesia and  Australia to prevent them entering and leaving Indonesia to get to Australia by boat.  This cooperation is driven by our mutual respect for Indonesia and Australia's  sovereignty, our respective sovereign responsibilities, and reducing each other's  burden.

We are also committed to no-surprises communication and maintaining a direct and  private dialogue at an operational level. Criminal people smuggling has significantly  violated both Indonesia's and Australia's sovereignty for the past five years in  particular. Tens of thousands of people have entered Indonesia, either illegally or by  abusing Indonesia's visa arrangements, for the purpose of engaging with criminal  people smugglers to break Indonesia's laws and embark on voyages to Australia.

These arrivals have created a residual and growing problem and population with  Indonesia of around 10 000 people, with more than 4000 who are now directly  supported by the Australian Government through our regional cooperation  arrangement with the International Organisation of Migration that this year will cost  Australia $41 million, almost double last year's allocation.

This residual population is causing increasing problems with Indonesia and  Indonesian communities, while also attracting an unwelcome criminal element  putting Indonesian nationals at risk.

It is important that we stop this flow of people into Indonesia, who do not have an  honest purpose for being in that country. In Australia, more than 50 000 people  illegally entered Australia under the previous government during the past five years.

The majority coming through Indonesia after transiting through the region. We now  currently have 33 000 illegal arrivals in detention and in the community on bridging  visas. As well as a further 2000 or thereabouts held offshore at Manus Island and  Nauru. This is now costing Australia $3 billion every year.

Our early gains since establishing Operation Sovereign Borders combined with the  strong cooperation from Indonesia means that the criminal people smuggling trade is  currently highly vulnerable to further actions that are now taken by Indonesia and  Australia. The period leading into the full onset of the monsoon is traditionally one  the busiest and most dangerous periods for these journeys.

We do expect that smugglers will take the opportunity during this period to attempt to  exploit this window of opportunity to clear remaining willing passengers who still  number in the thousands in Indonesia and to test our cooperation. Based on our  discussions that were held this week and have been held previously and the  dialogue between our leaders, I have great confidence about the strong response,  those seeking to break Indonesia's and Australia's laws will receive from Indonesia  and Australia. We discussed the full range of areas where we propose to engage in  further cooperative action, with particular focus on the immediate period. As the  Prime Minister said about his meeting with the President, on this occasion,  everything was once again on the table. The result of our discussion will be an uplift  in our cooperative operations across maritime and land-based activities, as well as  further cooperation to strengthen border controls, all designed to detect and prevent  people smuggling ventures. Now a joint summary of that meeting was prepared and  will be distributed to you now.

I'm happy to take further questions on these and other matters, relating to the  meeting and other aspects of Operation Sovereign Borders but as usual I will ask  Commander Campbell to provide his operational report. Thank You Commander  Campbell.

Angus Campbell: Thank you, Minister.

Welcome to the Operation Sovereign Borders weekly briefing for the period 9 o'clock  Friday 5 October 2013 until 9 o'clock this morning. Again for those who have not  previously attended, my comments will be confined to activities during the week  ending 9 o'clock this morning, related to the off-water reception and processing of  illegal maritime arrivals under the control of the Department of Immigration and  Border Protection. I will not discuss current or potential future on-water operations.

During the reporting period there were no arrivals. Over the course of the month of  October, there were a total of five suspected illegal entry vessels carrying 339 illegal  maritime arrivals who were subject to offshore processing or enhanced screening,  and none of whom will come to Australia.

Seven crew members were also transferred to immigration authorities in the month  of October. Also during the reporting period of the last week, a total of 76 people  were transferred to offshore processing centres, 44 people to Manus, and 32 to  Nauru.

At 9 o'clock this morning there were a total of 1137 people in Manus, 591 in Nauru  and there are 2184 people in Christmas Island facilities. We do continue to have  sufficient capacity to meet current and potential future requirements.

For the reporting period 14 illegal maritime arrival transferees were returned to Iran  after electing to go home voluntarily, six from Nauru and eight from Manus. Since the  commencement of Operation Sovereign Borders, a total of 67 people have  voluntarily returned to their country of origin from offshore processing centres. Also  during the last week, Indonesian authorities led by the Indonesian national police  and working with our Disruption and Deterrence Task Group have arrested three  facilitators and disrupted two potential ventures. Efforts by both Indonesia and  Australia to enhance the cooperation and mutual benefit both our nations gain from  addressing this common problem of people smuggling through disruptions and  prosecutions is greatly valued.

During the week, two Australian Federal Police federal agents travelled to Kuala  Lumpur, Malaysia and extradited a man to Australia. He is expected to be formally  charged with people smuggling offences in Perth today. The assistance of the Royal  Malaysia Police and their justice system are greatly appreciated in this matter. Mr  Sayed Omeid, an Iraqi national, was the alleged principal organiser of three vessels  known as Flinders, Nullawarre and Conara, collectively carrying 763 people that  arrived in Australian territory from Indonesia in 2001.

A few weeks ago, I spoke about the lies that people smugglers try and tell to  manipulate vulnerable people out of their money and get them onto boats. Today, I'd  like to speak about what Australia is doing to help people access accurate  information about people smuggling and Australia's current policy settings,  strengthening the anti-people smuggling message.

This campaign is focused in people smuggling source and transit countries, including  Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, India, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia and  Indonesia. The message it sends is clear, there is a new Government in place and if  you come to Australia by boat without a visa, you won't be settled here. It is that  simple. In doing this we are seeking to inform people of the risks and reality of what it  means to come to Australia by boat. We're speaking to people in their own language,  on television, radio, newspapers, billboards, brochures, story boards, posters,  roadshow activities, and through social media platforms such as Google, Facebook,  and YouTube.

In Iran, for example, a television advertisement outlining Australia's policy on  transferring illegal maritime arrivals for offshore processing and resettlement was  broadcast six times a day on two television stations for a total of 360 broadcasts in  the month of September. The next advertisement will air on Iranian television  throughout the month of November.

A man in Sri Lanka recently asked our team there for leaflets and a poster that  outlined Australia's policy on maritime people smuggling. He told us that he had  made the journey to Australia and had been sent home. He wanted these materials  to ensure that his friends and family did not make the same mistake. Another  example that our messaging is being received loud and clear is feedback from

community liaison officers in Indonesia. A 30-year-old Afghan man offered his view  that since hearing about the change in policy, he and others now know that, quote,  getting to Australia is useless, unquote. In another example, police in India acting on  a complaint they had received arrested a number of people smugglers to whom  potential passengers had given money. We're confident that our information  campaign played a role in the arrest. The passengers had become convinced that  the smugglers could not get them to Australia, but also knew they could not get their  money back and so they went to the police.

The feedback I've received on this campaign is very positive. It is making people  stop and think. Many are pausing to reconsider the value of working with people  smugglers and attempting the dangerous and ultimately pointless journey to  Australia. Thank you.

Scott Morrison: Well, thank you, commander and on behalf of the Government can  I thank all of those involved on the ground working on Operation Sovereign Borders,  whether at sea, whether on land, whether here in Australia. It has been, over these -  some weeks, I think an extraordinary effort working together across government.  And so please pass on our thanks to those working on the ground.

Journalist: Minister, you said that this is the first time in five years that the  Government's now had the upper hand against people smugglers. How exactly are  you measuring that?

Scott Morrison: Well, as I said, we've just been in Jakarta in the course of the last  week. And when I move around the region, whether it's there, or Malaysia and other  places, the Government has access to a range of information which enables us to  form a view about what is in the minds of the smugglers and their passengers. And  the balance of these - this information is showing very clearly that there is a sea  change. There is a shift. And the number of arrivals themselves, I think, demonstrate  a very significant change in the level of activity coming to Australia.

So I have no doubt that after five years of having the smugglers directing operations,  the Australian Government now, under the Abbott Government, is getting the upper  hand.

Journalist: So beyond the small decrease in the number of boats, other than your  gut feelings on this, is there...

Scott Morrison: It's interesting you describe a more than 70 per cent reduction in  the number of illegal arrivals to Australia as a small decline, but you can explain that  to your readers.

Journalist: What's the time frame for that 70 per cent decline?

Scott Morrison: That's the exact period balanced between what has happened  since the commencement of Operation Sovereign Borders and prior.

Journalist: But is there a statistical significance in a month's worth of boat arrivals,  though?

Scott Morrison: Well, as I said, we're not claiming anything based on arrivals,  solely. And we're not claiming anything about arrivals going forward, I was very clear  about that. But based on our - based on the information we receive, and working  through the region, and speaking to people who are doing this every day, there has  been a shift, there has been a shift, and we believe we are now getting the upper  hand against the people smugglers, which is in stark contrast to the last five years  where arrivals topped out at over 4000 people a month.

Journalist: [Indistinct] mention of warning the people in the different countries  before they leave, is there a deal now with Iran on repatriating people from there that  have been rejected here?

Scott Morrison: Well the Foreign Minister, you know, has made a number of  comments about that, and there are some discussions going on in the margins of the  meetings currently being held over in Perth, I understand. It is always our intention  and our effort to try and arrange for people's return to whatever country they may  have come from, and the experience is that particularly out of Iran, voluntary returns  are proving the most effective pathway. We're seeing that number increase going  back to Iran, not just from Australia but from our meetings in Indonesia this week,  there is an increasing number of people emptying out of Indonesia as well from Iran.

And so, whether people go back voluntarily or otherwise, the objective is that they go  back and that's what our policies are designed to address, and where we can  achieve that cooperation, then good. But equally there is cooperation that is  necessary for voluntary returns, in terms of access to documents, and for facilitation  through airports and so on, and we find that we get that cooperation.

Journalist: They're being allowed back in there now, in Iran?

Scott Morrison: Yes.

Journalist: Have any asylum seekers in detention here in Australia been sent  offshore as an indirect result of talking to the media?

Scott Morrison: No.

Journalist: So not at all?

Scott Morrison: No.

Journalist: Does it have any impact on their visa applications?

Scott Morrison: No, it doesn't. And, what the Australian Government has an  obligation to do, though, is ensure that we take all steps necessary so as not to  violate their identity. Now, it is important that people who are making claims about  asylum can do so in a discrete way and a private way. And we need to take all  reasonable steps under our duty of care to ensure that we don't expose people to  that situation.

Journalist: So would you prefer that they don't talk to the media?

Scott Morrison: Well, what they ultimately do is a matter for them. But our duty of  care is to ensure that there are suitable protections in place to ensure that their  identity is not exposed.

Journalist: So you wouldn't condone any warnings from, say, detention centre staff  to - actually there's asylum seekers in Darwin saying that they're being told by  detention centre staff not to speak to the media., do you...?

Scott Morrison: Well it's our duty of care to ensure that people are aware of the  risks that these things present, and that we exercise that duty of care in protecting  their identity. Now, that's what we do, and that has been the practice of governments  of all persuasions for a very long period of time and there's been no change to that  arrangement.

Journalist: [Indistinct] speaking to the media about revealing their identity, are they  being prevented from doing that?

Scott Morrison: Well, as you can see, they weren't prevented the other day.

Journalist: Minister, the capacity of the Manus Island facility is now at almost 1200  people. In the contract with G4S, it says that the facility has a permanent capacity of  600 people. How exactly are you facilitating more than double what the capacity of  the facility...?

Scott Morrison: Well, we expanded the facility.

Journalist: In what ways? Can you give details on how you expanded it?

Scott Morrison: Well, I mentioned last week - we're in the process now as we speak  of putting another 400, an extra 400 beds in and there is approval to put another 800  on Manus Island.

Journalist: [Inaudible questions]

Scott Morrison: Those 400 should be on-line by the end of this week and the week  isn't quite over.

Journalist: So they're not on-line now? [Indistinct]

Scott Morrison: No, you're not listening to me. You're asking lots of questions, but if  you give me the opportunity to respond then I will. We have current physical capacity  to deal with everybody who is there. We have the capacity to take every single  person who is currently on Manus Island, and we are putting in place, and that  should be occurring pretty much as we speak, an additional more than 400 beds.  And in addition to that, there will be an additional 800 beds. Now that is what is in the  works, but the currently capacity we have is capable of dealing with every single  person we have on Manus Island.

Journalist: Minister, I'm sorry but you simply can't answer the question. You said a  lot about what the capacity will be, but how has the facility gone from 600 to 1200?

Scott Morrison: Because it was expanded from when the 600 additional beds were  put in place. There were contracts - well, the beds go in tents, beds go in permanent  accommodation as well, but the majority of our offshore processing accommodation  is in tents and that's what people can expect to find.

Journalist: Is it true that a couple of dozen Australian guards were sent to Nauru  and then there wasn't anywhere to accommodate them so they were flown back to  Australia?

Scott Morrison: I'm not aware of that report. What I can tell you is just in the last  couple of weeks we've just completed accommodation capacity for 300 staff on  Nauru and I visited those facility myself as the first hundred or so beds were made  available. And so the staff accommodation is also an important thing that you have to  do when you're upscaling your capacity, not just in Nauru but at Manus, and that's  what we're doing.

Journalist: Minister. Will the department continue with community detention and  bridging visa releases?

Scott Morrison: Yes, for those who are part of the legacy caseload that was left  behind by the previous government of some 33 000 people. Anyone who's arrived  after 19 July though faces the new policy and that is that they will be sent to Nauru  and Manus Island, that's where they will be processed. There are no exceptions to  that. Our focus is obviously on those who have arrived on our watch and they're the  ones who are being sent there first, within 48 hours. Two working days is our target  and that's the policy that applies.

But for those who are part of the legacy caseload under Labor of 33 000 people that  sit within the network, community detention, bridging visas, held detention and formal  detention, all form part of the network that we use to deal with that caseload.

Journalist: Will lack of work rights remain under those bridging visas?

Scott Morrison: Yes.

Journalist: In the past week have there been any boats that have been intercepted  on the way to Australia and then sent back to Indonesia?

Angus Campbell: As I indicated, I won't discuss on-water operations at all.

Journalist: Sorry, Minister, don't you think it shows a weakness in your leadership  that you're constantly deferring to military officers to answer questions about your  own portfolio?

Angus Campbell: I think I answered a question that is wholly within my  responsibilities.

Question: But it's the minister that is responsible for the overall operation.

Scott Morrison: Well, let me answer it for you as well. We don't comment on things  that affect on-water operations.

Journalist: As I've just put to you, that - don't you think that, you know, it's a problem  that you're the minister responsible for this entire operation...

Scott Morrison: Well, I don't agree with the presumption of your question.

Next question.

Journalist: In terms of accommodation on Nauru, some human rights lawyers are  saying that they had to go through the Department of Immigration for virtually  everything, when they got to Nauru, including accommodation. Do you feel that  contradicts your talk that Nauru officials are in control of things there?

Scott Morrison: Everything that is done on Nauru is done under Nauruan law under  the auspices of the Nauruan Government and there is a significant amount of  support which is provided by the Australian Government to ensure the proper  running of those facilities. There's a joint management committee which deals with  the operations of those facilities and that includes representatives, obviously, from  both, and there are other measures we have in place to ensure the well running of  those facilities.

For example, people like Paris Aristotle who formed part of that committee and assist  with our efforts to make sure this is a well-run place.

Journalist: How many asylum seekers on Nauru have their claims processed now?

Scott Morrison: Well, those who are now on Nauru are all post 19 July arrivals  pretty much as I understand. And for those post 19 July arrivals, and they are now  generating the process again, I made a comment earlier in the week that it is in the  early preliminary phases. Now, that's a matter for the Nauruan government and they  will be working through that in due course. But similarly at the same time we're  working quickly to establish post-processing accommodation on Nauru as we are at  the East Lorengau site on Manus Island. And that is an important part of the chain of  accommodation that you need in place to run the system effectively.

Now, you may recall from some earlier briefings the previous government had not  put in place arrangements for post-processing accommodation on Nauru, and Manus  Island, so it is not clear to me at all where they intended people to go once that  process had been completed, but similarly they had not funded the operations of  offshore processing beyond 31 December. And both of these, I think, left the viability  of those operations in a very poor state.

Journalist: [Indistinct] Do you know how many - on Manus Island, how many have  resettled in PNG?

Scott Morrison: There's been no resettlements in PNG at this point, no. We're still  in the processing phase.

Journalist: Is there a plan for the asylum seekers in the community whose bridging  visas have expired or are soon to expire?

Scott Morrison: For those on bridging visas, well, they will be moved on to a  renewal of a bridging visa until their processing has got to a point of completion.

Journalist: And what about people who's in the - who are in the community with  expired visas?

Scott Morrison: Well, we would be looking to renew those visas at an early  opportunity.

Journalist: Would you consider using TPVs?

Scott Morrison: No. TPVs and bridging visas are completely different. Temporary  protection visas are visas for that legacy caseload of around 33 000 who have been  found to be refugees. People on bridging visas have not yet and may not be found to  be refugees and so the conditions and the situations for both of those groups is  completely different.

Journalist: Would you consider at least looking at operating people on bridging  visas the right to work so they lessen, you know, their reliance on welfare?

Scott Morrison: No, we won't, and secondly, we're putting in place a mutual  obligation program to more effectively engage people who are on bridging visas and  just not leave them effectively sitting around, as the previous government did, not  engaged, because we don't think that's an appropriate way to assist and manage  people in that situation. It was a key part of our election platform and we're in the  process of implementing that. It's a significant programme. It requires a lot of careful  mention are preparation and planning and that's what we're doing right now.

Journalist: Minister, there was a report this week that children were having their  lunchboxes searched to and from the Villawood detention facility. Will you confirm  whether or not that's happening and if so, explain why?

Scott Morrison: Well, contraband was found in a child's school bag last week and  when contraband is found, then you would you expect officers to take the  appropriate steps to ensure there is not contraband in other places. Now, I stress no  children are being searched but bags and other things have been to ensure that  there's no contraband. It's regrettable that that's necessary but when there is  contraband found, then I expect my officers working within those centres and in other  places to ensure that practice doesn't continue.

Journalist: And what was the contraband?

Scott Morrison: I said it's contraband. I'm not about to go into the details of those  things.

Journalist: Oh, is that an operational [indistinct]?

Scott Morrison: It's contraband.

Journalist: In relation to the confrontation in Manus Island, has there been any  results of the investigation into what happened?

Scott Morrison: This is the report that you're referring to before, sorry, or are you -  on the sexual assault or you're referring to the incident?

Journalist: [Indistinct]

Scott Morrison: No, I don't have any further information from that that I previously  provided, but we are working through those issues as we are on the very significant  incident that occurred in Nauru and we're in the sort of final phases of receiving a  report on that matter as well and once that report's available then you could expect  us to release the contents of the report in an appropriate format.

Journalist: Are staff in that centre on Manus Island at risk?

Scott Morrison: No.

Journalist: [Indistinct]

Scott Morrison: As you know, the commander had a force protection team go  through both Manus and Nauru recently and we're working through the result of their  assessments, but nothing has been recommended to me for immediate change that  would relate to the security of people working in those centres.

Journalist: What about in relation to the sexual assault report [indistinct]?

Scott Morrison: It's on the website.

Journalist: The report itself?

Scott Morrison: Yes.

Journalist: Indonesia has summoned Australia's ambassador in Jakarta to answer  allegations that Australia used its embassy there as a spy base. Will that affect any  of your negotiations over the border protection policy?

Scott Morrison: As I said, the cooperation between Indonesia and Australia on  people smuggling is at the best it's been. It is operational, it is forward focused, the  relationships are incredibly strong, and there's a very good reason for that, and that  is it is in Indonesia's and Australia's interests, our own discrete interests, to do this  and work together for that purpose. Now, that is not changed any by other events  and we found on the ground, the Commander and I, as we've reported at these  forums, particularly with the Australian Federal Police and others who are working  there, an outstanding level of operational cooperation and understanding between  these agencies, and the demonstration of having more than 35 - I think there were  37 officials and various representatives of the myriad agencies in Indonesia that

attended our meeting in Jakarta this week demonstrates the level of commitment  there is from Indonesia to work together on this issue.

People smuggling is affecting Indonesia, not just Australia. They're not the cause of  it. The policies of the previous government are the cause of it in terms of the massive  traffic we saw come through Indonesia to Australia, but they're very much part of the  solution and I understand that.

Journalist: [Indistinct]

Scott Morrison: Well, I'll leave those matters to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and  the Attorney-General and others who are more specifically tasked in these areas, but  what I have found on the ground is that practically Australia and Indonesia have a  mutual interest, a joint interest, in dealing with this problem. And that doesn't change  and we need to stop the people smugglers and Indonesia and Australia are  committed to doing just that.

Journalist: Minister asylum seekers in Darwin are saying that they have been told  not to talk to the media but also not to attend vigils and talk to the community. Are  you aware of that?

Scott Morrison: Well, as I said before, we have a duty to ensure that we discourage  people from putting themselves in a situation where their identity can be  compromised. I mean, that can have potential legal consequences for the  Commonwealth. And so we exercise our duty of care and that's what I can tell you  our officers do.

Journalist: So that is a directive from the Department to Serco?

Scott Morrison: It is our responsibility as a Commonwealth and my department,  who then work with Serco, to ensure we exercise our duty of care in this area and  that's what we do.

Journalist: Minister, I'm just reading the Cornell report now and it says [indistinct]  detention centre at Manus [indistinct] self harming and guards being assaulted. Do  you really think it's appropriate to be expanding the capacity of the Manus facility and  [indistinict] given what this report has [indistinct]?

Scott Morrison: Well, that report is based on an incident that took place some  months ago and we've been taken necessary steps to ensure proper security  arrangements within that facility, as well as Nauru, and that's why we're able to  expand the capacity and expand its operations and the centre I think has been  operating very functionally and serving the purpose for which it's been tasked.

Journalist: [Indistinct]

Scott Morrison: Well, I visited those centres and others have the opportunity to visit  those centres who are from international organisations and other members of  parliament and others can do all of these things, as was the case under the previous

government, and the appropriate, I think, transparency arrangements are there and  haven't been changed from the previous government.

These centres, we should stress, are not designed as hotels or resorts, that's not  what they're designed to do. They're designed to be a processing facility for people  to have their claims assessed and for people to be treated with dignity and respect,  and that is what occurs at these places.

Journalist: What steps have you actually taken to resolve some of the systemic  problems that...

Scott Morrison: Well, again, I don't jump to the conclusion of the presumption in  your question. But all steps are taken to ensure people are treated with dignity and  respect at both Nauru and Manus Island, and Christmas Island, and at Blaydin Point,  and at Villawood, and at Yongah Hill in Perth, and any of the other centres that we  have an involvement with.

Journalist: I am talking about the Manus facility now. So has the Department given  any official response to this report now as well?

Scott Morrison: Well, any advice that I might receive from my department is  obviously a matter of advice, and neither the department or I would go into matters of  advice.

Journalist: Well, why not?

Scott Morrison: Because that is a standing practice that has occurred by  governments for a very long time, which I would expect you to be familiar with. And it  was practiced by the previous Government.

Journalist: [Inaudible question]

Scott Morrison: Well I said any advice I might have received from the department  on those matters is a matter between myself and the department. But what I can tell  you is that the arrangements at those centres are continually being reviewed,  through the various management of those facilities, to ensure that people are treated  with dignity and respect. I've got time for one last question.

Journalist: So Minister, has the...

Scott Morrison: Maybe someone else would like to ask a question.

Journalist: Is it true that 13 000 people on bridging visas [indistinct]?

Scott Morrison: Well there have been no decisions taken as yet as to who might go  back in detention, but the Government, when in Opposition, had a clear policy to  completely revise the assessment process, and to retask the way the detention  network operated in relation to how that assessment process operated. Now, what I  mean by that is the detention network will predominately be used once we get into  our new assessment phase for those who have received a negative decision at

some point. That should be its predominant purpose, that's the onshore detention  network I'm talking about.

And those who are yet to be assessed, and are already in the community, well  there's no suggestion that until their assessment might commence, that they would  be brought back into detention, there's no suggestion of that. But we'll be making  more announcements about those issues, they don't go directly to Operation  Sovereign Borders. Operation Sovereign Borders is about those vessels and those  people who may seek to come here now, and since the commencement of that  operation. What we do with the legacy caseload of 33 000 people and the $3 billion it  was costing Australian taxpayers as a result of the previous  Government's border failures, well that's a parallel action by the Government.

Thank you for your time.

Journalist: [Inaudible question]

Scott Morrison: I do have an answer for you. I can give that - I can arrange for my  staff to give that to you after the briefing.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2013/sm209273.htm   Last update: Friday, 01 November 2013 at 17:29 AEST



