

Julie Bishop MP

Shadow   MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Sky News AM Agenda

26 April 2013

Subjects: HMAS Sydney joining US fleet, Australia’s foreign aid spending, Clive Palmer  reestablishment of United Australia Party, London ANZAC Day Commemorations

E&OE…

KIERAN GILBERT I spoke to Julie Bishop from London a bit earlier this morning. I did ask  her about Clive Palmer’s plans but I began on foreign policy and the fact that HMAS Sydney  is heading to Japan to join the US Seventh Fleet. Julie Bishop says she hopes the Government  has been in dialogue with other nations in the region so this move has not come as a surprise.

JULIE BISHOP I think that that is the most important step. It’s a key step that the  Government in the past has not undertaken and I’m assuming it’s learned its lessons. We’ve  had some embarrassing and unfortunate circumstances where the Government has made  announcements that affect other countries’ national interest without informing them.

In this case it would be highly appropriate for the Australian Government to consult and  inform other nations about the deployment of this ship and as I said it won’t come as a shock  to anyone that Australia is close to the US military but we should give them the courtesy of  informing them what we’re doing.

KIERAN GILBERT I want to ask you about some aid spending, Australia’s foreign aid  budget. We know that the Government has already spent well upwards of $3 million on  asylum seekers in Australia making Australia effectively our third biggest foreign aid  recipient and now suggestions that under an aid program that political figures have been able  to travel under that program, quite a big spend. Do you think that that’s appropriate? That our  aid spending is being used for foreign travel of politicians?

JULIE BISHOP This has been the case for many years on a bipartisan basis. I do have  concerns about the use of our aid budget across a number of areas and in fact in the lead up to  the last election I called for there to be an independent review of aid effectiveness and the  efficiency and the way our aid budget is allocated and to his credit Kevin Rudd did hold that  independent review.

However one of the recommendations, the most important recommendation in my mind, was  that there should be benchmarks put in place and programs and spending would be subjected  to these key performance indicators if you like. This has not been done by the Government  and should the Coalition be elected as the next Government of Australia I would ensure that  these benchmarks are put in place for every program and every aid program would be judged  according to this set of criteria.

KIERAN GILBERT The Federal Government has delayed its goal of reaching the foreign aid  spend at half a per cent of GNI, that’s been pushed out to 2016/17, pushed out by one year to  elevate aid spending to half a per cent of Gross National Income.

What’s the Coalition’s position on this? Is your policy to reach half a per cent of Gross  National Income by 2015/16? Or is it now that delayed timeframe that the Government  announced?

JULIE BISHOP Kieran, our policy had been to commit to increasing our aid budget to 0.5  per cent of GNI by 2015. However, the Government has now blown that opportunity because  they’ve pushed out beyond 2016 their aim to reach 0.5 per cent.

Until we see the figures in the budget, we’re not in a position to say when we can reach 0.5  per cent of Gross National Income on foreign aid. Every prediction, every forecast, all the  figures they’ve provided in their budgets to date have been way off beam. They’ve been  predicting budget surpluses in 2013 and of course we now know there will not be a budget  surplus. There are going to be deficits as far as the eye can see, they’ve already delivered four  record deficits.

So until we can see the figures, and indeed in this budget it will be very interesting to see how  much further they push out there commitment to 0.5 per cent of GNI but until we see that  commitment, those figures, then we’re not in a position to say when we can do it.

We remain committed to 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income. But more importantly and I  come back to this issue of performance benchmarks and key performance indicators, we need  to have standards against which we can judge the effectiveness of the aid spend. I’m not  satisfied that our programs, all of them are meeting an appropriate standard and that’s what I  would be subjecting the aid budget to, a rigorous assessment against key performance  indicators, benchmarks so that the Australian taxpayer can be assured that we are getting  value for money that our dollar is being spent effectively where it’s most needed and that is  in our region.

KIERAN GILBERT When we talk about the state of the budget though. If you look to the  United Kingdom where you are at the moment, they’ve already committed to a higher  percentage of their budget to be spent on foreign aid and the Cameron Government has  actually ringfenced aid spending so they won’t eat into that to their spend and their economy  is obviously doing a lot worse than ours.

Can you give some sense as to whether or not the Coalition is serious about delivering the  half a per cent of GNI by 2016/17 or are you willing to push it out beyond that.

JULIE BISHOP Kieran had the Government not blown the budget we would have been on  track to deliver 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2015 if we were the Government in 2015. But we have  to face the fact this Government has thrown money at every problem it confronts, it thinks the  answer to everything is to spend recklessly and mindlessly. It’s spending money that it  doesn’t have, I’m in London so I’m reminded of Margaret Thatcher’s great saying, “the  trouble with socialists they eventually run out of other people’s money,” and that’s what’s  happened here.

The Labor Government has spent recklessly, mindlessly over a long period of time. There’s  been the deepest descent into debt in Australian peacetime history. They’ve delivered four  record deficits. They’re on track to deliver another deficit. Until we can see the state of the  books it would be reckless of me to say that we could reach 0.5 per cent by a particular date. I  want to see the books, get to the bottom of it. We hear that there’s a huge black hole and I  think until the Coalition can actually see the state of the finances it would be reckless for me  to do anything other than commit to 0.5 per cent of GNI when it can be afforded.

Now clearly the Government is going to have something more to say about its commitment to  foreign aid in this budget and we need to see what they’re actually going to do. They might  even push it out beyond the forward estimates, who knows, anything could happen in terms  of the nation’s finances under this Labor Government.

KIERAN GILBERT And onto a couple of other issues now. Clive Palmer is, or has  established his own political party. He’s going to run candidates in 127 seats. Already the  major parties face the threat of the Katter Party, should the Coalition be taking this seriously  or do you see it as a stunt?

JULIE BISHOP Well Mr Palmer has said in the past that he’s going to run for seats, he’s said  it on a number of occasions. The great thing about a democracy is if Clive Palmer or anybody  else thinks they can get the support of the public they are entitled to participate in the election  process.

I assume that he’ll have an election platform, I assume he’ll make election promises and I  welcome a contest of ideas. But my point is if you want to get rid of the Labor Government,  if you want to get rid of the waste and incompetence, the inability to stop the boats then you  have to vote for the Coalition. it has got to be a vote for the Liberal Party and the National  Party, that’s how you get rid of this government.

KIERAN GILBERT And finally Julie Bishop, I know you’re in London for talks with  Foreign Secretary William Hague, but also obviously, you attended the ANZAC Day service  in London. We had massive crowds here in Canberra, more than 30,000 a record at the  Australian War Memorial. What were the crowds like in London?

JULIE BISHOP People all over the world have been commemorating ANZAC Day and here  in London it was a beautiful balmy day. It started with a dawn service at the Australian  Memorial at Hyde Park Corner and there were hundreds and hundreds of people there. At one  stage all of the traffic on Hyde Park Corner was stopped for the two minutes silence. It was  very moving.

Then there was a wreath laying service at The Cenotaph in Whitehall. Again, hundreds and  hundreds of people lining the streets and the traffic was stopped for the march and finally  there was a service in Westminster Abbey and that was attended by over 2000 people, mostly  Australians and New Zealanders, a beautiful service. And the members of the Royal Family  have attended each one of these commemorative services, the Dawn Service, at The  Cenotaph and again at Westminster Abbey.

People have been talking quite openly and excitedly about the 2015 Centenary of ANZAC, I  think we will see enormous interest, particularly in the United Kingdom for that  commemoration.

KIERAN GILBERT Julie Bishop joining me from London this morning.

- Ends -



