Chris Bowen

SHADOW TREASURER

INTERVIEW WITH MARIUS BENSON,  ABC NEWSRADIO  Posted September 30, 2013

MARIUS BENSON: Well Tony Abbott does fly out of Australia in a little over an hour for  his first overseas journey as Prime Minister, and while the government is hoping the  talks with Indonesia’s leaders will be largely devoted to and trade and investment,  recent clashes over the handling of asylum seek boats may dominate discussion. The  gravity of that issue was underlined at the weekend by the loss of probably 50 people or  more in a boat that sank of Java and claims from survivors that Australia did not respond  to calls for help.

For an opposition view on the critical visit, I’m joined by the interim Labor Leader, Chris  Bowen. Chris Bowen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN: Good morning to you Marius.

BENSON: Now Tony Abbott’s hope is that the talks will concentrate on trade and  investment. Would it be in Australia’s best interest if they were?

CHRIS BOWEN: Well we certainly do need to deepen the trade and investment links  with Indonesia, that’s very important. And of course, Kevin Rudd made that a focus of  his visit and indicated that would be his continued focus if we were in office, but  unfortunately given the very real tensions in relationships which have been caused in the  first week of a Coalition Government, I fear that will take a back seat.

You’ve had Minister Natalegawa making Indonesia’s view very, very clear, and they’ve  been making it clear for many years now, their policy about turning back the boats, so  this came as no surprise. It should come as no surprise to this government that had  been warned on this issue. And yet they’ve let this issue dominate and threaten one of  our most important bilateral relationships, in their first week, before Tony Abbott has  even visited Indonesia.

BENSON: What do you think of the point made by the former Foreign Minister Alexander  Downer that Indonesia shares or deserves a lot of blame on this issue itself? That it’s  engaged in pious rhetoric while ignoring Australian sovereignty and also there are  reports just from this latest boat, which sank of Java, some of the survivors saying it  was actually Indonesian military that actually drove us down to the launching site.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well let’s deal with each item in turn. Firstly, Mr Downer’s comments  were particularly unhelpful, and look Indonesia is more than willing to work with  Australia on these issues, they’ve been doing that for many years, they’ve been doing so  quietly. There’s a high degree of cooperation throughout the bureaucracy and at the  political level. But Indonesia makes the point that these are not Indonesian asylum  seekers, these are asylum seekers from around the world who’ve been using Indonesia

as a staging post to get to Australia. So therefore it’s a joint problem that needs to be  jointly approached. And they see measures such as going to Indonesia and buying boats  and paying bounties to turn back boats as not in keeping with that approach.

Secondly, on the matter of the allegations about the army, certainly without commenting  on the details, because we’ve only seen those media reports certainly I know that at the  most senior levels of the Indonesian government there is a willingness, again, to crack-down on any illegal practises, to ensure that there is a sharing of information about  those things, but it’s important that that relationship, at the most senior levels is a  cooperative one, and the sort of approach we’ve seen by the new government over the  last week really doesn’t engender that and really does threaten that cooperation.

BENSON: Trade is still a big aspect of these talks, even with the concentration on the  asylum issue, there’s something like 20 businesspeople traveling in the delegation with  the Prime Minister and the two other Ministers going with the Prime Minister, live cattle  in particular has been in the spotlight, do you believe that the Labor policies on that in  the past were the correct ones or that they damaged the trade unnecessarily?

CHRIS BOWEN: Oh look, these issues were dealt with at the time and clearly there  were some views expressed and clearly we all need to take into account the experiences  of the past. But I think that’s a good example where nations that are friendly, nations  that have good and open communication can deal with issues, at various levels,  Ministerial and bureaucratic and do that in good faith, even though they have different  perspectives and move on, and Indonesia certainly has expressed that they understand  some of the pressures on this in Australia. We need to understand the context of the  debate in Indonesia, and the importance of those exports to Indonesia from the  Indonesian point of view..

BENSON: Did Labor get it wrong in the past in dealing with the live cattle issue.

CHRIS BOWEN: Well what I’m saying Marius is that’s an issue in the context of the  times and we need to draw on that experience, and where you’ve got Indonesia…

BENSON: So is that ‘yes you got it wrong’?

CHRIS BOWEN: Where you have Indonesia expressing a strong point of view, you need  to take that into account, as the previous government did, and we listened, and took  that into account at the time and adjusted policies and obviously need to take into  account our own issues, what’s important to us, but do so in the spirit of cooperation  with Indonesia, which is what the former government did and what this government  should do.

BENSON: Another issue in the news is the decision by George Brandis the Attorney  General and the Agriculture Minister Barnaby Joyce to pay back some funds they  received for attending a private wedding in 2011. Is that issue now settled, are you  happy that the funds have been paid back, and George Brandis says that it was justified  anyway, but I’ll pay it back regardless?

CHRIS BOWEN: No, there’s still a fair bit to be said about this Marius. This is a flagrant  breach, just a terrible breach and sometimes there are grey areas, we accept that,  sometimes mistakes are made. But to see the first law officer of the nation, still today,  claim that this was a legitimate expense is frankly unbecoming and upsetting. Now this  is the first law officer of the nation who says a friend’s wedding, at which he allegedly  torn up the dance floor was “a work related function”. I mean, give me a break. And now  Tony Abbott has this man, the Attorney General, writing the ministerial code of conduct.  The code of conduct which will tell other ministers how they should behave. When the

Attorney General is responsible for the first major breach of the new government. Tony  Abbott needs to remove George Brandis from that responsibility immediately. We’re not  calling for George Brandis to be sacked. What we are calling for here is to be removed  from the reasonability of writing the ministerial code of conduct. And frankly he should  admit that this was an illegitimate claim and that he should apologise for making the  claim in the first place.

BENSON: Chris Bowen, thank you very much. Chris Bowen is the interim Labor leader.



