

SENATOR STEPHEN CONROY  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE  SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT PLACE, WEST PERTH  WEDNESDAY, 29 JANUARY 2014

SUBJECT: Government cuts to ADF personnel pay and conditions;  Construction Industry; ABC.

STEPHEN CONROY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: The first decision  the Abbott Government has made in the Defence portfolio is to cut the pay of  Defence Force personnel by up to $19,000.

Mr Abbott promised Australians before the election there would be no surprises.

Well there are about 1000 very surprised Defence Force personnel today who are  serving in the Gulf and in the Middle East.

Mr Abbott is hiding behind the drawdown of troops in Afghanistan for what really  is just a budget saving.

Mr Abbott has broken his promise that there would be no defence cuts.

Mr Abbott made the promise, Senator Johnston made the promise, and Joe  Hockey made the promise - no defence cuts.

And the first decision is to punish and penalise ADF personnel by up to $19,000.

JOURNALIST: Isn’t this the usual practice though to scale down allowances as  the mission is winding up?

CONROY: But there are different missions involved here.

Mr Abbott is hiding behind the drawdown of troops in Afghanistan to cut the pay  of people involved in anti-piracy, who are protecting the waterways. Mr Abbott is  not being truthful about why he’s making this decision.

This is a penny-pinching decision, which is about shoring up their budget, which  they’ve blown out at the expense of defence force personnel.

JOURNALIST: Hasn’t this decision been made by defence hierarchy though and  not Cabinet? Is it really fair to blame the Government?

CONROY: Well we’re reading in the papers that the decision was taken by the  National Security Committee of Cabinet. That’s Tony Abbott, David Johnston and  Joe Hockey. So this is a decision that has been made by the Cabinet of the  Abbott Government - an Abbott Government that promised no surprises.

JOURNALIST: The Australian Defence Association has described the decision as  quite logical. Do you think there is merit behind it?

CONROY: Where you have the drawdown of forces there is some reasonable  argument, but what this is is much broader. This is 1000 personnel that are still  serving there, that are still doing the same jobs that they were before, and some  of them don’t have a direct connection with the Afghanistan drawdown.

This is a penny pinching move which is about making a saving for the  Government at the expense of nearly 1000 Australian serving Defence personnel  - not all of who are involved in the Afghanistan drawdown.

JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, there are serious allegations of criminality  in the building and construction industry. Why resist a push then to put a proper  watchdog in place through the ABCC?

CONROY: There are two issues here. First of all, we have zero tolerance, zero  tolerance of corruption - whether it’s in the corporate world or in the trade union  movement or anywhere else in Australia - zero tolerance.

What is happening here is that Mr Abbott is simply taking an example, which  should be referred immediately to the police, and I understand has been, to try  and push his anti-union, anti-worker agenda. He wants to use this to try and  attack the trade union movement as a whole.

When one businessman at a company engages in fraud or bad behaviour you  don't condemn the entire business community, you don't hold a royal  commission into the entire business community. You refer it to the proper  authority and have the proper authority investigate.



This is simply being used as a political vehicle for an attack on trade unions as a  whole. There may be some bad apples in the broader trade union movement.  They should be weeded out, they should be referred to the police, there should  be zero tolerance.

But don't use it as an excuse for the Abbott Government's pernicious and vicious  attack on all trade union officials across the country.

JOURNALIST: But how can you be confident that will happen?

CONROY: Because it should be referred to the police, this has already been  referred to the police and everyone should co-operate. There should be zero  tolerance across the broad trade union movement as well as across corporate  Australia and everywhere else for the sort of allegations of fraud and bribery that  are taking place.

They have happened before in the corporate world, they have happened before  in the trade union world, but this should not be used as an excuse by Tony  Abbott for his vicious anti-union agenda, where he wants to smear every decent  trade union official in the country to further his own political ends.

JOURNALIST: What do unionists have to fear from the ABCC, though, if they  are doing the right thing?

CONROY: Well the Fair Work Commission has a whole section that deals with  this and has significant powers. We introduced, Bill Shorten when he was IR  Minister, introduced strong sanctions, massive increases in fines for trade union  officials that do the wrong thing.

What Tony Abbott is about is his vicious anti-worker agenda and what he wants  to see ultimately is to smash the trade union movement and use this as a  stalking horse to do it.

He wants to smear all decent, hardworking trade union officials across the  country and that's not acceptable any more than it would be acceptable to smear  every business person in the country because of a few bad apples and a few  cases of fraud or bribery in the commercial world.

JOURNALIST: What did you make of the Prime Minister’s criticism of the ABC  this morning and as a former Communications Minister do you think the ABC acts  outside the national interest?

CONROY: The ABC has an independent charter. It has to abide by its own  independent charter.

What we've seen since the Abbott Government was elected is a systematic attack  on the independence of the ABC. I haven't seen Mr Abbott's comments this  morning so I'm not in a position where I can comment on them.

But what you can see is that there are proper processes at the ABC set up under  the charter and if people have concerns about them then they should go through  those processes, they've all been put in place.

I haven't agreed many times with stories run by the ABC, I've disagreed many  times with stories run by the ABC. What Tony Abbott is really trying to do is  continue this veil of secrecy. He is continuing to withhold information from the  Australian public.

What should be happening is the Australian public should be informed on a  weekly basis of all of the activities of the Navy in their attempts to stop the flow  of refugees in unsafe boats. That should just be standard practice.

What Mr Abbott is wanting to do as he has demonstrated every single day is to  hide the truth from the Australian people about what is going on.

This would not be a story, this would not be an issue, if Mr Abbott and Mr  Morrison came clean with the Australian public and stopped politicising the Navy  and allow the Navy to speak for themselves and allow the Navy to refute these  allegations.

But what we're left with here is Tony Abbott and Scott Morrison using an almost  Orwellian refusal to answer any questions on an 'operational basis' and that is  allowing a cloud to hang over our Navy. That is not acceptable.

ENDS.

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM SIMS 0408 258 457





