The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection





Manus Island incident  Monday, 24 February 2014

Interview with Chris Uhlmann, ABC AM Program

Chris Uhlmann: And the Immigration Minister is Scott Morrison. Mr Morrison, good  morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Chris.

Chris Uhlmann: Why was there such a big difference between the two stories you  told the Australian public on Tuesday and the one on Saturday night?

Minister Morrison: Well on Tuesday afternoon I in fact first qualified the report I  gave that morning when I said that there were subsequent reports that were  conflicting and I could no longer confirm where particularly the death of Mr Barati  took place. Now, I said that Tuesday afternoon after returning to Canberra. Why  people didn't pick that up, that's a matter for them, but on Saturday there was a  weight of reports and particularly one report I received on Saturday that made it clear  that the record would have to be corrected. And I'm happy to correct the record,  Chris, where there's been imperfect information provided in the first instance and  that's what I've done and I think that's what's appropriate.

Chris Uhlmann: Yes, but you do have all the resources of a Department and one  would assume that they had checked their facts before they gave that information to  you.

Minister Morrison: Well it was a very initial report. It was done only within hours of  the incident. It was based on the information they had at the time. By as early as that  afternoon, I had already qualified fairly heavily saying that there were conflicting  reports about where Mr Barati had died and that was put on the record as early as  Tuesday afternoon.

Chris Uhlmann: And now it's clear that most of the violence took place inside the  compound?

Minister Morrison: That's right. As the picture has emerged over the course of the  week, General Campbell was up there late in the week and of course I received  some further information on Saturday that put the weight of the reporting behind the  fact that these incidents predominantly occurred inside the centre. I should stress  though, there were large numbers of transferees who were removed from the centre

under protection and taken down, as I said, on that first day to the oval, so they were  removed from the area where the riots were taking place.

Chris Uhlmann: If all the violence took place inside the centre and none of the  guards, as you say, have guns, how could a detainee be shot?

Minister Morrison: Well this is a matter we're still seeking to get to the bottom of  and that's what the police investigations are about, in particular the review that my  Department Secretary is commissioned for Mr Cornall.

Chris Uhlmann: So it would seem to an outsider that someone with a gun - i.e.  someone from the PNG police - got into the compound?

Minister Morrison: Well Chris, I did say yesterday that I haven't ruled out that any  incidents took place outside the perimeter of the centre, I've just said that the  majority of what took place, based on the reports I have, took place inside the centre.  So there are still a lot of questions to be answered. I have a lot of questions that I  want to be answered, just like I think the media does, but more importantly, the  Australian people and people in Papua New Guinea want answers and that's what  the reviews are about.

Chris Uhlmann: Do you know how the young Iranian man died?

Minister Morrison: No, we don't know. We know what his injuries were - they were  severe head injuries - but the autopsy I understand has been underway and  hopefully that's been completed and the police are continuing with their investigation.

Chris Uhlmann: There's no other way of looking at this other than there was a  complete breakdown of systems on that island on that night.

Minister Morrison: Well there was a violent riot Chris, that's what happened that  night, but the fact was that the next morning the centre opened and was running and  has been running since. The centre was not shut down by this violent and  aggressive behaviour and it has been able to maintain its operations. Now, we had a  terrible tragedy that night and that needs to be investigated, but the centre didn't  burn to the ground as it happened on Nauru or Christmas Island or Villawood or what  occurred on those occasions, it opened...

Chris Uhlmann: Do you accept that people get violent and aggressive when they  think that they have no hope and at this stage, those people have no hope of being  resettled anywhere as refugees if they prove to be refugees, do they?

Minister Morrison: Well no, I wouldn't say that. The resettlement plan is for them to  be resettled in Papua New Guinea.

Chris Uhlmann: And there's nothing in place for that to happen?

Minister Morrison: No, that's exactly the situation we inherited Chris and we've  been working, ever since being elected, to try and put detail and arrangements in  place to support those resettlement plans for Papua New Guinea. We inherited a

blank page; we inherited a centre that was under resourced and under capacity and  the security arrangements were deficient. The contractors that have been operating  at the centre, I haven't renewed their contracts and I put new contractors in place  which have actually started this week.

Chris Uhlmann: But that blank page is unlikely to be filled soon by PNG is it?  There's no rush on their behalf to try and fix this system.

Minister Morrison: No, I wouldn't agree with that, Chris, I think Papua New Guinea  are trying to work promptly to try and get the detail in here. What we need to  understand though is this arrangement was never going to be easy and I think the  sort of brash promises that were made before the election, that this was a done deal,  I think completely misunderstood the scale of work that needed to be done to bring  this into some sort of finality.

Chris Uhlmann: Finally and briefly, if you can't get an agreement with PNG, this  system can't work, can it?

Minister Morrison: Well I believe we will and I believe there'll be some evidence of  that in the not too distant future and that's what we're working towards. But the deal  that was there in broad that was done with Prime Minister Rudd is the same  arrangement we have and I expect it to be honoured and I know the Papua New  Guineans will.

Chris Uhlmann: Scott Morrison, thank you.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot Chris.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm212067.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 25 February 2014 at 09:31 AEST



