

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  THE DOORS, PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Iraq, Ebola, India, MRRT.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Look, I’ve  come out this morning to talk about the tragic death of Steven Sotloff. This is  another confirmation that IS in Iraq and in Syria are a barbaric organisation that  follows none of the rules of war. Steven was abducted more than a year ago  now and his tragic death, it underscores the type of enemy that the Iraqis are  fighting. Australia has decided to help supply the Peshmerga, the most effective  fighting force in northern Iraq at the moment to hold back this force which has  killed everyone that has stood in its way, murdered, abducted, sold into slavery,  women and children, that has besieged whole towns and set out to wipe out  whole communities. I know that yesterday, that the Secretary-General of the  United Nations, Ban Ki Moon, also gave his support including to military action to  hold back IS. This is a very serious fight and our Australians who are involved in  supporting the Iraqis to hold back this threat are doing a terrific job, a very  necessary job.

I want to say a couple of things about Syria as well, because people have said on  the one hand, you’re intervening in Iraq by supporting the Peshmerga, how is  Syria different? IS, the same organisation originally started in Iraq transferred to  Syria, grew its strength and is now back in Iraq. There’s one very key difference,  and that is the Iraqi Government has asked for Australian support against IS.  And unfortunately in Syria, the civil war now means that there is no credible

partner with which to fight IS. Any support of a similar type to Assad’s troops in  Syria would empower a regime that is a brutal regime, that is also accused of  mass atrocity crimes, including using gas against its own- chemical weapons  against its own civilian population. That doesn’t mean that the world community  should turn its back on Syria. Australia has been asked as part of the  international community to do more for Syria. The United Nations has called for a  rebuilding fund of humanitarian- a rebuilding fund of around 6 billion dollars and  so far the Abbott Government has only contributed less than 30 million dollars to  the relief effort in Syria. We also see that there are millions of refugees in Syria  and Iraq, well over a million in Iraq, well over 6 million in Syria, another area  where Australia could do substantially more than we are.

I want to turn now - does anyone have any comments or questions about the  international issues before I talk about domestic issues?

JOURNALIST: Just firstly on Iraq and the use of propaganda, the video  uploaded says that Steven Sotloff is paying the price for US air strikes. So, does  that give you pause or does that make you think about potential ramifications for  Western nations, Australia in particular?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s true that IS are using this as a propaganda  opportunity to try and warn off- not just the United States, this is an  international effort. Well over a hundred countries have agreed at the UN Human  Rights Committee to launch an investigation into the mass atrocity crimes that  have occurred in Iraq. This is an international effort against IS. But of course IS  will use any propaganda opportunity it has to try and frighten off or intimidate  the international community. I think given the many thousands of Iraqis that  have lost their lives, it is important for us an international community, to say that  our responsibility to protect Iraqi citizens has been engaged. Their government  has asked for the support of the international community. I feel so very sad for  Steven Sotloff, for James Foley before him, for any civilian who is caught up in  this fight. We know their names, because of the propaganda efforts of the IS.  We don’t know the names of the thousands of Iraqis who have lost their lives,  thousands of women and children who have been sold into slavery to IS fighters.  So tragic, our hearts go out to their families. We know how important the work is  that foreign correspondents do because without the work of people like Steven  Sotloff and James Foley and our own correspondents who are in war zones  around the world at the moment, the world wouldn’t know about these shocking  events. These people would sink into anonymity for us and sink into,  unfortunately, indifference because we wouldn’t be seeing the impact of IS on  northern Iraq and Syria without the reporting of journalists. But I don’t think we  can do what IS wants us to do and give up the support of the Iraqi Government  because of the propaganda that they launched.

JOURNALIST: So any lessons for the international community then?

PLIBERSEK: Well there is a very strong lesson for the international community  from the events of 2003 when the Iraqi invasion happened without giving proper  time to weapons inspectors to do their work. It happened without credible  evidence of weapons of mass destruction and it was later found to be false, it  happened without international sanction, without the support of many nations  and I think that that is an important lesson and it seems to me that President  Obama who was a strong opponent of the invasion in 2003 has learnt that  lesson, the effort that he’s putting in to building an international coalition to  support the Iraqis and the fact that the Iraqi Government has asked for this  intervention does make it a very different situation. But we need to learn the  lessons of 2003, that’s a mistake that should never be repeated.

JOURNALIST: Ms Plibersek overnight Medicines Sans Frontier has warned that  the world is losing the battle against Ebola. Should Australia be doing more?

PLIBERSEK: Well Australia has cut $7.6 billion from its aid budget. It is the  single largest cut in this year’s budget. One dollar in every five of savings is from  overseas development assistance. This is a real event where Australia could and  should be doing more. But it is difficult to see how that is supported with a $7.6  billion cut to the aid budget. Africa is one of the countries that has suffered most  from these cuts to the aid budget. Our aid to Africa has been reduced  dramatically. Now we were told by the Foreign Minister Julie Bishop that Africa is  a long way away, we’ve got no real responsibility to Africa, why are we involved  in an area so far away from our region? But of course the consequences of a  massive outbreak of Ebola, that health authorities are warning they are finding  difficult to contain, obviously affects us globally. We’ve seen how quickly this  illness can spread and how serious the consequences are.

JOURNALIST: How confident are you the Abbott Government is negotiating  [inaudible]?

PLIBERSEK: Well we’ve received no briefing on any safeguards that might be  negotiated, so we’ll wait and hear what safeguards have been negotiated.

JOURNALIST: The decision to sell uranium was actually made by the Gillard  Government so how far down the track was that Government with negotiating  safeguards?

PLIBERSEK: Well the Gillard Government had long and comprehensive  discussions with the previous government of India. We had a change of  government in Australia and a change of government in the world’s largest  democracy so I think it’s important to hear what their intentions are.



JOURNALIST: Do you still think Australia should be selling uranium to India  then and what are your concerns?

PLIBERSEK: Well India is an important economic partner for Australia and an  important strategic country in our region. And I am delighted by how successful  their elections were, how well run they were and the opportunity that hundreds  of millions of Indians had to vote. As for any comments on uranium I’ll leave  them until we know the details.

JOURNALIST: Can I just get a quick comment on the mining tax repeal,  particularly the School Kids Bonus, is it time to admit that this is a School Kids  Bonus which this government and this economy can’t afford?

PLIBERSEK: Well let me make a few comments about the domestic economy  and the budget. Tony Abbott said a year ago that there would be no cuts to  health, no cuts to education, no change to pensions and no new taxes. He has  broken every one of those promises with this budget. And yesterday we saw a  dirty deal that will leave Australians worse off. We know that the superannuation  cuts will leave someone who is 25 years old now who is earning $55 000 a year  by 2025 they will have missed out on more than $9000. If you’re talking about  older people on higher wages that’s thousands more. When you look at what  that means for retirement savings all together you are talking about easily $100  000 or more for the average worker that they’ll miss out on because instead of  getting 12% into their super, they’ll get 9% of their wage into their  superannuation.

[RECORDING CUTS OUT]



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



