

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  THE TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 3 OCTOBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Iraq, burqa.

LISA WILKINSON, PRESENTER: For more we are joined now by  Communications Minister Malcolm Turnbull here in the studio and from  Parliament House in Canberra Deputy Opposition Leader Tanya Plibersek, good  morning to both of you.

MALCOLM TURNBULL, COMMUNICATIONS MINISTER:Good morning.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hi Lisa, hi  Malcolm.

WILKINSON: Malcolm, if I can start with you, the Defence Minister David  Johnston said overnight that we have to finish the job in Iraq, but isn't this just  the start?

TURNBULL: Well what David is talking about is the importance of standing up  to this so-called Islamic State, which I really don't think we should refer to as an  Islamic State, ISIL is the term that I would rather use. We have got to stand up  to them. We’ve got to ensure that their sort of marauding over in that part of the  Middle East is stopped and we’re joining with our allies and I might add other

countries in the region, Arab countries in the region, Muslim countries in the  region. There is a grand coalition that is saying no to this sort of barbarity.

WILKINSON: There’s been a lot of mission creep on this. Surely to finish the  job properly it is going to take boots on the ground?

TURNBULL: Well it may well do, but as you can see from President Obama’s  lead and from what our Prime Minister has said, the boots on the ground are not  going be American or Australian boots.

WILKINSON: That won't change?

TURNBULL: Well I can't really - you can't rule anything out and if anyone was  going to make a forecast like that it should be the Prime Minister. Clearly foreign  interventions in that part of the world has had, let's say, most generously mixed  success, not a lot of success. It is really important that the major countries in  that area, the major Arab countries in the region, I am talking about Saudi  Arabia and others, take responsibility for securing their own region and for  dealing with an insurgent terrorist group like ISIL.

WILKINSON: Tanya, last time we went into Iraq, Labor didn’t support the  mission, this time you are, will you go as far as boots on the ground if that is  what it takes to finish this off?

PLIBERSEK: No, we don't support Australian troops on the ground in Iraq.  What we support is responding to the Iraqi government's plea to the  international community to protect civilians from imminent threat of mass  atrocity crimes. This is an organisation that kills anyone that disagrees with it,  different religion, you can be the same religion and if you don't agree with their  tactics they will kill you too. They are abducting women and raping, selling  women and children in the marketplace. It is a terrible organisation. The  government of Iraq has asked the international community for help and we are  responding to that plea for help. But we have said we don't support Australian  troops on the ground and we don't believe that there is a case for Australia to be  involved in Syria either at the moment. The situation in Syria is terrible, it is a  humanitarian disaster but we should be helping with extra support for the  neighbouring countries that are dealing with a massive refugee burden from  Syria.

WILKINSON: Alright, let's turn now to the burqa debate. Malcolm, do you like  the Prime Minister, find the burqa confronting?

TURNBULL: What Australians wear is a matter for them and I don't express a  view about other people's choice of clothing, it is a free country. In different

countries, including in some Muslim countries, there are all sorts of rules about  what people can wear and can't wear in public. But in Australia we have always  been very easy going about that. So if people want to put a garment over their  head so you can't see their face, that's their choice. As long as whatever security  arrangements are necessary for a particular place are covered, that is a matter  for them.

WILKINSON: The Prime Minister’s words on Wednesday certainly got Australia  talking. And yesterday we learnt that burqa-wearing women were going to be  confined behind glass in Parliament House. Last night the PM moved to overturn  that decision, is that an embarrassing back down by the Prime Minister?

TURNBULL: Well, not at all. There was a decision by the presiding officers, or  an interim decision by the presiding officers, which the Prime Minister asked  them to reconsider. And I think he has been wise to do that.

WILKINSON: But did the Prime Minister know that that decision was in the  planning?

TUNRBULL: I don't know, I can't comment on that. But can I just say this to  you, very, very few women, Muslim women, wear the full face covering. There  are many Muslim wearing the head scarf, there are many non-Muslim women  that wear a head scarf. I mean nuns used to cover their heads up like that. It’s  not exactly a- it’s not a Muslim monopoly on that. But the full face covering is  very, very rare- it’s not common. I have been in parliament for ten years, I have  only ever seen one woman with a full burqa in the public gallery. So it is not - it  isn't very common and the thing that I am concerned about, I know that Tanya  is because we are on a complete unity ticket on this, we don't want to have  debates like this being turned into some sort of coded attack on the Muslim  community. Can I just say again as I have said here before, the terrorists want  us to demonise and alienate the Muslim community in Australia. The Muslim  community is part of Australia, they are Australians. We have to pull together.  We have to be at this time more than ever united. Because our enemies, ISIL,  the rapists, the beheaders, the torturers that Tanya was talking about so  eloquently before, they want us, they want us to attack Muslims. They want us  to alienate and frighten and demonise the Muslim community so that they don't  feel they are part of Australia and they feel their only home is with an extremist  group. There is no point us doing the terrorists work, we have to pull together.

WILKINSON: Tanya, we ran a poll on the show yesterday and after the Prime  Minister's words on Wednesday, 85% of viewers said that they wanted the burqa  banned. Is the PM just reflecting the community's feelings or did he ignite this  debate?

PLIBERSEK: Look I don't think that there’s- I don’t think that poll reflects the  general Australian community. I think most Australians think wear what you  want, we are a free country. I mean, I said yesterday I don't want to see the  Prime Minister in his speedos, but it is a free country. This is a divisive debate, as  Malcolm said, we are stronger together. We are a stronger community when we  respect and trust one another.

WILKINSON: Okay Tanya, we will have to leave it there. We’ve run out of time,  thank you very much for that. Quickly, Doggies or Rabbitohs?

PLIBERSEK: Bunnies, Bunnies!

WILKINSON: Okay, Malcolm?

TURNBULL: Well I am still getting over the Roosters getting knocked out. I am  for the Bunnies too.

WILKINSON: Okay, seems to be a lot of support for the Bunnies this morning.  Thanks to both of you, have a great weekend.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



