

THE HON MARK BUTLER MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER  MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC 891 ADELAIDE BREAKFAST

WEDNESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: The Government’s disgraceful cuts to defence force salaries; renewable  energy cutting carbon pollution.

HOST: Mark Butler, Federal MP for Port Adelaide and Opposition Climate Change and  Environment spokesman. And Christopher Pyne, Education Minister, Member for Sturt and  Leader of the House. Thank you for coming in.

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: It’s a pleasure.

HOST: Christopher Pyne, why is the Government saying it can’t afford a pay rise for around  160,000 of its public servants? What sort of employer would dud its workers out of a pay rise  that’s well below the rate of inflation? We’re talking about 1.5 per cent.

PYNE: Well, I’m not sure you’re correct about all public servants. The only fact that I’m aware of  at this stage is the Defence Department has been offered a 1.5 per cent pay rise. I’m not sure  that applies to all public servants.

HOST: I think the Prime Minister’s flagging that it will.

PYNE: I haven’t seen a public announcement of that, but dealing with the Defence Department,  which we know has definitely been announced, the Labor Party and the Public Service Union  want a 12.5 per cent pay rise, which they know would break the Federal budget. We’ve had six  years of -

HOST: But no one believes that. No one takes that seriously.



PYNE: Well, I’m glad no one takes Labor seriously, but that’s what they think is a reasonable  and rational proposal. We’ve has six years of spending profligacy under Labor where debt was  rising to $667 billion, accumulated deficits of $123 billion into the future. Labor never saw a  spending idea they didn’t want to fund. And the electors elected us last year to fix that. We think  1.5 per cent is what the taxpayer can afford and that’s what we’re talking about; we’re talking  about what the taxpayer can pay.

HOST: What about your pay?

PYNE: As a Minister, I could be wrong, a couple of months ago our pay rise was frozen.

HOST: Before that in the last two years, you had three pay rises -

PYNE: My pay’s been frozen. Not even 1.5 per cent.

HOST: But before that in the past two years you had three pay rises in two years, all Federal  MPs. Pay for a backbencher leapt by $54,000, over a $1,000 a week to $195,000. The top 18  departmental bosses got rises of more than five per cent.

PYNE: Well, Labor made those decisions. They were in government.

HOST: [inaudible]

PYNE: Well, on the advice of the remuneration tribunal. It has always been my practice in 21  years not to interfere with these decisions being made by the remuneration tribunal. But that  was before we -

HOST: $50,000 a year!

PYNE: My understanding is that the first opportunity that this Government had to deal with  ministerial salaries, we froze them. My salary has been frozen. I am not benefitting more than  anybody in the Defence Department by these decisions and 1.5 per cent -

HOST: But you’re not going off to get shot at either.

PYNE: There are 600 Australians in the Middle East out of 57,000 members of the defence  forces, and that kind of heart-tugging, emotive argument doesn’t stack up against the facts.  There are 600 Australian defence personnel who’ve been sent to Iraq -

HOST: Are they getting more than 1.5 per cent?

PYNE: They are getting bonuses on top of their usual salaries.

HOST: Combat allowance?

PYNE: I heard the representative of the defence services union commenting on this on the radio  yesterday. It was pointed out to him by an ABC journalist that there are 57,000 defence  personnel of which 600 will be in the Middle East and they’ll all be paid more for being there.

HOST: Mark Butler? Are you happy with the 1.5 per cent?

SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER MARK  BUTLER: There are two problems with what Christopher said. He said, first of all, that the ADF  personnel were offered a pay rise. The unique thing about ADF personnel is that they don’t get  to bargain. They don’t get to negotiate. They don’t have a right to take industrial action as pretty  much the rest of the Australian workforce do. Because of the nature of the defence force, they  are entirely reliant on the goodwill of the Prime Minister of the day. They have no capacity to try  and arm-wrestle or put industrial pressure on the Government to get a better increase than this,  which is why Bill Shorten wrote to Tony Abbott to try and get him to lift the deal. There was no  offer. There was a ‘take it or leave it’ arrangement that the Government decided to impose on  the ADF.

The other thing is that, for all that Christopher cries crocodile tears about the budget, if you look  at the budget papers and I have - Joe Hockey’s budget, not Wayne Swan’s - Joe Hockey  budgeted for an increase in the defence wages bill of 3.9 per cent per year each year over the  next four years, while there was an increase in numbers in defence of barely one per cent over  the whole four-year period. It is quite clear that the Government budgeted for a reasonable pay  increase. Why they have decided to dud ADF personnel is an absolute mystery to me. But more  importantly, it’s an absolute mystery to the ADF.

HOST: Elaine has called from South Adelaide. Good morning, Elaine.

CALLER ELAINE: Good morning. I would just like to ask Christopher Pyne how come they  can’t afford to give our soldiers, our fighting defence forces, a decent raise when they’re still  talking about this huge paid parental leave for rich ladies getting paid thousands of dollars to  have babies? Their priorities are just absolutely ridiculous.

HOST: Christopher Pyne?

PYNE: Well that sounds like it’s straight of central casting of South Terrace and the Labor  Party’s talking points. The reality is that less than two per cent of women in the workforce earn  over $100,000. The vast majority earn well below average weekly earnings. And the reality is  that the Paid Parental Leave scheme is exactly the kind of treatment for women in the workforce  as people who go on holiday leave with extra leave loading, people who take sick leave get  paid. We’re simply saying that women who are in the workforce and have a baby should  continue to be paid at that rate for six months. I agree it’s generous and I think it’s absolutely a  justifiable scheme and it sits quite alone from decisions about defence forces pay because it’s

completely paid for by the top 10 per cent of companies in Australia who will pay an extra levy in  order to pay for the Parental Paid Leave scheme. So in fact it will cost absolutely nothing from  the budget because the levy will pay for it.

HOST: Has the Government considered getting some of the big weapons manufacturers to top  up the pay of the soldiers then? Would you have a similar scheme?

PYNE: Let’s be honest about this. Labor in seven years; I’ve never heard them say that they  would not fund a spending measure. Tens of billions of dollars of profligate spending occurred  under Labor -

HOST: Can you name one where they were defeated?

BUTLER: Let me name one; the fastest growing area of health expenditure, the private health  insurance rebate. We tried time and time again to get that means-tested so that people on very  significant incomes would not be subsidised by the Government to have their private health  insurance paid. That’s something that the now government opposed in opposition every time we  put it up in Parliament -

PYNE: They love hitting people on private health insurance.

BUTLER: You love hitting pensioners and low income earners with a Medicare tax.

PYNE: 68 per cent of people in my electorate have got private health insurance. Many of them  are pensioners and self-funded retirees and are not rich people and they are now struggling  because of the private health insurance changes that Labor put through.

BUTLER: What rubbish! They were untouched by that proposal -

PYNE: [inaudible] -

BUTLER: [inaudible] it only applied to people on incomes over $250,000 -

PYNE: Well, I can tell you it still hurts in my electorate.

HOST: Mark Butler, should coal-fired electricity and coal exports be phased out?

BUTLER: Our position on this is very different to the Government’s. We take the view that coal  is not going to disappear as the world’s major energy source any time soon. But if you are going  to deal with the very serious problem that it creates for the climate with carbon polluting the  atmosphere you need to have a broad array of policies. You need to have a cap on carbon  pollution. You need to impose a price on that carbon pollution so that coal-fired power stations  aren’t spewing enormous amounts of pollution into the atmosphere with no cost, and you need  to support the development of renewable energy technologies. Now all of those things -



HOST: So you don’t think it should be phased out?

BUTLER: I think what happens then is that a market emerges and decisions are made on  cleaner ways of making energy. South Australia is a great example -

HOST: So you want it phased out?

BUTLER: I don’t think those decisions should be made from Canberra. Canberra makes the  decisions to set up a proper market with a cap on carbon pollution [inaudible] -

HOST: You said, you said, hang on. I want to know what you’re trying to do.

HOST: You want to set up a market with a goal of phasing it out?

BUTLER: Yes. I think everyone agrees that over a period of time - it will be a fairly extended  period of time - we’ll move to more renewable energy sources.

HOST: What? Decades?

BUTLER: I think parts of the world will move at different paces, but here in South Australia,  because of the policies here, we are now at well over 30 per cent renewable energy. We’ve  dropped our carbon pollution from electricity generation in the last 8-9 years by fully one-third. If  the rest of the country, let alone the rest of the world, had done that we’d be in a massively  different position. We’ve done that because coal has been replaced by gas, which is much less  polluting than coal and because of the extraordinary growth in wind and solar power here in  South Australia -

HOST: The base-load power is still brown coal.

BUTLER: No, the base-load power is gas here. The brown coal power stations up in the Iron  Triangle have not been operating significantly. The key base-load power here is gas supported  by wind.

HOST: Supported by an interconnector with Victoria, which is run by coal-fired power stations.

BUTLER: There’s not much base-load power coming in from Victoria. If anything there are  periods of time where we’re exporting wind power to Victoria. There have been days -

HOST: Even when the wind turbines are turning, is it correct that coal-fired power stations have  to continue running in this country so that when the wind stops they’re able to provide power  immediately?

HOST: What you’ll find is that brown coal fired power stations across the country from LaTrobe  Valley up into Port Augusta have been largely mothballed over the last few years because of the  growth in cleaner energy sources, gas and wind. Now what’s happening is that renewable  energy investment has frozen because of the uncertainty over the Renewable Energy Target  introduced by Tony Abbott, and because of the spike in gas prices, the coal-fired power stations  are in the process of being turned back on. We’ve already had one in Queensland. We’re likely  to see it elsewhere. It has already seen our carbon pollution from electricity start to increase  over the last four months.

HOST: Chris Pyne, do you like coal?

PYNE: Well, I’m absolutely amazed. Coal is our second highest export. Iron ore, coal, education  and gold; they’re our four highest export industries. Coal brings enormous wealth to Australia in  exports. It’s one of the basics of our cost of living, quality of life that we have in Australia and  Mark Butler’s just said on ABC Radio Adelaide that coal exports should be phased out. Now that  will cost our country tremendous wealth and will hurt our living standards and cost tens of  thousands of jobs. It’s an extraordinary thing for him to have said and I don’t support it. I support  our Direct Action plan, which will improve the technology around coal, that will put more effort  into building trees and agricultural practices -

HOST: I think you grow trees.

PYNE: Emissions reductions targets of five per cent on 2000 levels. But I certainly don’t agree  with Labor or Mark Butler that coal exports should be phased out.

BUTLER: What we were talking about then was the coal used in power generation, not all coal.  We were talking about electricity. The biggest export from Australia is coking coal, which is used  in the production of steel -

HOST: [inaudible]

BUTLER: We don’t have a way to make steel without coking coal -

HOST: The question was - I wrote it down, I’ll read it again. Mark Butler, should coal-fired  electricity and coal exports be phased out?

BUTLER: Well I assumed that you were talking about thermal coal, which is for power. If you’re  asking about coal that’s for the making of steel, that’s a very different -

HOST: So that’s good coal?

BUTLER: Well, there’s no other way of making steel without coal. There are other ways of  making electricity. There’s renewable power. There’s gas-fired power. What we need to do is

have a think about both of those different markets because - not withstanding Christopher’s  pretty basic attempt to try and conflate them - they are two entirely different markets.

HOST: Chris Pyne, where will you get the $2.5 billion to pay heavy polluters under Direct  Action?

PYNE: Well, the Direct Action policy is fully costed as part of the budget.

HOST: But we know the budget’s in tatters. Most of your budget, the key revenue measures are  still not through.

PYNE: That’s not true. About 70 per cent of the budget is through the Senate.

HOST: 70 per cent?

PYNE: At least 70 per cent.

HOST: So you’ve got all the money you need?

PYNE: The money is there in the budget. It’s absolutely there in the budget.

HOST: Okay. So all your revenue measures are fine?

PYNE: We would like the entire budget to be passed by the Senate. We’re a long way from  giving up on that process. We’re only six months from the budget. The Labor Party introduced  things that they were collecting revenue on that didn’t pass in the Senate until two years later. In  fact, when we won the election last year there was still measures from the budget two years  before that Labor hadn’t even attempted to get through the Senate. So I don’t think Labor’s in a  position to lecture us about getting things to the Senate in time.

HOST: Mark Butler, have you sunk the boat your Immigration Spokesman was on? He was sort  of musing about the merits of turning back the boats and supporting that policy. I imagine  people like you would take a very dim view on that.

BUTLER: Our view about turn-backs has been very clear for a number of years.

HOST: Well it wasn’t for a few weeks there, about a week there.

BUTLER: I think Richard got engaged in some hypothetical discussion. But it has been quite  clear that our position about the lack of safety, going on advice provided to us by very senior  members of the Navy over the last couple of years, has never been answered properly by this  government.

HOST: That was his position -



BUTLER: It’s quite clear; that these turn-backs cannot be done safely. There is no guarantee  about the safety -

PYNE: [inaudible]

BUTLER: We don’t know that. This is something that your government refuses to tell the  Australian people about. We learn more about these things from the Indonesian media than we  do from our own government.

PYNE: Turn-backs has worked. Labor wants to restart the boats and we stopped them. At the  next election, there’ll be a very stark choice. Do you want to go back to the Gillard/Rudd policies  of starting the boats where there were 50,000 unauthorised boat arrivals, at least 1,200 deaths  at sea that we know of, the reopening of the Curtin detention centre and Inverbrackie, billions  and billions of dollars in taxpayers’ money being spent because Labor can’t make the tough  decisions, or do you want to keep the boats stopped by re-electing the Coalition Government?

HOST: You don’t need talking points. You’ve got them programmed in.

BUTLER: He’s a walking talking point.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SAMANTHA REGIONE 0412 642 387

