

THE HON MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN  AFFAIRS  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR

IMMIGRATION

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS SATURDAY AGENDA  SATURDAY, 22 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/ S: FoFA, Asylum Seekers.

DAVID LISPON: Lets now go to the Shadow Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign  Affairs, Matt Thistlethwaite. Matt thanks for joining us today, I just want to start with  the FoFA changes, now you were on a Committee that looked at FoFA, these

financial advice rules after the Storm and Trio collapses, why originally were these  protections put in place?

SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  IMMIGRATION, MATT THISTLETHWAITE: Well because of those collapses. I  was part of the Committee that took the evidence from retirees who'd invested their  whole life savings in financial products on the advice of their accountant, on the  advice of their financial adviser that carried these trailing commissions and other  fees and payments that the investors weren't aware that they were making and as a  result of that these financial products collapsed and we saw retirees lose the lot. In  some cases some of these retirees had re-mortgaged their houses after they'd  retired from work, re-mortgaged their houses on the advice of their accountants to  go into these dodgy financial products and they'd lost the lot, so it was as a result of  that, that Labor acted and put in place a new form of regulation that ensured that  advisers have to act in the best interests of their clients, and that every two years  the adviser has to sit down with their client and explain to them the fees and  commissions that are being paid on the products that they're in. Now we don't think  that is unreasonable regulation and to have this Government seek to water down  those reforms will see retirees, superannuants lose out in this process.

LISPON: As we heard from Senator Cormann there he is saying that the  Government is not seeking to remove this best interest test for financial advisers.

THISTLETHWAITE: Look that's pure semantics and rhetoric, David the Australian  people should not fall for this. What they are doing is leaving the test in place but  watering it down, making it easier for unscrupulous financial advisers to act in a  shifty manner and eventually we may see some investors, retirees lose out when  dealing with particular financial products. So we think the integrity of that test to act  in the best interests of the client should be maintained and that means that the  adviser has to act reasonably, they have to assess the client's situation, they have to  look at all the information that's available and provide that to the client and  importantly, the last step in that process, is to consider any other information that  they see is relevant and advice the client of that. Now we don't think that's  unreasonable that that last step of the test should remain in place.

LISPON: Is there some room for reform? Matthias Cormann there, the Finance  Minister suggesting that one of the clauses is a catch all clause and that that is one  area that would need to go.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well that was the clause that I was just referring to and it's a  stepped process and it's outlined in the Act that ensuring that all of the available  information is provided to the client, that there's no conflicts. if there are conflicts  that they're disclosed and that the best advise is being given to the client, and the  final step is to consider any relevant information that the adviser thinks the client  should know about and advise that to the client. The other point to make here is  that some of the financial institutions are saying 'well we don't know what the best  interest duty means', that's not true because it's stepped out in the Act and to assist  that ASIC goes further and provides a set of guidelines which detail what the adviser  should go through to properly advise the client.

LISPON: Okay, so the bottom line, do you believe this will hurt the nest eggs of  Australians?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well, look, think about it, what this is doing is giving big banks  and big finance companies a break. It's removing some of the regulation that we  have in place to protect mum and dad investors, to protect retirees from  unscrupulous advisers. Now I don't think that it's unreasonable to say that we've got  a level of regulations on big banks, big finance companies to say that they've got to  act in the interests particularly of vulnerable clients who may not know how the  system works and if you're watering that down then it allows unscrupulous advisers  to act in a shifty manner and people may lose.

LISPON: Okay I just want to get your thoughts on your current portfolio area and  that is of course Foreign Affairs, with the Prime Minister in Papua New Guinea and  suggesting through his counterpart Peter O'Neill of course that asylum seekers that  are being housed on Manus Island may be resettled in PNG some time after May  when the resettlement laws are going to go to PNG Parliament. How confident are  you that this will happen within a reasonable time frame?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well we're hopeful that it's dealt with swiftly. It's been seven  months now since the Abbott Government came to office and it's apparent that  they've done nothing on this important issue of working with the PNG Government  on resettlement of people who are in the Manus Island processing centre and it's  swift time that we do get on with the job of processing these refugees, that should  be done in accordance with the Convention, that is what was envisaged when Labor  signed the Regional Resettlement Arrangement. It's obviously working because this  Government has left it in place but they now need to get on with the job of working  with the PNG Government on resettlement.

LISPON: What about PNG though saying that they will not accept all of the  refugees on Manus Island. Do you have any belief that any other Pacific nations will  accept some of the asylum seekers?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well what's envisaged with the Regional Resettlement  Arrangement is that people will be processed in accordance with the UNHCR  Convention, that's what's specified in the Agreement, that was the approach that  Labor took in negotiating with it and that's the approach that should be taken in this  respect. It's always available for PNG to work with the United Nations High  Commission for Refuges in assessing the claims and ensuring that we're working  within the bounds of the Convention and that's what should properly occur here.

LISPON: Matt Thistlethwaite, we'll have to leave it there thanks very much for your  time.

THISTLETHWAITE: Pleasure David.

ENDS

