Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Twenty-one weeks without successful people smuggling ventures

Friday, 16 May 2014

The latest update from Operation Sovereign Borders reveals a total of 21 weeks  have now passed since the last successful people smuggling venture to Australia,  enabling the government's effective border policies to deliver strong dividends to the  Australian people, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott  Morrison said today.

'Another week under Operation Sovereign Borders has passed without a successful  people smuggling venture. There has been no post-monsoon surge in illegal arrivals  under the government's policies,' Minister Morrison said.

'The last successful people smuggling venture to have arrived in Australia was on 19  December last year. Over the same 21 week period in 2012/13 under Labor, an  illegal boat arrived at the rate of almost one per day and a total of around 9 000  people arrived.

'The benefits of this sustained achievement in preventing illegal arrivals are being  realised with significant dividends outlined in this week's budget - in financial,  humanitarian and reform terms:

 The government has saved the budget AUD2.5 billion in preventing  people arriving illegally by boat. This is in contrast to Labor's years of  blow outs which reached AUD11.5 billion. A further AUD283 million is  saved through the closure of six detention centres and AUD267 million  in savings will be realised by abolishing Labor's 4 000 family places for  illegal maritime arrivals.

 No one is dying at sea. In addition, the government will provide 20 000  places from within our refugee and humanitarian programme to people  waiting in often desperate circumstances around the world whose  chances at resettlement were blocked by those who arrived illegally  under Labor.

 The government is embarking on a major reform of Australia's border  agencies, establishing the Australian Border Force (ABF) to achieve  more integrated, more strategic and ultimately more effective border  operations, helping to build a stronger and more secure nation.

'We are doing what we said we would do, meeting our commitment to stop the boats.

'However the government will remain vigilant on our border through the continued  application of our policies, particularly maritime operations, and strong resolve  against people smugglers,' Minister Morrison said.



