Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Changes to resettlement another blow to people  smugglers

Wednesday, 19 November 2014

Interview with Chris Uhlman, ABC AM Programme

Chris Uhlmann: Scott Morrison is the Immigration Minister, good morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Chris.

Uhlmann: Scott Morrison can you tell us what you are doing and why?

Minister Morrison: We're taking the sugar off the table. That's what we're doing.  We're trying to stop people thinking that it's ok to come into Indonesia and use that  as a waiting ground to get to Australia. Indonesia is not a refugee generating  country, it's a transit country and it's used by smugglers and we've had great  success in stopping people coming to Australia by boat and for most of that time  over the past year that has seen a significant reduction of people moving into  Indonesia. Now, in recent months we've seen a change to that and that's because  people think they can transit and sit in Indonesia and use that as a place to gain  access to Australia. Now, this is designed to stop people flowing into Indonesia and  to support Indonesia and for them not to become a destination country where people  will wait just to get a visa to Australia. So, it's taking the sugar off the table.

Uhlmann: But to be clear, it does apply to people who have been processed by the  UN and found to be refugees?

Minister Morrison: What it does is it says that if you arrived in Indonesia before July  1 then if you've been processed in Indonesia then we're still taking 450 people a  year. It was 600, so it's a reduction of 150 places and they're the cases that we will  take. But if you came to Indonesia thinking you'd get a visa in Australia, well the  answer is no.

Uhlmann: Are there any exceptions post-July 1?

Minister Morrison: No.

Uhlmann: Now, does it apply to other transit countries like Malaysia?

Minister Morrison: Well, no and in Malaysia in particular what we do in Malaysia  and we take well over 1000, I think around 1500 people out of Malaysia, and they  are predominately refugees from Myanmar. So they are people that largely have

gone to countries of first asylum. The Refugee Convention wasn't set up so people  can go forum shopping, it was to provide support and protection to people and that's  what our programme does. We're not going to do it through smugglers, whether it's  in Indonesia or anywhere else.

Uhlmann: You mentioned the Refugee Convention a number of times in the  conversations we've had before. You clearly have little time for it, why doesn't  Australia pull out of it?

Minister Morrison: Well no, that's not my view at all and I've never said that. We do  support the convention. But what we don't support is how that convention is abused  by smugglers who try and leverage people into Australia through whatever means  they can - and what we know now is people smugglers are smuggling people into  Indonesia for the purpose of trying to get resettlement in Australia by this other  method. Now that's not good and supportive of our friend and neighbour Indonesia  and as former president Yudhoyono said, in advice to Australia, you've got to take  the sugar off the table and that's what we're doing.

Uhlmann: Indonesia is our friend and neighbour. The Indonesian President was just  here for the G20. Did the Prime Minister discuss this move with him?

Minister Morrison: I'm not in those meetings but I do know this plan was discussed  with the Indonesian Government and has been over the last several weeks.

Uhlmann: You would expect though that if the Indonesian President was here that  the Prime Minister might raise something like this with him and you would know  about that.

Minister Morrison: I don't sit in on those meetings and I don't comment on those  meetings. What I do know is the Indonesian Government was fully appraised of this  decision prior to it being made and advised to the public.

Uhlmann: And what has been the response of the Indonesian Government?

Minister Morrison: I will let the Indonesian Government speak for themselves.  There is a commentary today from an Immigration spokesperson who made a  prediction this would see less people coming into Indonesia and that is the intention  of this decision.

Uhlmann: That Indonesian immigration official I think also said the impact on  Indonesia would be huge, and asylum-seekers would stay in Indonesia for longer.  That can't be good for Indonesia.

Minister Morrison: We are happy to work with Indonesia in any way we can to  reduce the number of people in Indonesia but not through the process of  encouraging more people to come to Indonesia because they think they will get a  visa to Australia. The people smugglers adapt their business model and their  business model now seeks to bring people into Indonesia to queue up and wait there  rather than stay where they can gain a visa to Australia. We resettle about 2700  people who are Afghans largely out of countries of first asylum whether that is in

Pakistan or Iran or other places. We have got 4400 places that will be going to  people who are affected by the Syria and Iraq conflicts so we are meeting our  obligations, we are just not going to meet the expectations of people smugglers  because we are going to take the sugar off the table.

Uhlmann: As you say though people do adapt to changing circumstances and what  if people in Indonesia now believe they have no other choice than to board boats to  Australia?

Minister Morrison: They know the response they will get if they try that because we  have already closed that way by boat and people all the way up the chain,  particularly the people smugglers, understand the way to Australia by boat is closed.

Uhlmann: Now the Indonesians say their detention centres are over capacity, is  Australia going to be giving any more money to Indonesia to assist with that?

Minister Morrison: We are continuing the support we give to Indonesia in that  regard and we are always open to how we can best deploy that in supporting  Indonesia. That is something we have maintained all the way through this process  and we are the most significant supporter and contributor with Indonesia in  supporting them throughout their community detention network. I have visited many  of those places myself and we do that also through the IOM who do a very good job  up there in supporting people in that country but what we don't want to see is that  number increasing by smugglers bringing more people into Indonesia.

Uhlmann: Another part of your plan of course was to get Temporary Protection  Visas back again, you are still trying to get that through the Senate. Are you still  confident you can do that? There are only two weeks of the Parliamentary sitting  year left.

Minister Morrison: We continue to discuss those matters with the crossbenchers  and I continue to have very positive discussions. The position of the Palmer United  Party is well known. I am not going to predict the actions of the Senate. I am just  going to keep doing my job and working with the crossbench Senators because  Labor are opposed to Temporary Protection visas, they are opposed to stronger  maritime powers for turn-backs, they are opposed to clearing the backlog of 30,000  places. If we go on the way we are and that bill is not passed it is going to take  seven years and more to clear the backlog of 30,000 people. We think we can do  that in less than three years and hopefully even sooner with the measures we have  proposed. Labor is just going to see people wait longer and longer in Australia for  people they let in and remain in uncertainty with no decision.

Uhlmann: Scott Morrison, thank you.

Minister Morrison: Thank you very much Chris.



