Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP



Sunday, 14 September 2014

Interview with Andrew Bolt, the Bolt Report

Andrew Bolt: Joining me is the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison, a member of  the National Security Committee. Thank you for joining me.

Minister Morrison: Good morning, Andrew.

Bolt: The Mufti says if we go into Iraq, we will face greater threats at home. Change  our policies or else. It almost sounds like a threat. Are you happy with his  comments?

Minister Morrison: Well, I don't accept those comments, and Australia will always  act in our national interest. And I think it's positive that there are more positive voices  that are out there, such as Jamal Rifi and others who I think understand the very real  risk to all Australians here, and are working productively and positively with the  government, and other agencies, to ensure that we can keep Australia safe. I mean,  we should be aware of this rise in threat level, while we should be assured in terms  of the competence of our agencies. And the other thing we should never be, Andrew,  is we should never be intimidated by this. There is no excuse for terrorism, there is  no excuse for extremism, and there's certainly no justification for it, and we'll act in  our national interest.

Bolt: I'm just wondering if there is a link here, though. The Greens say the same,  you know. 'we-', the quote, 'we cannot ignore the impact of military engagement in  Iraq and the Middle East, and increasing the risk at home.' Is the fact that we've…

Minister Morrison: Well, I think we…

Bolt: We're joining the US in Iraq the reason the threat level has been raised?

Minister Morrison: No, and absolutely not. I think that view fundamentally  misunderstands Australia's situation. Australia has always been seen as a legitimate  target by terrorists and extremists, because of who we are and what we're about,  and what we represent. That has always been the case. Those comments reflect  what our advice is, and particularly what David Irvine and others have stated, who  know something about these issues. So therefore, no, I don't accept that as a  proposition. We need to act in our interests. We can never be intimidated by  terrorists and extremists. And I know the Australian community strongly supports a  very strong stand on this, in standing up for our values and our way of life. We  should get on with our way of life in this country, and never feel intimidated by  terrorists.

Bolt: The Sunday Telegraph reports today that our defence security authority sent  out a memo warning that a uniformed officer was approached in Sydney by a group  of young men, and told, quote, 'go to the Middle East, so we can blow your effing  head off, you…' expletive. It is going into Iraq likely to enrage some jihadists back  here?

Minister Morrison: They don't need any excuse, Andrew, and I think that's the point  I'm making. People will do stupid things and say stupid and offensive things, like has  occurred on this occasion. I mean these characters are just idiots, and they should  be dealt with by the appropriate authorities wherever that opportunity presents itself.  Our defence forces are under no change in their standing orders about how they  conduct themselves, but obviously with the change in threat levels, the implications  of that are being followed through on with all our agencies, not just in the military, but  in my own agencies, Immigration and Border Protection, and what's happening at the  airports, and so on.

Bolt: Well, you've cancelled dozens of passports of Australian jihadists wanting to go  over to Syria and Iraq to fight. Now they're here and angry, and some threatening  officers in the street, and possibly dangerous. Why don't - Why don't you just let  them go. And I'm being brutal here, let them go, fight and maybe be killed, rather  than having them here and posing a threat to us?

Minister Morrison: Well, there are two very good reasons why we shouldn't let them  go, and one is that if we think we just let them go over there and they won't then  have an influence to those back here in Australia, we're being extraordinarily naive. I  mean in today's age, they have the ability, as they're being further radicalised  overseas, to continue to influence, and recruit, and proselytise those who are back in  Australia. When they leave this country they're at a fairly low to moderate level of  radicalisation. They're just people full of some stupid and dangerous ideas. When  they go overseas, they get converted through the death cult into quite well-trained  assassins. Now, that's not what we want to see that happen. The second part is, that  we need to ensure that we're working with those here in our community, in Australia,  to try to counter the radicalisation message. And I think that's a very important part of  the government's program, in working with communities across Australia to help  them, help their own communities, not to fall prey and subject to this sort of  madness.

Bolt: Now, the execution on video apparently of British aid worker David Haines.  How do you read these grisly videos? Is it to warn us to stay away, or do you think  it's actually an attempt by the Islamic State to provoke us so much that we go in? Is  that what they really want, for us to actually go to the Middle East and fight?

Minister Morrison: Well, whatever is in the mind of these madmen is always going  to be difficult to determine. I think the intent is certainly to try to intimidate, and to try  and get a message through to their own people in countries such as Australia or  elsewhere. And that's why the only response that is really going to make an impact  here is the sort of response that they would understand. Now, you would see  already… I think the Americans are now getting a very clear view about the sort of  mission that is necessary in both Iraq and in Syria. There is a coalition which is being  formed across the Middle East to take part in that. Obviously Australia will consider

any specific request that comes as a result of those activities. But we cannot be  intimidated by this. And I know I've said it a couple of times already. Yes, we must be  aware, and I am very assured by the professionalism of our agencies, but we can't  be intimidated by this and we won't be.

Bolt: Now, the threat here is clearly from Muslim jihadists. Does that show that mass  emigration from the Middle East to Australia was a mistake or badly handled?

Minister Morrison: Well, immigration issues can have generational consequences.  That's the case regardless of what group or what intake it's been at any one time,  and it's not just in Australia but any countries around the world. But I genuinely  don't…

Bolt: But it's not regardless…

Minister Morrison: Think that's the point here…

Bolt: Scott, it's not regardless of which nationality. It is one particular region that's  causing… that immigration's from is causing these kinds of threats. There's no other  region that's done this.

Minister Morrison: Yes. My point is that we're dealing with criminals and terrorists  here, and that's what we have to focus on. That's what the government is going to  continue to focus on. We're not going to get distracted by other issues. What we  need to focus on is ensuring that Australia's interests are protected, there's a cure,  that we're responding in the right way, in a proportionate way that ensures  Australians are kept safe. That includes engaging with all communities across  Australia in a very sober way, but in a very effective way. It's our job to manage the  threat, not to escalate it.

Bolt: I understand that, but clearly there's a link between the intake we took from the  Lebanese civil war, and, as you say, a generation later, what we're facing now. I'm  just wondering. You're now offering 4400 places, just this year alone, to refugees  from Iraq and Syria. Letting in extra refugees from the Lebanese civil war created  security concerns today, are you repeating the same mistake?

Minister Morrison: No, I'm not, because what we're doing with those 4400 intake, is  we're predominantly talking there about persecuted Christian minorities in the Middle  East…

Bolt: Is that different to then if… Christians are different from Muslims in that sense?

Minister Morrison: My point is we're doing it through a proper process. We're doing  it with proper security and other checks that are done as part of our front door  refugee and humanitarian program, as opposed to the chaos we saw under the  previous government, where 50 000 people turned up on over 800 boats. We've got  control of our borders again, Andrew, and as a result we're able to put in place  proper programs with the right checks and balances. The sorts of immigration you're  referring to in previous cases were done in a very different way.

Bolt: Scott Morrison, thank you very much for your time.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot, Andrew.



