Minister for Immigration Scott Morrison

Regional Resettlement Arrangement, Cambodia visit,  children in detention

Thursday, 10 April 2014

Interview with Sarah Ferguson, ABC 7.30 Program

Sarah Ferguson: It's been nearly four months now since a boat carrying asylum  seekers reached Australia. It's a good start to the year for a government whose  mantra is to stop the boats. But questions still remain about how asylum seekers will  be processed on Nauru and PNG's Manus Island. And then there are the hints that  Australia will strike a deal with Cambodia to process asylum seekers there. And here  in Australia and in offshore detention, hundreds of children remain indefinitely  detained.

The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison joins me now.

Scott Morrison, welcome to the program.

Minister Morrison: G'day, Sarah.

Ferguson: What's the latest on Nauru? Is there any move on the settlement of  asylum seekers in Nauru?

Minister Morrison: Well there is and I met today with David Adeang, the Justice  Minister, and Charmaine Scotty, the Home Affairs Minister in our Ministerial Forum.  We'll have 60 persons who will have decisions handed down within the next month at  a minimum, and then beyond that, each month we're expecting at least that pace of  decisions. Now that comes on top of the announcement we made last week about  things in Manus Island and similar progress there on processing, so we're pleased  with that progress.

Ferguson: So what happens to those 60 people? Are you also undertaking to pay  for the costs of all those refugees as they're settled on Nauru, as you have on  Manus?

Minister Morrison: Well that's right. That is the nature of the arrangement that was  put together by the previous government to meet the costs of what will be permanent  resettlement for those found to be refugees on Manus Island in PNG.

Ferguson: So what kind of costs are we talking about in both places?

Minister Morrison: Well at this stage, it's still very early days. In Nauru, for example,  the agreement was never there for permanent resettlement in Nauru, but there will  be a lengthy period of temporary settlement in…

Ferguson: You must have some idea about the costs. Everyone's talking now about  budgets, heavy lifting.

Minister Morrison: Well, that's true, and that's why it's important that we've been  gone now 16 weeks without a boat arriving. If we'd still had people arriving, even at  that reduced level before Christmas of around 300 a month, then I think these costs  would certainly be getting completely out of control, as they had under the previous  government.

Ferguson: So just to go back to that though, for what they are. What kind of costs  are we talking about on Nauru first?

Minister Morrison: Well there's a mixture. There's schooling costs, there's health  costs and they'll continue to be provided out of the centres for those who are being  temporarily resettled in Nauru. So there are infrastructure and service costs that are  provide through the Nauruan Government, but there will be a very simple payment  made to those on Nauru who are resettled there at local living conditions levels for  the period of time in which they're there.

Ferguson: And on Manus Island, those are indefinite costs. Are we going to pay  those?

Minister Morrison: Well in Manus Island we're looking at a different resettlement  model which - and that is still being worked through with the expert panel that Dame  Carol Kidu is chairing in PNG and we're waiting for that report to come back before  we get into the specific costs on that arrangement.

Ferguson: Alright. Now you have been in PNG recently. I noticed that you said that  tensions in the detention centre there have declined.

Minister Morrison: True.

Ferguson: You said because Transfield have taken over. You said that in an  interview.

Minister Morrison: Yes.

Ferguson: Are you saying that G4S was responsible for the violence that  happened?

Minister Morrison: Well, no, I'm not necessarily saying that at all. I mean, that's a  matter for investigations to conclude.

Ferguson: No - I'm sorry - forgive me for interrupting, but you said, '… because  Transfield have taken over,' in that interview.

Minister Morrison: There were tensions before they arrived and they've adopted  some different procedures in how they're managing the centre internally and I think  those initial changes have yielded some real positive results and the tension levels in  the centres have declined. I had Lieutenant-General Campbell there just before I  was in Port Moresby and he reported the same to me. So, I'm pleased with that and  was one of the reasons we integrated the contracts between Manus Island and  Nauru and now we're on the same playing field, if you like, in terms of the  arrangements administratively and I think that's yielding good results.

Ferguson: And does that include having the local staff be allowed back into the  compounds? 'Cause I know that's something that G4S did straight away. Given the  violence that had occurred, the role of local staff, they were kept out of the  compounds. Are they now back in again?

Minister Morrison: No, and that was a common-sense, I think, response from G4S  at the time and Transfield, through their service providers, are doing the same thing.  Now, that's not necessarily a permanent arrangement, and when it is safe to do so  and when the appropriate arrangements are in place, then I imagine there'll be a  transition to more regular ways of doing things up there.

Ferguson: You say the tension's declining, but it's not what the detainees are  saying. They're saying that local guards in particular - and there've been a number of  occasions where they're threatening to kill them, they're holding up machetes, they're  making gestures like that (moves hand over throat) across their throat. One went so  far as to allege that a guard had said he would kill him and he would eat him. It  doesn't sound like a safe place.

Minister Morrison: Well they're very, very strong allegations that are being made  and I can't substantiate those. I'm not sure whether they could be substantiated in  terms of how you put them forward, either. What I do know is the reports that I'm  getting from the people who are managing the centre demonstrate that the normal  behaviour in the centre and the levels of tensions that were previously at a higher  level have been reduced.

Ferguson: You got it wrong before. You said that it was a safe - it was much safer  for the detainees were they to remain inside the centre. That proved to be  egregiously wrong.

Minister Morrison: Well we'll wait for the investigation before we make any major  conclusions on that, Sarah.

Ferguson: What I'm saying is the information was wrong before. Could it be wrong  this time?

Minister Morrison: Well, this isn't just information I've had reported for me up there.  This was seen first-hand by Lieutenant-General Campbell and the deputy secretary  of the department, who were there the same week. I mean, we have seen the way  that Transfield operate. I think they have shown real promise in the way they've  transitioned the services there. And remember, they're not just providing the security  services, they're also providing the direct services to the transferees that was  previously provided by the Salvation Army and we've seen some improvements  there as well.

Ferguson: Just briefly on the investigation into Reza Berati's death. It was reported  that two - at least two Australians had left the country and are not able to be  interviewed by the PNG police. Have they been interviewed by police here?

Minister Morrison: When I was in PNG last week, I gave an absolute undertaking to  ensure that any persons of interest who in Australia would be able to facilitate those  interviews to be undertaken, and equally, those who were witnesses in Manus Island

who need legal representation or other forms of support to assist them in making  statements, they would receive that as well and I understand that's been done.

Ferguson: And what about those people there: have they been interviewed by  police here?

Minister Morrison: Well, look, I'm not going to go into that matter, but I can say that  any effort that is required of us to facilitate that, I've given an absolute undertaking  that that would be done and that is being resolved between the AFP and the PNG  police.

Ferguson: Why can't you confirm that? It seems like a fairly straightforward thing.  They're alleged to have been involved, they're here.

Minister Morrison: Well I can't tell you that that interview has taken place.

Ferguson: So you're not refusing to say, you're saying you don't know.

Minister Morrison: I can tell - no, I can't tell you that it hasn't taken place yet. What I  can tell you is the appropriate connections have been made between the AFP and  the PNG police as I undertook to do and that was my role in that process.

Ferguson: It was a terrible event.

Minister Morrison: It was.

Ferguson: Are we going to see the report into those - into that violence?

Minister Morrison: Of course.

Ferguson: You will release it?

Minister Morrison: Of course.

Ferguson: Will you release on interim report or wait till the final report?

Minister Morrison: No, I'll be following the same practice that the previous  government did on these matters.

Ferguson: You've been in Cambodia as well recently. You went to PNG, you went  to Cambodia. One of the poorest, most war-damaged countries in the world. Is this  an appropriate place for asylum seekers who we don't want to be settled - for them  to be settled there?

Minister Morrison: Well, first of all, these are early discussions about regional co-operation and it is about a regional discussion in broadening the number of  resettlement places that are available in the region. And I should stress to you,  Sarah, this is about resettlement, not processing. The processing is done in Nauru.  Whether someone's a refugee would be determined by that process. In the same  way, when we take people from offshore, whether it's from Africa or Malaysia or

Thailand or somewhere, we accept the determinations made by the UNHCR or an  appropriate country. So, any discussions we're having here are around resettlement.

Now, remember, resettlement is freedom from persecution, it's not a ticket to a first-class economy. And there's a very interesting question here, and that is: are we  going to get behind a process which expands the number of countries that can  participate in global resettlement where there's a dearth of places, or are we going to  hold out and say that, well, we're only interested in freeing people from persecution if  they can do so in a first-world economy? And I think this provides a real opportunity  to change that paradigm and we're talking about effectively three signatory countries  here who are talking to each other now after my discussions with Nauru today -  Nauru, Australia and Cambodia. I think this has real promise.

Ferguson: And we're going to have long-term financial commitments in all three  places?

Minister Morrison: Well, there would be resettlement packages should we be able  to arrive at an arrangement, and any other countries that were interested in getting  involved in an arrangement like this, we're obviously happy to talk to them. And that's  - remember that the arrangements reached with both Nauru and Papua New Guinea  provided for resettlement in other countries within the region, including within the  Pacific. Now, we are implementing an arrangement which was left to us with  basically nothing written down post that initial statement and so all the hard work has  had to be done by this government and we're doing it.

Ferguson: Let's talk about our own conditions of detention in Australia.

Minister Morrison: Sure.

Ferguson: There are currently 1000 children in detention, including 177 on Nauru.  Psychiatrists who visited Christmas Island recently described children that are  depressed, afraid, developmentally delayed. They described also terrible physical  conditions - sores that won't heal, blood-shot eyes. What policy could justify treating  children like that?

Minister Morrison: 8000 children turned up as part of the 50 000 and more that  turned up under the previous government. The reason we have children in detention,  Sarah, the reason they're here at all is because the previous government's failed  policies put them here. Now…

Ferguson: Yes, but you're keeping them in detention.

Minister Morrison: And the policy was that on Christmas Island where people  arrived after 19th July, that they would be subject to offshore processing and that's a  bipartisan position and people who are on Christmas Island will be transferred to  Nauru now with their families. For those who are onshore, then it is our policy to get  people into community detention and where possible onto bridging visas, and that's  what we're endeavouring to do and that's what we've been doing. There are more  children in community detention than there are in held detention within Australia.  Now the held detention facilities in places like Blaydin Point and Wickham Point,  these are, I think, first-rate facilities, and for those who've had the opportunity to visit  them - I think you and I actually did an interview outside one of them when they were

being built many years ago. And those facilities I think provide the adequate care  and support to families and in particular children.

Ferguson: Scott Morrison, that's all we've got time for, but thank you very much  indeed for coming into talk to us.

Minister Morrison: Thank you, Sarah.



