

THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY VIEWPOINT  SUNDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Abbott Government’s failed Budget;Mathias Cormann’s  comments; Rising unemployment; Border protection.

CHRIS KENNY: Joining us live from Canberra now is Brenda O’Connor, Labor’s  employment spokesman. Thanks for joining us Brendan.  BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Not at all, Chris.  KENNY: I want to start on the economy with you. Bill Shorten, Labor in general,  of course the Labor Opposition has been opposing a lot of the Budget measures,  a lot of the Budget cuts, a lot of the attempts by the Coalition Government to  reduce spending and get the Budget back on track for surplus.  Yet Labor is not putting up savings of its own. In fact Labor is actually voting  down some of the savings it proposed in Government. It’s ok, whether or not  you approve of Mathias Cormann’s language of a “girlie-man”, his point about Bill  Shorten taking a weak option is the right one isn’t it?  O’CONNOR: Well, I think the Finance Minister did really sound like a bit of a dill  in that attempt to get a grab up for the newspapers. The issue for Labor-  KENNY: But he’s saying that Bill Shorten is being weak by saying he’ll block  savings and not put up any savings himself. In other words pretend that  everything would be ok, even if we didn’t cut spending in the Budget.  O’CONNOR: I’m just saying a Finance Minister of Australia doesn’t have to  sound like a dickhead if he wants to make a point. There are economic

challenges for the country, no doubt about it. And that’s why the Opposition  indeed has put up savings.  The first thing we’ve said is that the Paid Parental Leave is an expensive waste of  time - unfair, unaffordable, inequitable, won’t do what’s it’s supposed to do, and  therefore that was the first thing we put up as something the Government  should reconsider.  We also said that there were savings in other areas of the Budget. Chris Bowen  has been willing to work with Joe Hockey. Indeed the Leader, Bill Shorten, wants  to work with the Prime Minister, as we have in other matters.  But there are a whole range of issues here, Chris, that are breaches of election  commitments by the Government. And we quite rightly are holding them to  account to the promises they made before the election.  KENNY: Sure, but you’re also voting down measures that you identified in  Government to save money and you’re not coming up with any other savings. I  mean it’s no good pretending that the Budget will just magically drift back to  surplus. There’s got to be some structural reform.  O’CONNOR: And we’ll keep talking to the Government about the things that  we’ve already prosecuted in terms of where they should find savings. But let’s  remember the Government overstated the matter. They pretended there was a  Budget crisis. They went on to double that with their own decision making.  I would suggest, Chris, that if they were fair dinkum they would look at some of  the spending that will not be fair. Indeed will not be good for the economy. And  also I think it’s important to note the way in which these cuts will have a drag on  consumer confidence and business confidence.  Usually with incoming Government, whoever the party is in Government, you see  an increase in confidence. I can’t say after 12 months we’ve seen that in this  case. And I think partly that’s because the budget itself is a bad budget. It’s an  unfair budget and it has scared a lot of people including consumers and that has  affected retail spending and that’s also had a drag on business confidence.  KENNY: Bill Shorten is saying that he can knock back the saving measures the  Government has put up and still get to surplus, get the Budget into surplus even  faster than a Coalition Government would. I mean it’s just not credible, is it?  O’CONNOR: Well, we’re not the ones sitting around the table with Treasury and  Finance. It’s the Coalition’s job to get their Budget through. I don’t recall Mr  Abbott, when an Opposition Leader, showing any sense of bipartisan on almost  anything economic, or for that matter when it came to things like border  protection.  KENNY: Now, what about your comment then about Mathias Cormann and what  you describe about what he’s got to say. Does it suit your purposes, perhaps,  does it suit your purposes, does it suit some people in the political game to kick  up a fuss about that sort of language and create bit of a distraction if you like to  prevent the debate focussing on the central economic issues?  O’CONNOR: I’m not the one that’s on page three of the Daily Telegraph today.  I’m not the Finance Minister of Australia. You have the Finance Minister

characterised - the fact is the Finance Minister of this nation has decided to self-parody. That’s his choice but he should understand he’s a senior cabinet  Minister, who has at his disposal the Finance Department, who should be making  the significant decisions in that area rather than making sort of ridiculous  comments. The ones he’s chosen to make just to get a cheap headline.  KENNY: Surely, Brendan O’Connor, you don’t really - that’s not your honest  view that by using the “girlie-man” reference he’s someone damaged his  standing and the standing of the Finance Ministry. That’s not plausible, is it?  O’CONNOR: No, what I’m saying to you is it’s not the sort of language that a  Finance Minister would normally be using. They’d be focussing on the significant  decisions that are made in Government.  KENNY: Yes, but you’ve just talked about his language being the language of a  dickhead and you’re a Labor frontbencher. I mean it’s just petty isn’t it?  O’CONNOR: Well, as you say, he made that comment. I’m telling you what it  sounded like. And of course it ran as a caricature on page three of a tabloid  newspaper. He did it for a purpose. I think he’s got better things to be doing  than that.  KENNY: Yes, I think he probably has but-  O’CONNOR: I’m not suggesting - I am not saying he’s committed this  outrageous sin-  KENNY: I remember Julia Gillard calling Christopher Pyne a mincing poodle, for  instance. I mean it’s just language.  O’CONNOR: Yes, I mean the parliament - look, I’m not getting overly  concerned about it. I just think there’s better things for the Finance Minister to  be doing and saying than trying to get a cheap headline up in page three of the  Daily Telegraph.  But fine, he’s done it now. The bigger question, Chris, is him focussing on the  fiscal decisions and the budgetary matters. He still has a lot of work to do to  convince the Senate to pass provisions of the budget. That’s what he should be  focussing on. Instead he just wants to insult the Leader of the Opposition. That’s  up to him. It’s his call.  KENNY: I think the distraction is not one that he’ll welcome and I think you’ll  see some pretty technical language from all sides of the debate in parliament  this week.  O’CONNOR: Perhaps.  KENNY: Your portfolio area is employment and workplace relations. We’ve seen  the unemployment number drift out to 6.1 per cent. There’s been some wild  fluctuations as well because the ABS seems to be in some sort of strife with its  stats. But there’s no doubt that unemployment is higher than it was expected to  be and there are some concerns about where it’s headed. What sort of concerns  do you have about the employment, the jobs outlook in Australia at the moment,  especially when we’re getting indications the global growth is coming off?  O’CONNOR: There are concerns that - and the Opposition is concerned - that  we are seeing unemployment rising. And indeed we’ve seen youth

unemployment rise now and it is now in excess of double that of the national  unemployment rate. That’s a great concern and it should be a great concern to  the Government.  We need to work to ensure we that bring that unemployment rate down. That  we create opportunities for work. And that we don’t lose jobs while we are also  anticipating growth in emerging areas of our labour market.  And there are, of course, a lot of jobs yet to go in the car industry, automotive  parts sector of our economy, unless we are to redirect some of those companies  in an area that will get them into a supply chain that will continue to exist after  the car companies leave our shores.  KENNY: Did the Labor Party go too far in its re-regulation of the Labor market  back in 2008 in the Rudd Government? And would you be willing to look at any  reform in the labour market, in industrial relations as we head towards the next  election to free up the job market any further?  O’CONNOR: We’ll always look at reform. It’s not about whether it’s more liberal  or just regulated in certain areas. I think there’s always room for improvement of  industrial relations.  But I have to say if you were to compare productivity over the two terms of Fair  Work it exceeds that of WorkChoices. So in the broader sense between the two  fundamentally different systems Fair Work, just in terms of productivity output,  prevails.  It’s also a fairer system, but that’s not to say we should not be providing greater   - I mean we really need to be as a Government involved in working with  business to create a culture of lifelong learning in a labour market which is going  to change rapidly where people are going to have to adapt to that change,  acquire new skills.  I mean jobs that are going to be created in 10 years we can’t even imagine or  anticipate now so we have to have a flexible arrangement. But it doesn’t mean  you therefore just cut conditions of employment to do that.  You need great collaboration, you need a skills agenda that’s sensitive to the  needs of business. Business has to have a large say on what skills should be  acquired for their sectors of the economy. I think we could do a whole lot better  in the areas of traineeships and apprentices.  When you’re talking about employment or IR - I mean I stand back and look at  what is that business needs? It needs highly education, well skilled employees  who can adapt to rapid changing circumstances. And that’s the sort of economy  we want.  KENNY: Flexibility in the workplace -  O’CONNOR: Sure -  KENNY: Just on this because it’s related to it directly and that is the unions’  domination or the unions’ influence in the Labor Party, the 50 per cent rule as it  stands at the moment. A lot of senior Labor figures have started to criticise this  saying the union movement has far too much control over what the Labor Party  does. The last to speak out has been John Faulkner. Is he right?

Do you need to get the union power within the Labor Party down to around 30,  20 per cent rather than the 50 per cent figure where it enables the union  movement to effectively dominate the Party?  O’CONNOR: When I’m talking about those matters I’d probably spend most of  my time discussing those in party forums, including the National Conference, of  course which is coming up next year.  I don’t think there is a correlation between the proportion of members of  national conference and necessarily what policies are introduced by Federal  Parliamentary Labor Party Caucuses. If that were the case, when Keating  brought about the reforms he introduced - the then ratio was 60 per cent  unions, 40 per cent branches.  So I don’t think necessarily there’s an issue, a direct nexus between the  composition of the party and the policies. I think the policies have to be forward  thinking. It means, yes, you must have some very robust, rigorous debates in  your national conference and other bodies. But I don’t think you can suggest  that because there’s a proportion that represent unions somehow you can’t  introduce reform. That wouldn’t make sense because as I say, the  Keating/Hawke era showed otherwise.  KENNY: Alright, well you mention policy there, I want to finish up on border  protection policy, you’re a former Immigration Minister. With only one boat  arriving this year do you concede that the Coalition has done what you said they  wouldn’t be able to do and stop the boats?  O’CONNOR: Look, even the Government doesn’t say they’ve stopped the boats.  But I welcome Chris, I do welcome the very radical decline, as you say down to  just one in fact. I’m very happy that we’ve seen a very sharp fall in irregular  maritime arrivals. Primarily, as you know, because of the deaths that arose at  sea.  This is the thirteenth anniversary today of SIEV X, where over 300 people  perished and that was during the Howard years. We’ve seen so many deaths at  sea, we saw so many in our period in Government that we of course would want  to see the end of that.  But can I say to you - and therefore I understand that why the Government is  reticent in sort of claiming that this matter is at an end, because movement of  people around the world is not something that can be just fixed by a domestic  fix.  I think the longer term issues for this country will be creating a new compact  between countries of transit, origin and destination. Because ultimately, we still  will have to find ways to resettle people that are fleeing persecution -  KENNY: Well, that’s why we have a humanitarian intake for -   O’CONNOR: That’s right.  KENNY: The point here is that Labor weakened the border protection regime  after the people smuggling trade had been stopped under the Howard  Government. Can you now concede, can you now say to them, people of  Australia that-

O’CONNOR: I just think that you’re being a bit simplistic Chris, is all I’m saying.  KENNY: - Labor got it wrong.  O’CONNOR: No I think I already made -  KENNY: - (inaudible) border protection laws in the future?  O’CONNOR: Look, I understand that you want a simplistic narrative for this. But  let’s be clear if it was just about domestic laws, why did it start under Howard?  The fact is, I’ve conceded -  KENNY: Well no, the narrative is the Australia population have seen what’s  happened over the last 10 years-  O’CONNOR: But what you’re suggesting is that it only happened because of  changes to domestic laws. Then why did it happen -  KENNY: I am suggesting that -  O’CONNOR: Then why did it happen, why did the increase happen on the first  occasion under Howard? My point is that -  KENNY: We saw that happen and they were able to stop it with strong laws and  offshore processing, TPVs stopped at that time. And then in 2008, you got rid of  this disincentives and it started up again. I mean that’s just the facts.  O’CONNOR: Well, that’s why I welcome the decline. Of course we’re going to  make sure we can do everything. Let’s remember, the fundamental shift in the  fall of vessels happened before the election with the PNG settlement  arrangements which this Government, quite rightly, embraced.  So there are areas of bipartisanship. Let me just say to you. And you may not  agree with this - because we’ll never know - but we would have liked to have  got some cooperation from the Abbott Opposition on issues about Malaysia.  We were never given chances when the High Court struck our decision down.  We got no support from Mr Abbott or Mr Morrison in relation to a proposal we  were putting forward on the advice of the experts. We got no support in the  Parliament because they wanted to see the vessels continue. We don’t want to  see the vessels continue.  KENNY: Sure. Well we’re aware of that history. And in the end, very late in the  piece you embraced offshore processing again and started with PNG and Nauru.  O’CONNOR: Yes we did. That’s right.  KENNY: So one of the few areas of policy differentiation now, one of the few  areas where Labor has failed to footprint what is happening now, is on boat turn  backs. Do you concede that turning back boats has been critical in stopping this  trade, and that if Labor were to come back into Government they would embrace  turn backs as a policy option?  O’CONNOR: Well that’s something for us to consider. I understand that there is  proposal before the Parliament. It is harder to have this debate when you don’t  know exactly the way in which these operations have occurred because they’ve  been under a cloak of secrecy, Chris.  I mean you’re talking about public policy here, yet we do not know exactly the  manner in which these things were done and whether they are sustainable. And  you’ve seen the comments by the incoming President of Indonesia, and we have

to be very mindful of ensuring that whatever works in the short period of time is  sustainable over the longer period.  So there’s a bunch of things that we have to consider. But Richard Marles I’m  sure will be focused on that. And the Labor Opposition will be examining exactly  what we will do in matters that are still outstanding and areas of difference that  still continue between us and the Government.  KENNY: Brendan O’Connor, you’ve been very generous with your time. Thanks  very much for speaking with us about your current portfolio and your former  portfolio.  O’CONNOR: Thanks Chris.  ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: Kylie Jensen 0402 298 728

