

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 18 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Coalition split on Tony Abbott’s Paid Parental Leave Scheme;  Coalition turn back policy; SIEV 221.  KIERAN GILBERT: With me on the program this morning the Shadow Immigration  Minister Richard Marles, and also the Assistant Infrastructure Minister Jamie Briggs,  Jamie Briggs first to you, Ian Macdonald’s comments, it almost, you could almost be  forgiven for thinking it was a Labor Senator.

JAMIE  BRIGGS,  ASSISTANT  MINISTER  FOR  INFRASTRUCTURE  AND   REGIONAL  DEVELOPMENT:  Well  look  I  mean,  that  is  the  Senate,  that’s  the   opportunity for the Senators from the backbench to ask questions of the Executive,  and  as  usual  the  Finance  Minister  handled  himself  perfectly  and  answered  the   questions that were put to him, this is a budget that asks everyone to contribute and  it’s  got  growth  at  its  heart,  it’s  about  building  a  stronger  Australia,  $50  billion   infrastructure investment ensures that we have a quality of opportunity throughout  Australia and that in the future we’ve got a sustainable Budget for our children so  we’re very proud to defend it, we’re very proud to take the measures through the  Parliament, and we’ll continue to argue for it.

GILBERT:  How widespread is the dissent though, is it just one or two as far as you  can tell within the Coalition?

BRIGGS:  Well people have got some, raise issues about different Budget measures  of course, it’s a Budget which fixes the mess that we inherited from the Labor party,  $660 billion of debt if we hadn’t have changed the settings that we were left from  Labor.  We’ve had to address the sustainability crisis that we’ve found on the  Budget, we are not going to shirk the hard decisions and put it on the next

generation to pay for, we’re in effect, borrowing for consumption today from  tomorrow’s future and we’re not going to do that.

GILBERT:  Richard Marles, I suppose the developments yesterday in your portfolio,  we’ll get to them down the track in the program, but you had your own divisions in  the Labor party on show, in briefing to the media out of caucus, so this is just  natural politicking isn’t it?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  A bit different Kieran, the debate that we had was one that was  respectful inside the party room, but what we saw from Ian Macdonald last night  was inside the Parliament, look this is a stinking carcass of a Budget, they’re the  words that have come out of the Coalition, which is hated by the Australian people  but as we now know is hated by half the Coalition as well, but I can tell you one  thing, Ian Macdonald has been around for a long time, he knows a bad policy when  he sees it, and the Paid Parental Leave scheme is exactly that, for all the burden  sharing that Jamie is talking about now, this is a Budget which is providing $50,000  cheques to millionaires, I mean that’s actually in the Budget as well.  Today Kieran  in Geelong, there’s an announcement of twenty jobs being lost at the CSIRO, we’re  seeing public service cuts occur all over this city in Canberra, all the while $50,000  cheques are being paid to millionaires, people need to remember that and that’s  what Ian Macdonald saw and that’s what he was talking about last night.

GILBERT:  What about the Clive Palmer response as well, how are you going to  manage that when you’re talking about not just the Paid Parental Leave Scheme but  we’re hearing this morning via The Guardian, Lenore Taylor reports that Ricky Muir  is open to working with any party that shares his values and has not ruled out, said  he’s not decided on how he will vote on carbon and mining tax repeals, that’s  according to Keith Littler, the President and founder of his party.

BRIGGS:  Well I think what you’re highlighting is that the Senate will be interesting,  it is always interesting in its own way, and for those of us of the House of   Representatives who were always a bit bemused by the Senate, we’ll continue to be  so, but I think increasingly so in the next few months it will be an interesting  place.  But you know, if you go back to September last year when the Government  changed, and Richard’s leader in the movement of Government changed by a nose,  the reality is, we went to the election and said that we would fix the Budget and this  is what we are doing and it’s difficult, and it’s hard.

MARLES:  You didn’t say you were going to increase taxes.

BRIGGS:  We said we would fix the budget, we said we would get rid of  unnecessary taxes and if the Labor party would listen to the Australian people and  abolish the carbon tax.

MARLES:  You’ve increased taxes, you’ve put in new ones.

BRIGGS:  We would have abolished the carbon tax, we said we would build roads  of the 21st century and we’ve got a $50 billion program, but even today we see the  Labor party are now trying to oppose spending on infrastructure that’s how negative  they are , and most importantly Kieran, and this is the one Richard loves the most,  we said we’d stop the boats, and you know what, tomorrow, Richard’s going to love  this, tomorrow six months, six months since the last successful people smuggling  exhibition to Australia, we have stopped the boats from arriving for six months, we  said we’d do it, we’ve done it, now the Labor party in their little caucus meeting of  yesterday had five hours of argument, five hours of the split between the left led by  Anthony Albanese who still wants to be the leader, and the right, led by Richard  Marles whose trying to defend some sort of position that the Labor party has, but  what we know that if the Australian people ever re-elect Labor, they will do what  they did in 2008, they will back down again on the strong measures that we’ve  taken and the boats will start up again.

MARLES:  So now Jamie’s taken us there, this is a Government which loves its  scoreboards, loves to beat its chest on the good days, noticeably silent on the bad  ones.

BRIGGS:  Six months tomorrow, do you agree with six months tomorrow?

MARLES:  Well here’s a figure that you won’t hear the Government talk about  today, today is a thousand days since the second reading speech of the legislation  which would have enabled the Malaysian arrangement, it is a thousand days since  the Liberal party teamed up with the Greens to block the Malaysian

arrangement.  Now since then, 680 people, more than that, lost their lives at sea,  we hear all about the six months and however many days on a day by day count, it  is a thousand days since Scott Morrison and Jamie for that matter, had the  opportunity to resolve this issue, and they voted with the Greens to make sure the  issue could not be resolved.

GILBERT:  It’s a bit of a ‘what if’ though isn’t it?

MARLES:  No it’s not a bit of a ‘what if’ and it’s interesting point.

BRIGGS:  We’re going to take lectures from the Labor party now.

MARLES:  You won’t hear that scoreboard today and they don’t like that.

BRIGGS:  Will you admit on the scoreboard though, will you admit the 2008  changes started the trade again?

MARLES:  There’s a whole lot of things which gave rise to it, and I’m on the record  in relation to a whole lot of things where people could have done better where  Governments could have done better, but let me say this, we do not hear anything  from Scott Morrison or the Liberal party about why they made the decision a  thousand days ago, to block the Malaysian arrangement and it would have made a  difference.  Now it’s an important co-incidence of events today Kieran, because we

also have a decision in the High Court coming up, now if that goes the wrong way,  and there needs to be -

BRIGGS:  A decision your Government made.

MARLES:  A decision which your Government continues to prosecute, and is a key  part in why we have seen a reduction in the flow of asylum seeker vessels.

GILBERT:  Can we just clarify for our viewers though what you’re talking about, the  High Court handing down a ruling at 10.15am this morning on the Manus Island  Facility, those challenging the facility say, claim, that the then Minister, Chris Bowen,  your colleague, did  not designate appropriately, the Manus Island Facility as a

Detention Facility.

MARLES:  Now we hear Jamie now saying that this was our decision, I’m not sure  that we hear Jamie saying he’s walking away from that, so we’re not walking away  from that.

BRIGGS:  The incompetence of Labor on this is constant, is constant.

MARLES:  If there is incompetence on the part of Labor it is embraced by the  Liberal party in Government in terms of their suite of measures to deal with asylum  seeker vessels and your Minister well knows that, but if we have a situation where

there needs to be a legislative fix, you will have a party in the Labor party, which is  willing to do what we need to do in order to save lives, but a thousand days ago  today, we had a party that did everything it could to wreck this issue.

GILBERT:  Let’s hear from the Minister about it I suppose, what is the contingency  if the High Court does scuttle the Manus facility?

BRIGGS:  Scott Morrison will no doubt competently deal with this issue as he has  since September when he was appointed the Minister, the reality is -

MARLES:  Will we get a call to help? Will we get a call to help in the Parliament  because that’s the question? Because we know what you did when you got that call.

BRIGGS:  Depends what happens in your caucus mate, we can’t predict what  happens in your caucus.

GILBERT:  Let’s hear Jamie’s response please.

BRIGGS:  In September 2008, which Richard cannot bring himself to admit, and the  Labor party cannot bring themselves to admit, they unnecessarily and ludicrously  changed laws which were working, they changed laws which were working, including  turn back operations which are absolutely -

MARLES:  There were no turn backs in 2008, there weren’t -

BRIGGS:  No because the boats had stopped.

MARLES:  Turn backs had stopped under the Howard Government -

BRIGGS:  Understand some history, exactly, let’s go back to history, turn backs had  worked -

MARLES:  No by the time we get to the end of the Howard Government they had  abandoned turn backs as a policy -

BRIGGS:  Because the boats had stopped Richard, this is what they don’t  understand, and this is the risk for Australia Kieran, if they get elected again they’ll  change this policy again, they’ll change the policy again.

MARLES:  That is simply not true

BRIGGS:  And that’s what the Australian people have got to consider when they get  back to the ballot box.

- BREAK -



GILBERT:  This is AM Agenda, thanks for your company. With me this morning the  Assistant Infrastructure Minister, Jamie Briggs and also Labor frontbencher, Richard  Marles. I want to get back to something Jamie referred to earlier, this relates to the

front page of the Financial Review this morning, “States lead build plan faces  defeat.”  It’s a story by Phil Coorey and Laura Tingle, that the Greens and the  Palmer United are set to oppose this effort by the Government to have states

privatise, recycle assets to invest in more productive assets, now some of the states  including as we saw yesterday with the NSW Budget, are well and truly on board.  How does Labor stand in the way of billions, tens of billions being spent on  productive infrastructure?

MARLES:  We’re not standing in the way and I’ll explain our position.  But there is a  fundamental flaw in the economics of this Government. It belies the fact that this is  a Prime Minister who is not really that interested in economics. Privatisations can be  good,  they can be bad. They need to stand on their own two feet in terms of being  good public policy. What we’ve got here is a 15 per cent incentive proposed by the  Federal Government, which is necessarily going to skew the public policy decisions  around whether or not a privatisation should happen or not. And there is a real risk  that we see bad privatisations occur as a result of this.  So what we’re saying is  this.  We are not standing in the way.  We’re proposing a couple of amendments.  One is that in relation to the infrastructure that occurs as a result of the  privatisations we just want to see a cost benefit analysis.  That’s not a big deal.  And  the second is that, if there is, there needs to be the right of veto for either house of  Parliament to veto one of these projects if in the event they don’t stack up.  Now

again, that seems to me to be pretty prudent to make sure that this does not give  rise to bad privatisations and bad infrastructure spends.

GILBERT: But they’re not your decisions though.  Because these are going to be  privatisations done by state governments.  I don’t understand how a Federal  Parliament can then tell a state what it should and shouldn’t sell.

MARLES:  The Federal Government is seeking to intervene in the decision, well you  are seeking to intervene in the decision of states by offering -

BRIGGS:  You don’t understand

MARLES:  No no, by offering an incentive for states to go down the path of  privatisation and then building infrastructure. Now presumably that offer of an  incentive -

BRIGGS:  He just doesn’t understand it.

MARLES:  That offer of incentive is seeking to influence decisions.  Presumably that  is the point, that is the public policy point of what the Commonwealth Government is  doing and Commonwealth money will be spent, so it is not unreasonable that  Commonwealth Parliament have a right to veto that if they think that the project  doesn’t stack up, but importantly, Kieran, we’ve said this -

BRIGGS: No, see you’ve talked about two different things

MARLES:  If the amendments don’t get up, we’ve said we’re not standing in the  way of this bill, so we’ve made that clear, so let’s just all take a Bex and lie down,  we’re not in a position where we’re saying we are going to get in the way of this,  but we are seeking to make this better legislation.

BRIGGS:  Well someone,  unless you’re questioning the integrity of Phil Coorey and  Laura Tingle, and, you know that’s up to you, but that’s certainly what their take on  what you’re trying to do is, and what you simply don’t understand, and it doesn’t  surprise me because Anthony Albanese is just playing a game on infrastructure,  that’s all, he’s angry that he lost the portfolio, I understand he enjoyed the portfolio,  it’s a terrific opportunity to help build a stronger Australia, I appreciate that, but he  cannot get over his anger and he is making things up, he continues to make things  up, including your argument that no doubt he’s briefed you on this morning that we  are paying money on the basis of the privatisation, that’s simply not true, we are  paying money on the basis of a spend on infrastructure -

MARLES:  So you are paying money?

BRIGGS:  Hang on Richard let me explain so you can take some notes, if the state  decides out of a privatisation, which the state government makes a decision on, and  the Federal Government cannot stop if they do that, even if your little amendment

gets up here, then privatisation would have taken place, all that you’ll prevent, all  that you’ll prevent is the spend going on infrastructure -

MARLES:  Yes but your spend -

BRIGGS:  You’re trying to stop roads being built in Australia -

MARLES:  Now you’re being tricky Jamie -

BRIGGS:  No I’m not -

MARLES:  Yes you are because -

BRIGGS:  Because privatisation would have happened -

MARLES:  So in the midst of all that rhetoric you would have -

GILBERT:  But you’ve said you’re going to back it anyway -

MARLES:  What we’ve said is that we’re seeking to make this better, we are putting  in place -

BRIGGS:  You’re trying to stop the States from actually getting the roads built, this  is the thing that Anthony goes on about all the time.

MARLES:  We’re putting in place amendments to see that the Commonwealth  spend is done better, in the midst of all the rhetoric that you’ve just heard from  Jamie there, here lies the concession, there is going to be Commonwealth money  spent on the basis of a state privatisation.

BRIGGS:  No, no, on the basis of the state making decision to build infrastructure.

MARLES:  After a privatisation, and that seeks to influence decisions, that is  absolutely the point of their policy.

BRIGGS:  Can I just make -

MARLES:  And that’s not about Anthony Albanese’s anger or anything else, it’s  about your bad policy -

BRIGGS:  Honestly -

GILBERT:  Let Jamie Briggs make a point here, because the bottom line is here  that they’re going to back it, despite the language, they’re going to back it, they  won’t stand in the way of it.



BRIGGS:  Well obviously Anthony’s briefing to Phil Coorey and Laura Tingle he  needs to go and correct, but this highlights the problem that the Labor party’s

got.  Bill Shorten and Anthony Albanese will continue and fight out the faux battle,  Anthony Albanese is the preferred Leader of the Party.

MARLES:  You’re always talking about the internals but tell us about the policy.

BRIGGS:  No, no well I am and very much so, the problem that they’ve got is that  they’re obsessed by politics, this is why they were a bad Government for six years,  they do not understand the policy, they’re not interested in Australia’s future, they  want to play tactical games in the Parliament to just try and disrupt public policy,  they’re now even trying to stop roads being built, rail being built, by state  governments.

MARLES:  Well that’s just not right -

BRIGGS:  Because they are completely obsessed by the politics -

MARLES:  We did more rail and road building in our time in Government than any  other Federal Government.

BRIGGS:  Well you’ve lost Government -

GILBERT:  We’ve got to wrap this up on that area, we’ve got to finish on one bit of  policy that I think you might agree on -

BRIGGS:  No we won’t, surely.

MARLES:  Cross your fingers.

GILBERT:  Your form this morning would suggest otherwise, but Julie Bishop today  is going to be talking about an ever intensifying relationship in the US Alliance that  the US will continue to remain the dominant power throughout the 21st century, that  that will remain undiminished, what do you say to those in the, I suppose, in the  strategic community in international affairs, who say that Australia, and Malcolm  Fraser for one as well as suggested this, Australia does need to shift its strategic  focus to China more and that the Minister, and the Government hasn’t accepted that  yet or recognise that.

BRIGGS:  Well look I think what successive Governments have been able to prove  is that you can be a great friend to China and a great friend of America, and we’ve  shown that I think for a very long time and it is the aim of both sides of politics to  ensure that we have got an ever increasing and growing relationship with China,  they’re very important to us, they’re very important to our economic and security  into the future, but equally the Americans are our closest friend and will continue to  be our closest friend, we share their values, we share their outlook on the world,  they’re very important to us economically also, and just last week the successful tour  of the Prime Minister in the United States, where he had a series of very successful  meetings on behalf of the Australian people, comes on the back of you know, the  same whether it be former Labor Prime Ministers, John Howard, and Labor Prime

Ministers before it, Bob Hawke and Ronald Reagan as we talked about a couple of  weeks ago, they are both vital relationships and I think maintaining the balance in  both is absolutely well worth trying to -

GILBERT:  Do you think it can continue undiminished that the US power though  given that the rising and ever rising China?

MARLES:  I think there’s a changing world situation which America is completely  aware of but I am going to disappoint Jamie and agree with everything he just said,  he’s right, the American alliance is very much at the heart of Australia’s foreign  policy, they are our key security partner, I think the point to understand though, is  in balancing the security relationship with the US and of course the growing  economic relationship with China, we’re actually dealing with precisely the same  issue and set of circumstances that the US itself is dealing with, the United State’s  largest trading partner is China, and we are all dealing with exactly the same issue  and that is how we best engage with the peaceful rise of China very much to the  economic benefit of Australia and very much to the economic benefit of China, in a  world which we hope will evolve in the most peaceful way.

GILBERT:  I think we surprised our viewers as well, I think after a fiery discussion  that we’re rivalling the bromance of Husic and Frydenberg.

MARLES:  We’ve always, I’ve always had a bromance with Jamie.

BRIGGS:  We were there before those two.

GILBERT:  Have a good day both of you.

ENDS

