

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP   SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND  MULTICULTURALISM  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR

COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   ONLINE INTERVIEW  SKY AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 7 AUGUST 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Metadata; asylum seeker arrivals via plane

DAVID LIPSON: Joining me now on the program, Alan Tudge and Michelle  Rowland. Thank you both very much for your company today. Starting with you  Alan Tudge. It is a complex area and it’s difficult to explain, even for people who  know a lot about these laws. So why has Mr Internet himself Malcolm Turnbull  been left out of the sales pitch and discussions so far?

ALAN TUDGE: Morning David. Mr Turnbull hasn’t been left out of the  discussions so far. He’s an integral part of this. Senator Brandis is the Attorney-General, of course leading the overall national security efforts. That’s his role.  The key thing that’s…

LIPSON: The decision that was made was in the national security committee to  go ahead with these changes in principle and the first Malcolm Turnbull  apparently heard about it was reading about it in The Daily Telegraph.

TUDGE: David, the key things that we are putting in place are on the direct  advice of our national security experts and they are advising us to put in place a  number of measures including the ones that we are discussing this morning.  They are doing so because there is a real and there is a present risk of terrorism

on Australian soil. And we are determined to ensure that we can do as much as  humanly possible to avoid any such attack here in Australia.

LIPSON: No one disputes the risk and the need for some changes. David Irvine,  the head of ASIO, has indeed said that this is absolutely crucial. I suppose what’s  being questioned is the process and the fact that apparently Malcolm Turnbull

was pretty angry about being left out and had a bit of a blow up in Cabinet. Has  this been rushed through?

TUDGE: This isn’t being rushed, David. We’ve got a National Security  Committee, we have national security agencies. They agencies have advised the  committee and the committee is working on proposals to take forward. These  will then go to the Parliament once the legislation is drafted. There’ll be further  debate then. There is no rushing, we are absolutely determined to implement the  recommendations of our national security agencies to ensure that Australians can  be as safe as humanly possible in this nation.

LIPSON: Michelle Rowland, I’m a little confused about Labor’s position because  you do support changes to keep Australians safe in principle but at the same  time there’s been some criticism about the privacy concerns in particular for the  mass collection of data.

MICHELLE ROWLAND: David, on this national day of mourning I firstly want to  offer my deep condolences to the family and friends of the victims involved in  this tragedy. I also want to highlight, and you correctly point out, that there are  some significant concerns: whilst we all recognise that surveillance is one of the  most effective tools we have to guard against terrorism and other threats to our  national security. The first I think is privacy. I believe that Australians have a  deep held belief that their privacy needs to be kept in mind and not  compromised in these matters. It’s a very fine balance, it’s a very vexed issue.  The second is oversight. I believe there needs to be independent oversight of the  operation of these laws. Just as we had Bret Walker as the Independent National  Security Legislation Monitor overseeing what would otherwise be some very  heavy handed forms of laws, heavy handed for a good purpose, but they do  require strong oversight. And the other issue of course is cost. Who was going to  bear the costs of this? It is a regime which currently under the interception and  access arrangements, the carriage service providers, the ISPs, have agreements  with the law enforcement agencies to effectively make this cost-neutral. Now for  most of these, some of them carry metadata and provide metadata along with  the other data they provide in response to law enforcement requests. But the  issue of storage and the issue of specifically requesting metadata is something  that needs to be looked at for cost efficiency.

LIPSON: Will Labor support these changes then? That’s the crucial question

here.

ROWLAND: We’re yet to receive a full briefing on it, David. We do need to see  the details but I do believe that those three principles are those that need to be  taken into account when we examine these measures. And it’s actually quite  frustrating that we have a government that’s put this out there and the two  ministers that should be responsible for this area can’t seem to be in alignment  on it. So as soon as we receive that briefing and we’ve examined the precise  detail we’ll be able to answer that question fully. But I think what I’ve outlined  are some of the principles that should be guiding, and I believe will be guiding,  Labor’s approach to these matters amongst other things.

LIPSON: Okay, I do want to move on. Alan Tudge if there is something that you  really want to respond to there I’ll give you the opportunity if you could keep it  brief.

TUDGE: I just wanted to make clear though to your viewers that the content is  not being kept. Michelle raised an important point about privacy, that is an  important consideration. The content is not being kept, i.e if you’re making a  telephone call, your telephone call content is not being kept. Any post you put on  Facebook and the like cannot be acquired unless there is a search warrant in  place. What is being kept is the fact that you have made a call from one place to  the next and the duration of that call, not the content of it.

ROWLAND: Calls are already subject to the interception and access regime as it  currently stands. Here we’re talking about the footprint, basically the electronic  footprint, that is left.

LIPSON: And pretty clear picture can be created if the intelligence agencies  decide they want to spare the time and the money and the effort to actually  create such a picture. Look, we will move on. I want to look at this story  reported in Fairfax today by Nick McKenzie and Richard Baker that there’s  apparently rampant visa fraud and migration crime involving plane arrivals into  Australia while we’re all focused on the boat arrivals. Now I think all of us in  politics and the media, I must say, are guilty of focusing almost entirely on  asylum seeker arrivals by boat but not those who come here by plane. Should  we be taking more notice of this, Alan Tudge?

TUDGE: These were very serious allegations made in the Age and the Sydney  Morning Herald this morning. The Immigration Minister has called for an  immediate report on those allegations, the veracity of them and measures to  curb them should they be correct. We are determined to ensure that any such  fraud is clamped down upon in any way. People are arriving by boats, we are  determined to ensure they come the right way and not the wrong way. And

similarly if they come by plane.

LIPSON: Because Michelle Rowland, one of the claims is that Somali people  smuggling sell linked to an overseas terrorist suspect has been able to get  dozens of people into Australia.

ROWLAND: These are sophisticated operations and any government of any  persuasion needs to make sure that we are vigilant in investigating and making  sure this doesn’t happen. If there’s a problem we as a parliament, and Scott  Morrison as the minister, should fix it and no-one I think would dispute the fact  that people are becoming more and more sophisticated looking at different  angles in which to game the system, in which to do the wrong thing. And I  believe we have focused a lot - obviously, I agree with your comments - there  has been a lot of focus on arrivals by sea and we need to focus ourselves on  those other forms which are obviously under severe threat at the moment.



LIPSON: And does that mean shifting resources then to the airport borders if  you like?

ROWLAND: Whatever needs to be done. I have only ever seen the reports in  the Herald this morning so what I know is what I read there. But I do believe  this is something that the Minister needs to look at closely and where there are

gaps they need to be fixed.

LIPSON: Alan Tudge, would the government, or should the government do  that?

TUDGE: Absolutely. The government has asked for a report on these allegations  immediately and will take whatever action is required to get on top of any fraud,  any illegal activity, will have absolute resolve just as we have had resolve in  relation to unlawful arrivals by boat. I do point out though, and without making  large political points here, that these were reports which were alleged to be  given to the previous Labor government and so Michelle’s comments are right,  action must be taken but perhaps it should have been taken a couple of years  ago rather than being left to be taken right now.

LIPSON: Alan Tudge, Michelle Rowland thanks so much for your comments and  insight this morning. We do appreciate it.

ROWLAND: My pleasure.

TUDGE: Thanks so much, David.

ENDS    MEDIA CONTACT: ALEXANDRA CRAIG 0435 094 304

