

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC CAPITAL HILL INTERVIEW WITH LYNDAL CURTIS   WEDNESDAY, 9 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Government detention centres; Asylum seeker vessel turn backs;  Relationship with Indonesia.

LYNDAL  CURTIS: Labor’s  Immigration  spokesperson  is  Richard  Marles,  he  joins  me   from Melbourne, Richard Marles welcome to Capital Hill.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good afternoon Lyndal, how are you?

CURTIS: Good, we heard there Sam Dastyari call for compassion, it’s a nice sentiment,  but if the aim is to have anyone who arrives as an asylum seeker not be settled in  Australia and have them spend time in detention centres either in Christmas Island or  on Manus Island or Nauru, which was Labor’s aim as well, in the end the approach will  not be a compassionate one will it?

MARLES: Lyndal I don’t accept that, our approach is one that is very much based on  compassion and that’s principally about seeing the end to the loss of life at sea, there’s  nothing compassionate about the loss of life at sea that we have witnessed over the last  few years.

CURTIS: Is there anything particularly passionate though about leaving people in  detention or in offshore processing centres?

MARLES: Well the detention facilities that are being run by this country always need to  be run in a way which is safe, dignified and humane. I don’t understand why we never

hear this Government utter that phrase to describe a test to which they would hold these  facilities to account for. They need to be the standard of which these facilities are run,  and at the end of the day, when we hear the reports this morning, around questions of  self-harm, for the Prime Minister to go out there and start talking in terms of blackmail is  really to take us down a very negative and incorrect path. What we need to be hearing  from the Government today is what they are doing to ensure that these people are  properly being cared for, that they are receiving the services that they should, that  Christmas Island is a facility that is being run in a safe and a dignified and a humane  way.

CURTIS: But threats of self-harm have happened before and happened when Labor  was in government, are there ways to prevent that happening at all?

MARLES: Well of course you can look at the ways in which you deal with that issue.  What you didn’t have when incidents of this kind occurred in the past was the Prime  Minister of the day walking out and starting to try and use phrases like blackmail. Our  first and foremost concern was addressing the needs of the people who were in a state  of distress and that’s what we ought to be hearing from in relation to the Government of  today, what are they doing?

CURTIS: The questions about the motivation for threatening the self-harm are not clear,  have you been able to get any clarification on that?

MARLES: I haven’t Lyndal, but that point is exactly the point, where the motivations are  not clear, we ought not have our Prime Minister on TV this morning essentially imputing  a motive as to what’s going on. He is absolutely jumping the gun and taking this down a  very negative path indeed, what we need to be hearing from our Government are what  services are being provided to these people, how can we have a sense of confidence  that Christmas Island is being run in a manner which is safe, dignified and humane, that  ought not be a hard thing for the Government to say, and it ought not be a hard thing for  the Government to do.

CURTIS: Now you were asked this morning on AM if boat turn backs was a legal policy,  if there was a determination that it was legal and it could be done safely, would it be an  option for Labor to accept that part of the policy, you didn’t answer the question, could I  get an answer now?

MARLES: Well we’ve got an open mind in relation to any step that will be taken in the  future which will help save lives at sea, but our concern in relation to turning around  boats in the context of Indonesia is that all of this has occurred in what is effectively a  very abnormal set of circumstances. There’s a degree of unreality about it, because  what we have at the moment is an effective suspension in our relationship with  Indonesia when it comes to cooperation around asylum seeker vessels. In the long  term, if we are going to have a resolution to this, we need to be working hand in glove  very closely with Indonesia, the country from which these boats are coming, that’s just  plain common sense.



CURTIS: So finally, if it is legal, if it can be done safely, if it can be done with the  agreement of our Asian neighbours like Indonesia then it could be an option for Labor?

MARLES: Well there’s a whole lot of ifs in that question, at the moment what we are  seeing is that Indonesia do not accept this, there is no doubt that the policy is one which  is eroding our relationship with Indonesia, we shouldn’t forget Lyndal, that because of a  turn back operation on the water at a particular moment in time, we have a Prime  Ministerial visit to Indonesia cancelled. That says everything about the way in which our  nearest neighbour regards this particular policy. The real test of the ethicacy of this  policy will be how it operates in the context of a normal relationship with Indonesia.

CURTIS: Richard Marles we’ll have to leave it there, thank you very much for your time.

MARLES: Thank you Lyndal.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

