Minister for Immigration

Scott Morrison

Tuesday, 22 April 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Ray Hadley: Minister good morning to you.

Minister Morrison: G'day Ray.

Hadley: You were in Malaysia were you?

Minister Morrison: Yes we were up there for a regional forum on security and so we  were up there talking about the policies that are working here and how we can work  more closely together with those in the region to, not to stop boats, but to stop drugs  and guns and other things that come down through our region to Australia.

Hadley: We are coming up to the end of the fourth month. We haven't had a boat  since the 19th of December, correct?

Minister Morrison: That's right, well that is more than four months since the 19th  but obviously this year we are getting towards the end of April and things are holding  well and the policies are working well and we are not leaving anything to chance.

Hadley: How many had arrived at the same stage between mid-December and this  period, so the end of April in 2013?

Minister Morrison: Oh, over 100 boats and well over 6000 people.

Hadley: 6000 people?

Minister Morrison: So this is, we're well into the post monsoon phase now Ray I  believe. I mean people might want to debate the weather but I mean over March and  April of last year there was over 2000 in both of those months.

Hadley: Our weekly question or fortnightly question in this case, any update  regarding the family of Captain Emad?

Minister Morrison: Well, there is a lot happening there I can say but there is not  much I can say publicly. It is a very vexed legal issue and the previous government  left plenty of fishhooks over this one and we're working through it week by week. I  wish there was more I could say on this Ray. I am finding it very, very frustrating.

Hadley: Okay, as our listeners no doubt are as well. Now there is footage emerged  via Fairfax of PNG nationals employed as Manus Island security, they say allegedly  attacking detainees a day before the riot that killed the asylum seeker Reza Berati.  Have you seen this footage as yet?

Minister Morrison: I saw that footage this morning and look there is a police  investigation and an independent review going into all of these things that's why I  haven't been providing a running commentary on every piece of information that has  come out. Clearly the media have got access to a lot of asylum seeker stories and  they are putting their case and that's what journalists do, I don't have any issue with  that. But the formal investigation and inquiry will find out what there is to be found out  here and I'm sure that will cover the issue very comprehensively.

Hadley: Were you surprised the Indonesian Foreign Minister has, I guess, in a way  criticised our boat people policy? He says 'shared responsibility, not shifting  responsibility is the way forward'. Surely Indonesia doesn't think we are asking them  to do more than their fair share, they haven't done much to date.

Minister Morrison: Well without commenting on that specifically I would say this,  the Australian government, the Coalition supports policies that work and our policy is  working and our policy is unchanged. Any suggestion from anyone that there might  be a change in our approach is just dead wrong. Anyone seeking to get here by boat  will be faced with exactly the same policies that have been operational now,  particularly for these last more than four months where there has not been one  successful venture. There has been no change, no let up, and there won't be.

Hadley: Now we spoke much earlier about this creeping into Indonesian waters and  we are talking about Indonesia. We have got one Navy captain, Australian Navy  captain, stood aside while another will receive administrative punishment, whatever  that means, after ships crossed into Indonesian waters. Now obviously I have no  knowledge of how you determine whether you are in waters or not, I mean just  simply what, a navigational error?

Minister Morrison: Well this was the subject of that review that was done by Navy  and Customs which went into some detail about how this occurred and the Navy has  then subsequent to that, very separate to Operation Sovereign Borders, has gone  through and made some further decisions about some of the involvement of some of  the individuals in those events and that is entirely a matter for the Navy, it is not  something for Ministers or others to engage in. They have their own processes for  dealing with things of this nature, they have done that. I mean those incursions were  regrettable, they occurred, we have found out how it happened and most importantly  it has not happened again.

Hadley: This relationship with Nauru, because it is all about Manus Island. What is  happening with Nauru? There is a suggestion that our relationship is disintegrating.

Minister Morrison: Well that is just complete rubbish. I met, not last week but the  week before with the Finance Minister and Justice Minister David Adeang at one of  our regular forums and I updated people after that meeting that the processing is  occurring this month, we have got the accommodation in place for when people are  found to be refugees for them to be able to be accommodated there. The centre in  Nauru is running well and we have not had the same sorts of problems there we  have had on Manus Island. That is not to say we can be complacent about that. You  have always got to be eternally vigilant on these things and we are and we are

working very closely with Nauru. So I don't know what those comments refer to but  all I know is that the relationship we have with Nauru on this is working very well.

Hadley: I just had to laugh today there is a story by Troy Bramston in the Australian  and Troy says two days before Julia Gillard challenged Kevin Rudd's position as  Prime Minister she told him in writing via an email that the Labor Government was  perceived as incompetent and out of control and heading towards electoral oblivion  and she talks about the great deal of anxiety over asylum seeker policies -a loss of  control of our borders. Well of course she was to become Prime Minister and it got  worse, not better.

Minister Morrison: That is true and I think it is a timely reminder from Troy about  the chaos, cost and tragedy that was occurring under the previous government and  the fact that they simply had no answers. It didn't matter if it was Kevin Rudd or Julia  Gillard or any of the four immigration ministers that they had, they just had no  answers. Now in just over six months we have ensured that we are stopping the  boats and we are being true to our promises, we are doing exactly what we said we  would do and it is having exactly the effect we said it would have

Hadley: Now on other matters, Bill Shorten, I mentioned this at the top of the show,  plans to reform the party or wants to. It appears that to reform it he is going to have  to carry the union movement, of which he is a part, kicking and screaming to the  bargaining table. Unlikely?

Minister Morrison: Well I think this is just a whole lot of naval gazing from the Labor  Party. They don't seem to understand that they lost the election because they were a  really bad government and they had really bad policies that inflicted very terrible  chaos on the Australian economy, on our borders. I mean that is why they lost  government. They ran a really bad one and no amount of naval gazing from Bill  Shorten, looking into the internals of the Labor Party, unless it produces this result -  that they realise that there was a mandate to get rid of the carbon tax and they got  that wrong, that there was a mandate to restore temporary protection visas and to  restore the polices that worked under the Howard Government. Until they can fess  up to their monumental policy failures as the reason they got tossed out of office well  frankly I think they are still in the cul-de-sac they have been in for a long time.

Hadley: Ok we look forward to talking to you next week again. Thanks for your time  this morning.

Minister Morrison: Many thanks Ray.



