The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



Malaysia and Burma trip, alleged child bride  case, Syrian passport cancellations, torture  claims, Senator Hanson-Young  Tuesday, 11 February 2014

Interview with Ray Hadley, 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Ray Hadley: I was going to have my regular Monday morning chat with the  Immigration Minister Scott Morrison but he was late returning from Burma. He is on  the line right now. Minister, good morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Ray.

Hadley: What were you doing in Burma and Malaysia?

Minister Morrison: Well in both of those countries we were working with our  partners up through the chain through where, you know, the people come through  the smuggling networks and that's certainly where they come through Malaysia and  we have gifted two Bay Class patrol boats to Malaysia to assist them with the patrols  they do in the Malacca Strait, which is an absolute highway for the smugglers but not  just for people but also for all sorts of things across that Strait, and so we have an  excellent partnership with Malaysia to do that. And of course in Myanmar, in Burma,  well that is a source country producing refugees and I was pleased to know when I  went to both of those countries that the message about our policies is getting  through loud and clear. I mean, in a remote camp in Rakhine State in Myanmar  people knew all about what the Australian Government was doing and stopping the  boats.

Hadley: Now I'd imagine you have caught up with the story that we broke here on  Friday where a 26 year old man married a then 12 year old girl in an unregistered  Islamic ceremony in the backyard. The Lebanese man who is here on a student visa  has been charged with having sex with that girl more than two dozen times. He is a  paedophile allegedly. Authorities became aware of the situation when the man tried  to enrol the girl in school and was told to go to Centrelink to ascertain guardianship  rules. It has been reported the man then tried to get a spousal visa. The imam who  married the pair has also now been charged. You have been keeping a close eye on  it from afar?

Minister Morrison: Yeah I have and I mean obviously the individual is on charges  and is currently in custody and he was on a student, higher education visa and so  there are potential issues there.

Hadley: Does he get sponsored for that? Does someone, you know, if he comes  from Lebanon and he's there is that the normal course of events?

Minister Morrison: No, it's not a sponsorship arrangement. I mean it's, you know  you have to have a course that you are going to, you have to enrol and you have to  meet those requirements. And so there wasn't any issue about higher education visa  but anyone who is on a visa is ultimately subject to the character test and obviously  that case and matter will have to go through the proper channels and when it comes  to finality well then there will be opportunities to take whatever action is necessary  then.

Hadley: Ok, without reference to this specific case but a question that has been  asked by many of my listeners, if this fellow comes to Australia on this particular visa  is he entitled to Centrelink payments as a student even though he is an overseas  student?

Minister Morrison: I would have to come back to you on that Ray. I wouldn't want to  mislead people. My understanding would be no but I will confirm that back through  the program this morning with you.

Hadley: On the more general issue of young girls marrying older men it appears  from my discussions with the state minister in NSW Pru Goward, it may be more  widespread than perhaps we know. There may be some sort of underground  operation here with, you know, extreme arms of the Islamic faith which is of course  being condemned by reasonable people of the Islamic faith but others may not be  seeing it in the same light we all do.

Minister Morrison: Well Senator Cash, who is my assistant Minister, and in  opposition we took a strong stand on this as well and that was about marriage  pending visas which were coming out of what I call high risk countries in this area. It  is our policy that no one under the age of 18 gets a marriage pending visa even if the  marriage is intended to take place after the person is over 18. I think we have to be  eternally vigilant on this sort of thing. We are very alive to it and I expect my  department to be also and you know when people come to this country they have to  abide by our values and our laws. It is that simple.

Hadley: We spoke a couple of weeks ago about dual passport holders, Syrian  passport holders and Australian passport holders, going there to fight. The story  today that we have had more cancelled due to security concerns in fact it has trebled  since 2011. 18 passports were cancelled last year compared to 7 in 2011. ASIO has  done this. Is that a role that you leave to them or do you get involved?

Minister Morrison: No, passports sit both, well it will be advice from ASIO, but then  there are decisions taken by the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Foreign  Minister and the Attorney General is also very involved. I mentioned on the program,  I think last week Ray that the Attorney General is very focussed on this issue and we  are working through a number of issues. We haven't got anything more to announce  yet but I can tell you it is attracting a lot of his attention and mine because there are  some important immigration issues that relate to this as well.

Hadley: And are these passports, these passports being cancelled would be people  still residing in Australia so they can't travel, not the people that have gone to Syria.

Minister Morrison: It can work both ways, so the passports...

Hadley: So that would mean that they couldn't come back. Ok well that's, so that's a  replication of what they do in the UK.

Minister Morrison: That's right. So we have a range of options but I don't want to  give them too many hints.

Hadley: Look on Saturday we thought the ABC had offered their regrets as opposed  to their apology and then Fairfax trotted out a story basically going no further,  offering no further information, no further proof just the same bloke recycling the  same rubbish that has been denied in the past by everyone concerned. It must be  disappointing that given that the ABC has copped it between the eyes over what they  did that Fairfax would do exactly the same thing via one of their reporters on  Saturday.

Minister Morrison: Well no amount of recycling false claims makes them any more  true and this is, the only difference I suppose between Fairfax and the ABC is that  the taxpayers don't pay Fairfax, thank goodness when they are the sort of things that  they are going to report. I note though that Fairfax has also been pretty hot on the  story of union corruption and they have broken some important stories there and of  course the government announced...

Hadley: They have done an outstanding job, as their reporters do like Kate  McClymont and the like, they do an outstanding job.

Minister Morrison: Kate is a very good example of that. But on that story they were  just wrong Ray and they also reported that Customs were undertaking a further  review or inquiry these ridiculous allegations of Navy torture. That is just wrong. It is  just not true. I mean they just dream it up.

Hadley: Yeah that was the hat on which they, the hook they hung their hat on. They  must have thought there was going to be another review. That is not true at all?

Minister Morrison: Well that is just absolutely not true. Customs issued a statement  saying not true. I did the same thing but I suppose if they don't report that story, they  have got to report the actual story which is no successful people smuggling venture  to Australia in over 50 days and the government's policies are working. I mean last  week Simon Benson who was up in Malaysia when I was there reported on the story  that in one of the joint operations we did with Malaysia we actually intercepted a  group of people coming back to Malaysia from Indonesia because the way to  Australia had been shut by our government.

Hadley: Look I want you to do me a favour, Sarah Hanson-Young is at it again. They  want to initiate a Senate inquiry into how the Navy breached Indonesian waters while  intercepting boat people. Now given her performance at the last inquiry, I think we  should encourage an inquiry, simply to see what she can produce this time.

Minister Morrison: Well Senator McCune as she may well be known up in the  Senate after her performance on the last Senate hearing, look she could jump up  and down and get, and do what she likes.

Hadley: We'll just call her Lisa Hanson-Young.

Minister Morrison: Something like that but maybe she should have an inquiry into  whether Sea Patrol is fictional or real because she does seem to be a bit confused.

Hadley: Well you might have missed it because you may have been away but what  she tried to do was smother it with a program that appeared on I think Channel  Seven the night before the inquiry on the Thursday night I think it was from memory.  And that was mainly, it is done with the cooperation of fisheries in NSW and police  where they go out and catch people, like the New Zealand counterpart, are knocking  off you know the wrong type of fish or shells or whatever else. You know people  racing around under the influence of alcohol in boats, it has got nothing to do with  the arrival of illegal boat people, not one thing to do with it and she said oh that's  what I meant, I meant that show.

Minister Morrison: Yeah well, I think people have formed their view on that  performance but look the Senate, Labor and the Greens, will team up in the Senate  and wherever else they can to try and undermine the policies that are working  because the alternative to that is to actually acknowledge that for five years they got  it hopelessly wrong, chaos, cost, and tragedy was the result and frankly they should  be welcoming the fact these policies are working. I thought we all wanted to save  lives at sea and stop the boats. That's what they certainly said when they were in  government and supporting the government. That's what we are now doing so I don't  know, I don't understand why they seem so intent on trying to drag down policies that  are working.

Hadley: Ok, well done. Thank you very much.

Minister Morrison: Thank you Ray.

Hadley: The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211651.htm   Last update: Tuesday, 11 February 2014 at 16:30 AEST



