Scott Morrison MP

Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Migration and Maritime Powers Legislation  Amendment (Resolving the Asylum Legacy Caseload)  Bill 2014, counter-terrorism  Thursday, 04 December 2014

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Programme

Fran Kelly: The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison joins us now, Minister welcome  back to breakfast.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Fran, good to be with you.

Kelly: Minister from what the crossbenchers are telling you will you get these  changes though? Will you be able to introduce temporary protection visas?

Minister Morrison: Well that is a matter for the Senate and I am not going to go  around verballing Senators. They can articulate their position. What I know is that the  government has put forward, I think, a very constructive proposition, one that has  been developed up with the crossbenchers, particularly Senator Xenophon and  Senator Leyonhjelm and Bob Day and of course the Palmer United Party. Because  the measures that are being put in the amendments that the government has agreed  to exactly reflects and contains all the matters agreed with the Palmer United Party  earlier this year, which were tabled in the House of Representatives. So what we're  putting to the Senate, what we've put to this Parliament is exactly what we took to  the last election and that was, temporary protection visas, turning boats back where  it's safe to do so and a fast tracked process to deal with the 30,000 legacy cases that  Labor left behind because they just didn't process people just like they didn't protect  our borders.

Kelly: The Palmer United Party had agreed to support the temporary protection  visas but only because you also agreed to introduce something called the Safe  Haven Enterprise Visas or the SHEV which would allow refugees to apply for - to  stay in Australia if they spend more than three years working in a regional area. It is  unclear I think and the Palmer United Party are saying they're unclear if you are  offering people who stay for three years working in the region then access to  permanent residency in Australia. Is that what you are offering?

Minister Morrison: It is three and a half years and that's what was agreed.

Kelly: Three and a half.

Minister Morrison: Those three and a half years in a designated regional area and  that can be either working or studying or a combination of both and what was in the  letter that we provided to Mr Palmer and was agreed to is now specifically provided  in the amendments which we are supporting and putting forward in the Senate. So  that matter…

Kelly: So once people stay for three and a half years working or studying in a region,  then do they get to be permanent residents?

Minister Morrison: No what they get to do is they have the opportunity to make an  application for an onshore visa. That could be any visa but not a permanent  protection visa and that is what was agreed, and that's what's in this bill.

Kelly: So what would get in the way of them not getting a visa to stay?

Minister Morrison: Well they wouldn't have met the eligibility requirements for a  particular visa like a 457 for example or an employer nominated skills visa or a  student visa or something of that nature. So this bill, these measures as we've  agreed them doesn't give them any special advantage for an onshore application but  it enables them to make an onshore application where they do something very  important and that is they work or study to put themselves in a position where they  can continue to make a contribution because a permanent protection visa…

Kelly: But a contribution without the promise of ever getting to be an Australian  citizen?

Minister Morrison: Well they get to make an application and that's what people all  around the world get to do and if you come to Australia illegally by boat then that  shouldn't give you a leg-up for an onshore application. What this bill does and what it  was always intended to do is give someone that opportunity if they could meet that  criteria. That's what we agreed and that's what's in the amendments that we've been  able to put together, particularly yesterday, as we worked through that remaining  issue and I will leave Mr Palmer and the Palmer United Party to outline their position.

Kelly: There is a number of changes you are offering to make, one is an increase in  the refugee intake if temporary protection visas are in place and the processing of  these people can occur. Another one is that it would allow the children and I think I'm  not sure of the numbers whether it's close to 200 or close to 400 children on  Christmas Island could then be brought to the mainland. Why don't you just bring  them anyway, the children?

Minister Morrison: The existing policy and this is the policy of the Labor party too I  should stress is everyone should…

Kelly: Doesn't mean it's a good policy.

Minister Morrison: Well I think the policy of offshore processing, temporary  protection visas, and turning boats back where it is safe to do so, Fran, are very  effective at stopping the boats and stopping the deaths at sea and frankly we have  proved that. So I think those package of measures are good policies. They are

policies that were supported by the Australian people at the last election. But when it  comes to people who arrived after July 19, the policy and Labor's policy has been to  send people to offshore processing. What we agreed given that we've had such  success in stopping the boats, that those who arrived up until the end of the year and  who haven't been transferred then they could be taken into this legacy caseload. It's  Labor's policy that they should all go to Nauru, that's what their policy is. What we've  agreed through this process is that we would take all of those children and there's  more than 460, they're both on Christmas Island and they are also on the mainland,  and they would be taken in the legacy caseload, they wouldn't be taken to offshore  processing, and they would be ultimately released into the community.

In addition to that as we've said we will be providing work rights to those who are on  bridging visas. There's some 25,000 of those. They would be able to work while their  claims are being processed in accordance with what we put forward. So Fran, an  increased intake, work rights, children out of detention, families out of detention, this  is what is on the table. I'm sure you would agree that they are a package of  measures which echo all the various positions that have been put to the government  over a long period of time. Now, it's up to the Senate, but if the Senate does not feel  like supporting an increased intake, works rights and getting children out of detention  in return for the government being able to implement the mandate it got at the last  election for temporary protection visas, turn backs and fast processing to resolve a  legacy caseload then you'd have to ask: what would they support?

Kelly: So if they don't support TPVs then those positive measures of an increased  intake, work rights, and getting children out of Christmas Island out of detention,  that's not on the table anymore? The children will stay in detention?

Minister Morrison: Of course they will Fran because we revert to the policy as it  currently stands. We are suggesting a way forward here and for the way forward to  be achieved then we obviously need to do that consistent with our policies and  consistent with the government's proven, successful border protection regime.

Kelly: But Minister with respect if these are good policies…

Minister Morrison: I am not going to weaken our borders Fran and allow those  boats to come back. I am not going to allow the deaths at sea to start again. I am not  going to allow the chaos and the madness when we had over 40 boats turning up in  a month at one point, almost 2,000 children in detention under that madness. That  can all come back if the government weakens its border protection policy and it ain't  gonna happen on my watch.

Kelly: So if the Senate says no to TPVs the children stay in detention. Why isn't that  the government using children as pawns?

Minister Morrison: It's absolutely absurd and outrageous and offensive to suggest it  Fran. What we are seeking to do is move forward with a policy in partnership with the  Senate. If the Senate takes a different view that's their right but then the government  will have to pursue the policies as they exist and it is the government's policy and it is  the Labor party's policy that people who arrived after the 19th of July will go to  offshore processing. Now if we were to change that and say oh no you can all come

to the mainland and get permanent protection visas then that would be an invitation  for people to get on boats again and Fran I am not going to see children get on boats  again. You in the media through all of this period you remember the chaos, you  remember the tragedy, you remember the cost, and I don't see how any responsible  government could allow that madness to return and to think it can't would be  completely naive.

Kelly: It's 17 minutes to eight. Our guest is Immigration Minister Scott Morrison.  Minister just finally yesterday I think you visited the home of Assim and Bassama  Elbaf the parents of the four Sydney brothers who left home and travelled we think to  fight in Syria for ISIS. What did you say to Assim and Bassama Elbaf, what was your  message?

Minister Morrison: It was several weeks ago, Fran.

Kelly: I beg your pardon.

Minister Morrison: Because in this case what had occurred was a member of the  community had alerted me that these four young men, one boy who is 17, had sent a  message saying they were on their way to that fighting field and we sought to see if  we could have disrupted them along the way but it was too late. I went to see the  family at the invitation of them and supported by Jamal Rifi to seek to convey to the  family that having four sons being lost to this death cult is just a tragedy and a  terrible situation but importantly to try and urge them to work within the community  and with the government to say to other parents you need to tell us if you have fears  for your sons because if you don't tell us, the government - once they go and they  cross that line as I have said before they become enemies of Australia and enemies  of the world.

I was appealing to them to see if we could get the sons to make their own way back  out. The government is not going to go into Syria or Iraq and seek to extract them.  Once they are there they either walk out by themselves and sadly the more likely  outcome is they will never walk out of anywhere again. We appeal to the community  call 1800 123 400 if you have concerns about anything your sons may be doing  please let us know because we don't want to see more Australians become  indoctrinated into this death cult and then likely walk to their own death.

Kelly: 1800 123 400.

Minister Morrison: That is right.

Kelly: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison thank you very much for joining us on  breakfast.

Minister Morrison: Thanks for your time Fran, good to be with you.



