





THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKYNEWS PM AGENDA  THURSDAY 31 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Children in detention; Alcoa

DAVID SPEERS, JOURNALIST: The Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles  joins us live now from Geelong in his electorate and apologies for the slight delay  that is in on this line. Thanks for your time. What is your reaction to some of these  claims that have been made today, particularly the one from a leading psychiatrist  who is involved in providing care to children that statistics on the extent of mental  wellbeing amongst children, mental health problems, were covered up by the  department?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION: Well, David, I  think the substance of the report is deeply concerning. The level of statistics around  mental health problems associated with children in detention is obviously deeply  concerning. But so too is the idea that these statistics are being covered up. When  you hear Australia's Human Rights Commissioner, Gillian Triggs, who is a very  serious person say that the Immigration Department is smothered in secrecy, that  ought to be a concern to all of us and, of course, this minister and this government  has an appalling track record when it comes to transparency in this area of policy.  And we simply need to know what is going on within these facilities, people need to  be given the confidence that children in them are being treated with the very best of  care and, frankly, we can't have that confidence at all.

SPEERS:  Well, the information that that was apparently withheld, or not put into  the report, suggested that 15 per cent of children in detention had clinically  significant emotional distress issues. Are you able to say whether that is any worse  or indeed any better than under Labor when there were many more children in  detention?

MARLES: Well, this is a deeply concerning statistic. That is the simple fact here.  Scott Morrison as the Minister needs to be doing everything he can to make sure  that the conditions that are applying to children in detention are as best as they can  absolutely humanly be. We need to be doing everything that we can, of course, to  get children out of detention but when they’re there, they need to be treated with  the utmost care. Ensuring that they have access to schooling and there have been  issues there in relation to Christmas Island. And making sure that they have access  to counselling. Now, we have heard Gillian Triggs consistently raise concerns about  how children are being treated on Christmas Island. I am also deeply concerned  about the way in which people are being treated on Nauru, across the board and  obviously that includes children on Nauru as well. And what we need to be hearing  from is our minister about exactly what he's doing to make sure that the conditions  prevailing for kids are at world's best practise. Instead, we hear silence and this is a  Minister who hides behind a culture of secrecy.

SPEERS: The Department Secretary did give evidence at that inquiry today and  Martin Bowles had some pretty compelling statistics of his own. He pointed out that  in July last year, when you were still in power there were nearly 2 - 1,992 children in  immigration detention, 688 of them on Christmas Island. Now there are only 659 in  total in immigration detention, only 153 Christmas Island. So there are 530 fewer  kids in detention at Christmas Island. Surely, that is a very important statistic?

MARLES: Sure. And it is important that as people process that kids are removed  from detention, no question. That is not our criticism here. But for those children  who are in detention and when we were in government we did everything we could  to remove children from detention, for those kids who are there, firstly, we need to  understand what steps are being taken by this government to get kids out of  detention. But secondly, when we need an absolute assurance that these kids are  being treated at world's best practise. We don't have that assurance because what  we have got is a culture of secrecy.

SPEERS: The Department Secretary does say that they are being treated the same  as - that all people in detention are receiving the same level of healthcare that those  in the general community in Australia received. Are you saying he is wrong about  that?

MARLES: Well, is the secretary suggesting that the statistics around the rate of  mental illness for children in detention is the same as that which applies across the  population? I mean, the fact of the matter here -

SPEERS: Well no he’s not but that's a reality of being in detention and you're not  saying that these people should be let out of detention. You're not saying these kids  should be released, are you?

MARLES: Well, we are saying that everything should be done to get kids out of  detention and we should be hearing from our government about what steps they are  taking to do everything they can to get kids out of detention and where kids are  there, they need to be treated in a way which is at world's best practice. That has  not been the case in terms in the way in which this government has gone about its

business on Christmas Island. And Gillian Triggs has consistently raised concerns  about that and we share those concerns. But we are also very concerned about the  way in which - about the conditions that are prevailing on Nauru. It seems a  situation where you are making conditions as harsh as possible in order to  encourage people not to go through a refugee status determination, is a big  concern, and we need to be assured by the government that that is not their  strategy when it comes to the way in which they are operating Nauru and for that  matter Manus.

SPEERS: On this issue finally - I just want to clear this up - are you saying that that  150 children, roughly, who are still at Christmas Island, should be released in to the  community detention or some form of care on the mainland and get them out of  detention now?

MARLES: I think we need to be doing everything we can to get children out of  detention. We acknowledge that the starting point is that a whole lot of children will  be there by virtue of their families being there and that there is an element of  processing obviously which needs to occur in order for that to happen. But what we  need to be hearing from the Government is what steps they are taking to see that  this is happening as quickly as possible and that we - and that we are - that they are  doing everything they can to have children removed from detention. That is what we  need to be hearing from the Government. Instead, what we hear is silence. And as  Gillian Triggs said, we have a department which is smothered in secrecy. That is a  damning assessment and it needs to change.

SPEERS: Let me finally ask you, Richard Marles, on a separate issue. In your  electorate there, Alcoa, such an icon for the last 50 years, the smelting plant is  shutting down, the last shift will clock off tomorrow, today the pot line was turned  off. An end of an era for that plant and I'm sure you have been out there and  visiting some of the workers today.

MARLES: I was out there this morning, David, and you've lived in this town as well  and know how important Alcoa is to the identity of Geelong. You know, for the  entirety of my life, I've looked across at Point Henry and seen that smelter. It is a  really sad day. That the pot line was turned off this morning, there was I think quite  an emotional ceremony as the switch was flicked. Indeed, I think one of the pot  lines which was turned on in 1980, the very person who turned that pot line on in  1980 flicked the switch to turn it off today and that must have been a poignant  moment for him. But it is a very sad day for Geelong. Tomorrow will be another  emotional day as the final shift is completed and I intend to be out there again  tomorrow. I think for the whole of Geelong, the day has finally arrived where we are  seeing a very significant number of people lose their employment. And, you know,  amidst all of this, we remain concerned about the fact that this Government is yet to  provide a single cent dedicated to the transition for Geelong as a result of the Alcoa  decision and that is an absolute disgrace.

SPEERS: Richard Marles, thank you for your time and there are indeed some tough  times there for Geelong with that, the Ford plant and other job losses going on  there.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SOPHIE ANDREW 0417 466 413



