

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS PM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 29 MAY 2014

SUBJECT / S: Manus Island police investigation; Tony Abbott’s GP Tax.

DAVID  SPEERS:  Richard  Marles  is  the  Shadow  Immigration  Minister,  thanks  for   your time, what do you make of what the PNG police have said today?

RICHARD  MARLES,  SHADOW  MINISTER  FOR  IMMIGATION  AND  BORDER   PROTECTION: Well  what  is  most  concerning  about  this  David  is  the  lack  of   coordination  and  lack  of  cooperation  between  the  Australian  Government  and  the   authorities  in  PNG  which  this  evidences,  we  said  from  the  outset  that  to  do  this   properly it would need to be done hand in glove with the PNG authorities, we are  actually encouraged that in the Terms of Reference for the Cornall Report that that  was a part of it, and we have been encouraged by the fact that the information in  the  Cornall  Report  was  provided  to  the  PNG  authorities,  but  we  have  been   concerned  from  day  one  about  the  way  in  which  the  Abbott  Government  and   Minister Morrison has gone about his engagement with PNG.

We should never forget that what the Cornall Report makes clear is that the failure  to deal  with  the  question  of  processing and resettlement was  the key issue in  the  increase in tension at the facility and the minister did not have a single conversation  with his counterpart in PNG about that question for eight months after he was sworn

in.

SPEERS: Okay,  let’s  just  get  back  to  the  PNG  police  though,  they  have  now  said   that police did not enter the detention centre either before or during the unrest, now  can I ask how much stock do you place in what the PNG police are saying?

MARLES: Look I’m obviously not in a position to mediate between the versions of  the PNG police and the Cornall Report, I obviously know that Robert Cornall is a

person that has provided fine public service and in reading the report I think it is a  really good report, there I might say remain questions in my mind about what the  minister’s office did or didn’t do in relation to the warnings he was provided.

SPEERS:  Let’s just leave the Minister to one side for a moment, there’s a pretty big  difference here between what the PNG police are saying that the police didn’t enter  the centre and what the Cornall Report has found. The police are also saying they  only shot warnings shots in the air, that is not what the Cornall Report has found  either, there are some glaring differences here.

MARLES: There are, and so the short answer to your question is that I can’t  mediate those differences, but the fact that there are those differences is of  enormous concern because what we should have seen is the Australian Government  working absolutely hand in glove with the PNG authorities and one point I would  make knowing something about PNG and having visited PNG recently and asked  questions around this issue is that I do think the PNG authorities have been working  diligently themselves in relation to this issue but there is now a difference between  the Australian Government and the PNG authorities says everything about how the  relationship is being managed so poorly by the Minister and the Abbott Government.

SPEERS: Look I appreciate you want to lay political blame at the feet of Scott  Morrison here but I want to ask you given that knowledge you have of PNG, of the  PNG police, do you have confidence in the PNG police?

MARLES: I have confidence in the PNG police and I understand that in relation to  this issue they have been working very diligently in their investigation. I cannot  explain obviously the difference in the views that are expressed by the PNG police  and the Cornall Report.

SPEERS: So you have confidence it will bring to justice those responsible for the  fatal attack on Reza Berati and the beatings that were issued to others?

MARLES: I do have that confidence but I’d also make this point David, it is so  important that justice be done here, it is so important that those people who were  responsible for the death of Reza Berati are ultimately brought to justice and held to

account for what they have done. Now, I do have confidence that the PNG police will  proceed with this, but it absolutely needs to happen so that the Australian people  can have confidence that a facility which they are funding is being operated in a  proper way, and sadly right now that confidence is lacking in the Australian people  because of the way in which this Government - the Abbott Government is managing  the facility.

SPEERS: Let’s just step away from this particular issue and let me ask you more  broadly about the asylum seeker policy, why do you think boats haven’t come since  December?

MARLES: Well I think the principal reason why boats haven’t come since December  and why boats have slowed down since the 19th of July is the arrangement that

Labor made with the Papua New Guinean Government to put in place a situation  which took Australia off the table. And what you see from the 19th of July last year is  unquestionably a situation where the flow of asylum seeker vessels reduced by 90  per cent come the election and those numbers persisted right through to December  last year without the Abbott Government doing any substantive work within the  asylum seeker area in terms of dealing with that flow of vessels. So that’s  unquestionably been the main reason.

SPEERS: I’m just going to ask do you think turning back the boats has played a  part?

MARLES: I accept what the Government says, that there haven’t been any boats  since December and I accept what the Government says that they’re turning boats  back -

SPEERS: And has that played a part in the end result?

MARLES: Well, obviously if you are turning boats back it means they haven’t come  but I mean, my concern about this issue is that all of that has been implemented in  a circumstance where there has in effect been a suspended relationship between  Australia and Indonesia and our concern about this policy has always been the  impact it will have on our relationship with Indonesia, it is clearly corroding it, we  shouldn’t forget that a turn back stopped a Prime Ministerial visit to Indonesia, the  purpose of which was to heal the rift between Australia and Indonesia. There is no  more vivid explanation of the impact on our relationship than that and if at the heart  of your question is, ‘are turn backs a good policy?’ You cannot judge the efficacy of  that until we understand how that works in the context of a normalised relationship  with Indonesia and this is a question that the Abbott Government has failed to  answer.

SPEERS: I know but I have asked you this before but it sounds like you are still  open to considering whether it works if you are given that information in the fullness  of time and you can make that judgment as to whether it’s worked or not?

MARLES: So in turn backs it’s clear David, firstly we are open to any measure which  saves lives at sea, of course we are, and we are open to that from a position of  compassion about ensuring that we end the loss of life at sea, but I made very clear  in my speech to the National Press Club this week that we have concerns about the  turn back policy, first in terms of what it does with the relationship with Indonesia as  I have just explained but also the secrecy which that we are seeing out on the high  seas does not allow the Australian people to have a sense of confidence that safety  at sea is being maintained in what is innately a risky and difficult business and we  need to have confidence around that.

SPEERS: Look nearly out of time but I want to ask you beyond your portfolio to the  Budget which has been dominating Parliament all week and a lot of argument again  today about the GP co-payment of which Labor is opposed to but as we’ve heard the  Prime Minister pointing out repeatedly it was a Labor Prime Minister Bob Hawke who

initially put a co-payment on GP visits and of course Labor has long supported a co-payment on medicines, why are you so opposed to a co-payment now?

MARLES: We are opposed to a co-payment because this is going to reduce the  accessibility to health care for the most marginalised people within our society but  what we have seen from the Government is a desperate attempt to reference a very  brief Labor policy almost a quarter of a century ago because they have patently  been unable to sell their policy today.

SPEERS: But if your objection is the most vulnerable they can still be bulk bulled.

MARLES: But in circumstances David where the scheduled fee for the doctor is  reduced and if you are in an area of disadvantage from the point of view of the  system which regional Australia is an example of that, so in my electorate for  example the $9 incentive fee that you would get as a bulk billing doctor is also  removed so that means you get $14 less if you are a doctor in a disadvantaged area  where people are not able to make the co-payment, now the problem here is that if  you’re going to set up a medical practice the last place you are going to do it is in an  area of disadvantage, in Redfern in Sydney or in Norlane or Corio in my electorate of  Geelong and that is precisely our concern about what this policy will do - it reduces  the accessibility to health care for the most vulnerable and marginalised people in  our community.

SPEERS: Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles we will have to leave it there,  thank you very much for joining us.

MARLES: Thanks David.

ENDS

