

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

SPEECH

ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB  TUESDAY, 27 MAY 2014







Thanks Laurie (President of the NPC).

I can think of no more complex, vexed policy area than that of asylum seekers.

It draws strong emotions from the community - since taking this portfolio I’ve  learnt a surprising number of obscenities can be squeezed into 140 characters -  and it demands robust answers to complex questions.

Answers to the questions that come from facing the cruel reality that some 7  million people are seeking permanent asylum in the world today.

The appalling questions of how many should we resettle? Which people should  we resettle? To whom do we say ‘no’? and how do we make this devil’s choice?

You see the wicked reality which underpins this area of policy is whether its  Green, Liberals or Labor we are left saying no to millions of worthy seeking  refuge.

Any intelligent observer of it should immediately be wary of the politician who  merely offers a simple slogan as a solution.

Precisely because of this complexity, if you intend to navigate asylum seeker  policy you better be clear about your values.



The boarding of the Tampa in 2001 was a moment of political rupture for our  country and particularly for immigration policy.

As the Liberals drove our public debate off a cliff of xenophobia, Labor made a  mistake which was perhaps understandable in the midst of this storm.

Our immediate focus was on the unprecedented events unfolding at sea, and in  the process we did not articulate in my view the values which underpinned our  actions.

As we have made difficult decisions in Government and now take difficult  positions in Opposition, it is not enough to get the policy settings right. We must  also win the battle of believability.

And to do so we must articulate what it is we stand for.

There is no doubt that the values that drive modern Labor are compassion,  fairness, and generosity.

A fundamental maxim: that we as a country should not harm people.

Compassion does lead us to seek an end to the loss of life at sea.

Fairness leads us to empower the UNHCR in helping us make the choice of who  should qualify for our humanitarian program rather than people smugglers.

Generosity leads us to increase our humanitarian program.

And through it all we must ensure that we never harm people as a form of  deterrence.

While the policy questions are complex, the politics of boats is crystal clear.

“We decide who comes to this country and the circumstances in which they  come…”

Former Prime Minister John Howard spoke those words in October 2001 during  his election campaign.

A few words intended as a rallying call to voters pressing buttons about our  sovereignty that signaled the beginning of more than a decade of dog whistling,  policy tussling, soul searching, loss of life and the ugliest sides of political  cunning.



This has been an appalling debate for Australia.

People that faced perilous circumstances at home, risking their lives at sea  elicited not compassion but instead were castigated on our airwaves, in our  parliament, and on suburban streets: branded as ‘illegals’.

In the post September 11 landscape, people were understandably anxious - and  the ground was fertile for people’s anxieties to be exploited, including by the  shock jocks warning of Sharia law coming to a suburb near you.

The Liberals had seized upon the worries of a public facing an unknown terror  threat and whipped this frenzy into a political tide.

We were all the poorer for this.

By 2007, the vessels attempting to reach our shores were few (5 boat arrivals).  The people smugglers were devoid of technology we have now - still operating  in relatively primitive circumstances without easily accessible smart phones and  GPS.

While our offshore processing centres remained open, only a handful of people  were in them.

The strong call from the electorate at the 2007 election was to end offshore  processing and abolish Temporary Protection Visas.  In early 2008 the last refugees left Nauru. There was barely a whimper from the  Liberal Party.

While no vessels were arriving - and comparatively few did through 2008 - the  nature of the problem was about to change.

2009 marked a significant change with a spike in the number of people on the  move worldwide.

This was reflected in renewed interest by smugglers in getting people to  Australia: particularly Afghan Hazaras and Sri Lankans.

It is unlikely the Howard Government’s policy would have been effective in  halting the flow given these changing circumstances. People smugglers had  learnt they could still market Australia as a destination - albeit one that required  a detour at Nauru.

Indonesia’s concerns with turn backs meant this was not an active policy in the  last days of the Howard Government.

And the evidence of TPVs has always been that they increase asylum seeker  vessels because under a TPV a boat is the only means possible to effect a family  reunion.

And so the next influx of asylum seeker vessels began.

From the immediate moment the asylum seeker vessels began to reappear,  Labor immediately set about trying to calibrate a solution to stopping them.

While it would have been far from the magic fix in stemming this tide of asylum  seeker vessels, I believe had we maintained offshore processing - it would have  removed any element of incentive.

That was the conclusion of the Houston Report which Labor endorsed in 2012.

In 2010 we saw the Christmas Island tragedy followed by a period which saw the  sea voyage from Java to Christmas Island become the most dangerous journey  in pursuit of refuge anywhere in the world.   And it raised another difficult question. Did Australia have any obligation in  relation to the loss of life on our borders?

There are many voices in the debate today calling for the closure of Australia's  offshore processing.

These voices speak from compassion. And I respect them and recognise the  humanity they bring to a terrible debate.

But if compassion is our touchstone, I cannot see how Australia does not accept  an obligation surrounding this terrible journey.

This was an appalling situation which had to be stopped.

Be it the reintroduction of offshore processing or the work of the Expert Panel  chaired by Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, Labor sought to do all it could to  solve the problem.

The most significant proposal was the Malaysian Arrangement.

With the decision of the High Court this proposition was put squarely in the  hands of the Parliament.

It is at this point that the Coalition's approach to dealing with the question of  asylum seeker policy unravels as nothing but political opportunism.

In following a strict order of obstructionism, Scott Morrison denied Labor co-operation at every turn.

He ran a joint ticket with the Greens to bring down the Malaysia Arrangement.

With the Malaysian Arrangement needing a lifeline in the Parliament, Tony  Abbott was brutal in tossing it aside - a letter to the Prime Minister in which he  rebuked her request for bi-partisanship with a stinging: ‘this is your mess, you fix  it’.

Let me be clear about what the Malaysian Arrangement would have done -

Scott Morrison says that turning back boats at sea has stopped vessels coming to  Australia.

While the Government hasn't told us how many asylum seekers have been  turned around since December, based on the numbers of people arriving as  reported weekly last year, it can be no more than two or three hundred.

The Malaysian Arrangement provided for the effective turnaround of 800.

By Scott Morrison's own logic we see crudely paraded via a daily scoreboard it  would have solved this problem almost three years ago.

Yet the Coalition grasped at a multitude of reasons why they were saying no to  the Malaysian Arrangement.

We have seen Scott Morrison and the Liberal Party try and crudely lay at the feet  of Labor the tragedy of those who died at sea. The truth is that ruthless people  smugglers are to blame for these deaths.

But if Mr Morrison is to continue to indulge in his running tally on our borders,  then it is important to know that 689 of those deaths at sea occurred after the  Coalition rejected the Malaysia Arrangement.

I cannot point to a more ruthlessly opportunistic exploitation of a terrible  situation than what Scott Morrison and the Coalition did in relation to scuttling  the Malaysian Arrangement.

And if we were to believe the concerns he raised then about Malaysia how does  that sit with his negotiations now with Cambodia? His hypocrisy is inescapable.



The point I draw to all this, is that opposition for opportunistic value must not be  allowed to permeate this policy area again. It won’t under my watch.

Unlike our time in power the Abbott Government does now and will continue to  have the support of Labor in bringing to an end the flow of asylum seeker  vessels to Australia. But that does not for a minute suggest we have written  them a blank cheque.

The lasting policy Labor implemented was the PNG Arrangement.

There has been no more important act by an Australian government in reducing  the flow of asylum seeker vessels than this.

By securing an agreement with the Government of PNG to have those persons  found to be refugees at the Manus Island Detention Facility resettled in PNG,  Australia was for the first time taken off the table as a permanent resettlement  destination.

Spreading the word through the networks of people smugglers that taking to the  sea offers no chance of ever being resettled in Australia is the only effective way  to deter people from making the risky journey.

Within two months, by the time of the election, vessel arrivals had dropped by  90 per cent.

Whereas 19 arrived in the week of 19 July.

By the first week of September it was 3.

And there those numbers stayed until mid-December despite the Government  not putting in place a single other piece of substantive policy during that time.

But the success of the PNG Arrangement should ultimately be measured by the  fact that since the day of its implementation on 19 July last year - 312 days - we  have not seen a single loss of life at sea.

This is the real daily count that should be noted.

Today Labor continues to stand for compassion in doing all that is necessary to  bring an end to the loss of life at sea.

We support offshore processing at Nauru and Manus Island as a step which has  saved lives.



But this does not absolve the Government from their obligations to ensure that  Manus Island is a place which is safe, humane and dignified.

Why is that such a hard sentiment for Mr Morrison to express? Why is it such a  hard outcome for them to implement?

The death of Reza Berati in an Australian paid facility is truly shocking. Outbreaks  of violence, harm and abuse have no place in detention facilities of which we are  a part.

It is clear from the Cornall Report released yesterday that the Government  breached its duty of care to those persons at Manus Island.

It did so by ignoring the repeated advice to upgrade security, including fencing  and lighting. It also did so by neglecting the critical relationship with the Papua  New Guinean Government.

The fact that Scott Morrison hastily convened a ministerial forum only after the  tragic violence occurred - 8 months after taking ownership of the facility is a  serious breach of his ministerial responsibility.

There still remain unanswered questions about his conduct and response to the  repeated warnings he personally received about the need to improve security.

Today Labor stands for fairness by working with bodies such as the UNHCR to  determine where best to deploy our humanitarian program for greatest benefit.

As those arriving by sea have filled up the available places in the humanitarian  program, the voiceless in the debate are people in camps such as Dadaab in  Kenya and Yida in South Sudan - which I visited last year.

Languishing in these camps are the world's most vulnerable.

Today Labor stands for generosity by seeing an increase in the size of our  humanitarian program. We are a rich country, we must be doing more.

The Abbott Government's slashing of the humanitarian programme speaks of a  mean, selfish streak that permeates much of its immigration policies.

By the end of the Labor Government we had increased our humanitarian  programme to 20,000. That would have increased over the course of our next  term had we been re-elected.

That would have been the right thing to do, and signaled a system that is fair,  compassionate and generous.

The Government's mean spirited approach has also played out in Mr Morrison’s  dogged determination to use Temporary Protection Visas.

Let’s be clear - unless TPVs are to be offered to people arriving after 19 July last  year - which would amount to putting Australia back on the table - their only role  will be in relation to the 30,000 asylum seekers who are already in Australia.

As such by definition TPV's cannot act as a deterrent.

TPVs leave those on them in limbo.

They are costly, short-sighted and create a cycle of despair and dependence.

Another area of this Government’s policy which raises concerns is the approach it  has taken to turn backs at sea- there is a scant level of information in the public  domain to adequately inform us about what is actually occurring.

Turning around rickety boats at sea is fraught with danger - for our service men  and women and those aboard the vessels. As such we remain concerned about  safety at sea.

The other critical risk is to our relationship with Indonesia. The clandestine  Operation Sovereign Borders is corroding this relationship.

There is no more vivid demonstration of this point than the fact it caused the  cancellation of a Prime Ministerial visit to Indonesia which was intended to heal  the rift.

This is the nonsense of pursuing a policy of regional cooperation from an  autocratic standpoint. And a guns blazing, go it alone effort to rule our seas will  not work over the long term.

We simply must work with Indonesia, and our other neighbours on this issue.  Labor supports a regional solution to this global challenge.

The relationship with our neighbours is a significant point of difference between  Labor and the Coalition, for where we stand for regional co-operation on asylum  seekers (with Malaysia and Indonesia or with PNG and Nauru) the actions of the  Abbott Government make it abundantly clear that they stand for unilateralism.  This is not sustainable.

While there is much work which needs to be done before Labor settles on the  precise policy that it will take to the next election, there are some important  observations to be made now.

Central to our position will be a continued support for offshore processing and  the PNG Arrangement.

We will also stand for humanity and dignity in the way that system operates.

And Labor will stand for a significant increase in our humanitarian program  befitting a wealthy country with a generous heart offering a fair go.

One of the collateral impacts of the asylum seeker issue is that it has allowed  very little room for talk of anything else in the immigration area.

I believe the Government has no focus, interest or depth to look beyond the  scoreboard of arrivals.

Scott Morrison will be typecast as the hard man of our borders. And that may  suit him for his future political ambitions.

But the immigration space is much more than chest beating on good days and  deathly silence on the bad ones.

Below the politics lies a debate about the critical role immigration will play in our  future economy acknowledging the wonderful role that immigration has played in  forging contemporary Australia.

Bob Hawke has said that the great influx of migrants after the Second World War  is the most defining feature of Australia today. He is right.

And so beyond the toxic politics around asylum seekers we want to have that  debate, to enliven it, and to talk about immigration policy, not with fear, but with  pride in our past and optimism for our future.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

