

Australian Mission to the United Nations E-mail   australia@un.int

150 East 42nd Street,  New York  NY 10017-5612    Ph 212 - 351 6600    Fax 212 - 351 6610   www.AustraliaUN.org

AUSTRALIA AUSTRALIA

UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  19 September 2014





The Situation in Iraq



Statement by HE the Honourable Julie Bishop, MP   Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia



(As delivered)





I thank you Mr President for initiating this meeting today, for we

must send a clear signal of the international community’s strong

support for Iraq.  Australia endorses the terms of the Presidential

Statement; it is an affirmation of Iraqi and international efforts to

combat the terrorist threat posed by ISIL and to provide

humanitarian relief to prevent further suffering.



- 2 -





The attacks by ISIL have brutalised the Iraqi population and

shocked us all.  Atrocities against women and girls and against

vulnerable minorities and security force opponents, as well as the

barbaric use and then beheading of captured journalists, an aid

worker and others, to advance their depraved agenda, are utterly

despicable.



Who can forget the grotesque images shown around the globe of

an Australian child, not more than nine years old, standing with his

father, an ISIL leader, holding up the severed head of a soldier?

This showed, beyond any ambiguity, the kind of hideous acts of

which this group is capable.



Australia condemns absolutely ISIL and its ilk, their barbarism and

their ideology.  The international community cannot, with any

conscience, turn away.  We cannot leave the people and

Government of Iraq to face this cruelty alone.



- 3 -





ISIL’s actions leave in no doubt the severity of the threat to the

region and to the wider world.  It poses a threat to Australia, our

friends in South East Asia, and beyond.  We have seen this before

- extremists, foreign fighters, returning home - responsible for

terrorist attacks in our region. Australia’s security and law

enforcement agencies have taken steps in recent days against a

group in our country inspired by ISIL who were seeking to emulate

their brutality in Australia.  ISIL is a threat to the fundamental

values of the international community and an affront to our shared

sense of humanity.



Australia has announced our preparedness to do more to help Iraq

and its partners in this fight.  In cooperation with Iraq, we are

deploying a military force to the region for possible involvement in

a United States-led effort to support Iraq against ISIL.  We are

willing to provide strike, early warning and air-to-air refuelling

aircraft, and a Special Forces Task Group to advise and assist the

Iraqi Security Forces.



- 4 -





This is a prudent and proportionate response to the threat posed by

this murderous terrorist organisation.



Efforts to effectively end ISIL’s ravages and territorial ambitions

will necessarily involve measures to cut off ISIL’s support

network, including the flow of fighters, arms and funding.  There is

more we can all do.  Australia is introducing legislative reforms to

address the threat from home-grown terrorism and is intensifying

our counter-terrorism engagement with others.  We urge other

Member States to do the same.



Political measures are also needed.  Formation of a new Iraqi

Government is a positive step towards addressing issues that

contributed to ISIL’s advance.  Australia supports Prime Minister

Al-Abadi as he seeks to form an inclusive government capable of

rebuilding a stable and cohesive Iraq that can counter the forces of

violent extremism.



- 5 -





The security situation in Iraq remains grave. The humanitarian

needs, including of innocent women and girls in conflict zones, are

multiplying.  Nearly two million people are believed to be

internally displaced.  These people are vulnerable. Their protection

needs are urgent.  ISIL has explicitly targeted minorities and also

women and children for sexual violence.  There must be

consequences for the perpetrators.



Australia will help address the needs specifically of displaced

women and girls, and victims of gender-based violence, and

provide a further $2 million to help the United Nations Population

Fund to scale up delivery of reproductive and other health care.

Australia has provided $5 million in emergency humanitarian

funding to Iraq and we have undertaken air drops of emergency

supplies to besieged communities on Mount Sinjar and in Amerli.

We have also provided around $130 million in humanitarian aid

for those in dire need in Syria, and assisted Lebanon and Jordan

face the outpouring of refugees across their borders.



- 6 -





The humanitarian crisis must end. The international community

cannot stand by and do nothing in the face of ISIL’s threat to

humanity.  This is why Australia is joining international partners to

assist the Iraqi Government in its fight against ISIL.



Thank you Mr  President.

