

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  MONDAY, 31 MARCH 2014  PERTH  SUBJECT/ S: Liberal cuts to school funding; Coalition attacks on NDIS;  Distribution of GST revenue; Commission of Cuts; Climate Change; W A  Senate election.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It’s fantastic to be here at  Belmont Primary School today with Labor's Senate team including Joe Bullock  and Louise Pratt. Also accompanying us is hard working local State Member of  Parliament Sam Rowe. Today we're visiting Belmont Primary School because we  are concerned that Tony Abbott wants to be a Federal Prime Minister in the  mould that Colin Barnett is a State Premier. We are concerned that education  cuts are occurring in Western Australia and that if Tony Abbott gets a rubber  stamp in his Senate, we will see further cuts to Western Australian schools. Tony  Abbott is the one who introduced State issues by saying he models himself on  Colin Barnett. Colin Barnett has got rid of 350 teachers, 350 school assistants,  $183 million dollars taken out of schools. In human terms it means that the  school behind me, Belmont Primary School is losing $47,885. What this means  for the remarkable students, the remarkable kids here and their hard working  parents and hard-working teachers, is less books in the library, less instruments,  musical instruments for the kids to learn on.



It means there will be less one on one time. Every parent in Western Australia  knows that if their children get extra one on one time with teachers and  teachers’ aides, the children’s learning outcomes will be a lot better. We're  concerned that education cuts will be one of the features of the upcoming  federal budget. We are concerned and alarmed that the Abbott Government has  had the Commission of Audit or the Commission of Cuts report now for two

months. They have even got a final report. They will not tell Western Australian  parents and teachers what cuts are in store for their kids. It is ridiculous that on  one hand Tony Abbott says he will give some money to Western Australia for  education, on the other hand he gives the green light to Colin Barnett to take  existing State funds out of Western Australian schools. This is not good for the  children of Western Australia. If Tony Abbott doesn't trust West Australians with  the Commission of Audit, why should West Australians trust Tony Abbott? Happy  to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, don't you think voters will see this as a cynical stunt,  highlighting State issues in a Federal campaign?

SHORTEN: I think the cynicism is that Commission of Audit which the Abbott  Government, Abbott Liberal Government's commissioned, where they know what  cuts they are thinking of but they won't tell people. There are very few things  more cynical than a Prime Minister of Australia asking people to vote for him one  week when he knows what he has in store for them but won't tell people. It was  Prime Minister Tony Abbott who said that he wanted to model his Government  on the Barnett Government. It wasn't Labor who put the words into Tony  Abbott's mouth. They came out of the Prime Minister Tony Abbott. He said "I  want to be like the Barnett Government" but what that means for Western  Australia is he wants to be like a Government who has cut 700 people from the  education system, who takes away resources from Western Australian schools.  The right direction for this country in the future doesn't involve cutting teachers,  teachers’ aides, resources for the kids so they get the one on time so that they  can be the best they can be.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has guaranteed funding for the first four  years of the Gonski education plan. Beyond that not so certain, but would you  commit to guaranteeing those funds in years five and six?

SHORTEN: Yes, we have committed. We understand that the prep children here  or the year one and two children are still going be at this school in more than  four years’ time. Parents, when they raise their children, don't make decisions  based on the media cycle or the 24 hour news cycle, parents are DNA hard wired  to make sure their kids get the best start in life and they reach adult life resilient,  happy, with a strong education. Parents in Western Australia need a Federal  Government and Federal Senate team who share the same long term plans for  their children that the parents have for their children.

JOURNALIST: You have committed and you still will commit to the next  election for those years five and six?

SHORTEN: Yes.



JOURNALIST: That will cost I think about $7 billion additional is that you’re  prepared for that?

SHORTEN: We budgeted for this when we were in Government and  furthermore, what does it cost Australia if we short change our kids?

JOURNALIST: If there are cuts, don't you agree the Government is doing the  right thing by trying to reign in the deficit?

SHORTEN: First of all you’ve got a confected budget emergency by the Abbott  and Hockey Liberal Governments. They have said they don’t intend, for instance,  on foreign aid they’ve said they have no intention in the immediate future of  achieving the targets of 0.5 per cent of gross national income which was the  foreign aid target. Yet in their mid-year economic statement they released at the  end of last year, they’ve got a bogus target in there by 2017/18. So what they’re  doing is they are creating straw men targets and then they are going to cut them  away. But what they’ve done, they have no intention of achieving that target, yet  they are actually pretending to inflate the deficit so they can justify their sense of  emergency. You tell a Government by the priorities it chooses. You can tell the  Abbott Liberal Government by the priority that they are giving the green light to  cuts in education at the state level. You tell the choices that a Government  make. We all pay our taxes to governments and we all want governments to  make choices which are in the benefit of the many not just the few. So what we  have here is the Abbott Liberal Government is making a choice that it will  downgrade its support for education compared to Labor.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, the Liberals are shifting their blame on recent  budget cuts. What do you have to say about that as a whole?

SHORTEN: When will the Abbott Government recognise they're no longer an  Opposition, they’re a Government. They’ve been in power now for the best part  of six months plus. They’ve got a hidden report which they won't tell Western  Australian voters about. They’ve got the wrong priorities. On one hand they’ll  give millionaire parents an extra $75,000 to have a baby yet they’ll cut payments  to orphans of military veterans. On one hand they say there’s a budget  emergency but on the other hand they’re coming up with schemes which are  not, with this paid parental leave, which clearly are extravagant gold-plated  schemes. We want to see funding for education, we think that education -  cutting resources, tens of thousands of dollars at Belmont Primary School doesn't  help. You see Joe Hockey’s giving lectures that people have to do the heavy  lifting. Mr Hockey, West Australians are already doing the heavy lifting. The  parents at this school are already doing the heavy lifting raising their kids. The  teachers at this school are already doing the heavy lifting. Why on earth should a

child in grade three or four, the great kids I was reading to, why do children  have to do the heavy lifting for Joe Hockey’s budget emergency.

JOURNALIST: Labor's primary vote has dropped to 29 per cent according to  the latest Newspoll. Are you concerned about the second Labor seat?

SHORTEN: We take nothing for granted. The biggest concern in this election is  that people don't turn out to vote. What I would say to Western Australians is  that I am as frustrated as you that there has to be another election. But what I  would also say to Western Australians is this is the first time this has happened  in the history of federation. This is one of the most significant chances that West  Australians have to make their mark on the Commonwealth of Australia by  picking Senators who will not be a rubber stamp for the Abbott Liberal  Government. But what we say to Western Australians is please turn out to vote,  regardless of who you vote for. And maybe this is not even in my interests but if  you want to vote for another party we would rather you vote for Labor but I  would rather you vote than don't vote. What we can't afford to do is hand away  the Senate to Tony Abbott's Liberals merely because people couldn't be bothered  voting.

JOURNALIST: One of the biggest problems for WA is the GST carve-up. Can  you commit to a revamp of the GST carve-up that would give at least some  money back to WA and what do you think of the proposals for the reduction in  the threshold for the GST on imported goods?

SHORTEN: Well there’s a couple of issues there so I’ll just go through each of  them piece by piece. First of all, in terms of the GST, and indeed just general  states funding across the nation, there’s a Commonwealth Grants Commission  which is an independent process. I believe that when you get something as  complex and vexed as who should get what, it is better to have that process  done at arms-length and I remain a constant supporter of an independent  process to make some of those decisions on the allocation of resources across  Australia. In terms of the GST online, it was John Howard who introduced an  exemption for GST on goods purchased overseas when they brought the GST in.  It was set at $250. It was Treasurer Joe Hockey who increased - sorry it was  Peter Costello who increased it to $1,000. Now what we see is the increasing  prevalence of online. We see that small businesses, in the high street, are feeling  some real pressure, that people can go online and buy their items cheaper on  line.



But of course you have to balance against that, you’ve got consumers who are  able to beat cost of living pressure by being able to try and secure the best deals  possible. It‘s not a simple issue. We're interested to see what the Government  comes up with. We recognise very clearly that there are competing pressures.

You’ve got people who purchase online who will be very frustrated if there’s a  new tax on them and the Abbott Opposition specifically made an election  promise not to tamper with GST. This is an ongoing issue. I don't think there is a  simple answer and we will see what the Government comes up with.



JOURNALIST: On the topic of climate change, a new report says Australia faces  increasingly frequent and more intense floods as a result of climate change.  What do you think the Government should do and what would you do?

SHORTEN: Well the Federal Government’s first got to accept, the Abbott Liberal  Government has first got to accept that climate change is real. We know that  they’ve got an expensive direct action policy which will pay polluters to pollute.  No serious economist anywhere supports the Abbott Government's measures.  What we see is just like they want to give millionaires an extra $75,000 to have a  baby, they want to provide polluters extra resources without any guarantee of  results. We believe in terms of climate change that a market-based system is the  best way to price pollution in terms of climate change.

JOURNALIST: You’ve said that this is effectively a referendum on Tony Abbott's  leadership over the first six months of Government. Isn't it also a referendum on  your six months as leader of the ALP?

SHORTEN: With the best will in the world I’m the Opposition Leader not the  Prime Minister. The Prime Minister’s the person in charge of this country. It is the  Prime Minister who says he wants to be like Colin Barnett. It is the Prime Minister  who’s got the wrong priorities. Very simply, why on earth would you give  $75,000 extra for a few people to have a child yet cut orphans' payments? What  on earth was the Prime Minister thinking spending weeks and weeks watering  down protections against racism and bigotry and what on earth was Tony Abbott  thinking creating new honours in Australia rather than focusing on jobs and  creating new jobs for Australia? This is a Government with the wrong priorities.

JOURNALIST: Some of your colleagues have suggested that Labor should  reform by moving further away from the unions. What message does it send to  them to have Joe Bullock, a very prominent union member, as number one on  the ticket for Labor?

SHORTEN: First of all David, I don't know if you got to see my National Press  Club speech last week, what I made very clear there is that I will be leading a  push within the Labor Party to modernise our relationship with trade unions. But  I think in terms of Joe Bullock, the idea that someone’s got up every day for 35  years to represent low paid workers is exactly the sort of people that you want to  see standing up and making sure that people in the retail sector have a voice in  the national parliament, not just people from Tony Abbott's fairly narrow gene

pool.

JOURNALIST: What about these allegations of a slush fund though. That’s not  a good look at the moment is it?

SHORTEN: Are you talking about Australian Water Holdings? Senator Sinodinos?

JOURNALIST: I am talking about the story in the Weekend Australian about the  slush fund?

SHORTEN: I understand that Joe Bullock’s answered those questions already.

JOURNALIST: Do you support the Government's decision to cut free  immigration advice for asylum seekers?

SHORTEN: This is a Government who wants to divide Australia into goodies and  baddies. What I would say to the Abbott Government is focus on education,  focus on health, focus on jobs.

JOURNALIST: Do you acknowledge that more work should’ve gone into the  NDIS? That it was launched too early and isn’t sustainable in its current form?

SHORTEN: I am not going to join the Liberal chorus attacking the National  Disability Insurance Scheme. The National Disability Insurance Scheme is about  empowering the lives of hundreds of thousands of Australians with disabilities  and their carers who’ve been effectively exiled in their own country. I am  revolted by the fact that the Abbott Government since they’ve got in has had  nothing good to say about the National Disability Insurance Scheme. It’s all been  on the never never. The Abbott Government is playing dangerously with the  hopes of hundreds of thousands of people with profound or severe disabilities.  The Abbott Government before the election was just like they would be on a  unity ticket on education, they’ve broken those promises. Just like they were  going to be on a unity ticket about disability reform, you can see them walking  away from those issues. I have no doubt that the Abbott Government can't be  trusted when it comes to standing up for people with disabilities and their carers.  Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053

