

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MEMBER FOR ISAACS



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC AM INTERVIEW WITH MELISSA CLARKE  WEDNESDAY, 8 JANUARY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Immigration; Relationship with Indonesia.

MELISSA CLARKE: Mark Dreyfus, if there have been two tow-backs recently, as  reported, is it a sign that the Coalition has been able to successfully implement  its policy?

MARK DREYFUS: The problem is we just don't know and Scott Morrison cannot  continue to keep Australians in the dark over this. He needs to front up and  explain what the Government is doing.

I think it's shameful that we are learning more from the Jakarta Post and from  Indonesian authorities than from our own government.

CLARKE: But if policies are being successfully implemented, which we might be  able to presume from these reports, then is the Australian public knowing the  details straight away that critical?

DREYFUS: Absolutely it's critical. We need to know when these events occurred,  how many asylum seekers were involved, how many Australian Navy vessels  were involved, what's the cost of these operations, how these events are  consistent with the refugee convention, with maritime law, and most importantly,

what attempts have been made to obtain Indonesian cooperation.

There's a whole host of questions which need to be answered by this Minister  and are not being answered.

CLARKE: Well, Indonesia's Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa has again stated  his nation's condemnation of the turn back the boats policy, but he's also said  that he expects relations between the two countries to return to where it's been in  the past. So is it that much of a cause for concern?

DREYFUS: It's a great cause for concern. The Foreign Minister of Indonesia is  an experienced diplomat and he is being very diplomatic. But in no uncertain  terms he has repeated Indonesia's rejection of this policy.

Prime Minister Abbott was warned more than a year ago about this Indonesian  response and what we've got here is an Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison,  and a Prime Minister who are not wanting to face up to the fact that to get  regional cooperation, to get a regional arrangement, we need the cooperation of  Indonesia and that is not forthcoming.

CLARKE: But Marty Natalegawa also said that he is having almost daily  conversations with the Foreign Affairs Minister Julie Bishop, so relations can't be  that dire if there is still that sort of close contact going on.

DREYFUS: And I'm very pleased to hear that that kind of communication is going  on, but it remains the case that Indonesia rejects this kind of tactic by the  Australian Government.

CLARKE: The Government is also refusing to confirm or deny whether reports  are correct that life boats have been purchased to transfer asylum seekers so  they can be sent back to Indonesia in seaworthy vessels. What do you make of  this idea?

DREYFUS: I can't make anything of the idea because Australians are being left  to guess at what the Government is doing in our name. We've been left to guess  what our Navy is being asked to do. That is not acceptable.



The only justification for this cover-up is a political one, where the Minister and  the Prime Minister are not wanting to explain to Australians what's going on  because that would make clear just how disastrous the impact this has had on  our relationship with Indonesia.

CLARKE: Scott Morrison would argue that informing the Australian public of  what's going on and what these approaches are would also be informing people  smugglers what's going on and give them the ability to prepare in advance.

DREYFUS: That's never made any sense. It's nonsense to suggest that people  smugglers are not informed about their own operations and about the fate of their  operations and it's equally nonsensical to suggest that you wouldn't want to be  telling potential people smugglers what is happening out there and what is likely  to be the fate of their operations.

On no level does it make any sense and, I repeat, it's just a cover-up by the  Government to cover up for their own political and diplomatic ineptitude. It's a  cover-up for seemingly the fact that they don't know what they're doing.

And the Australian people are entitled to know more. They're certainly entitled to  be told by their own Government what is being done in our name. They shouldn't  have to wait to read about it in the Jakarta Post or to be told by Indonesian  authorities what our Government and what our Navy is being asked to do.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ANNIE WILLIAMS 0428 040 522



