

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC AM INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS UHLMANN  WEDNESDAY, 9 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Tony Abbott’s comments about people in detention facilities;  Asylum seeker vessel turn backs; Relationship with Indonesia.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Richard Marles is the Opposition spokesman on immigration and  border protection. Welcome to AM

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning Chris, how are you?

UHLMANN: Richard Marles, I'm well.  Richard Marles, first and foremost, do you agree  with what the Prime Minister has just said, that Australia shouldn't succumb to moral  blackmail, with people trying to commit suicide to get protection inside Australia for  themselves or their children?

MARLES: Well I've seen the reports in the paper today. I don't know more about the  reports than what I've read.  We've got concerns about the situation on Christmas Island  and the standards of the facilities at Manus and Nauru. These facilities need to be run in  a way which are safe, dignified and humane.  And I can never understand why either  the Prime Minister or the Minister for Immigration can't use those phrase, use those  phrases to describe the needs of those facilities.  They need to be operated at that  standard and we need to hear how the Government is going to do that.

UHLMANN: Certainly, but to the point: should a government succumb to moral  blackmail?

MARLES: Well, I'm not going to go into that because I don't know the detail of the  circumstances that are persisting in relation to these individual cases.  What I know is  that these facilities must be run in a way which are safe, dignified and humane. I've got  concerns about whether that's happening or not. It worries me that the Government  can't use that phrase in terms of describing the standard that these facilities ought to be  held to. And clearly, that's what needs to occur now. And we ought to be hearing from  the Government about how it's going to maintain those facilities at that standard.

UHLMANN: Okay, but we have seen suicide attempts before under Labor governments  in conditions which you would describe as safe, dignified and humane. Should a  government submit to that kind of attempt to get a protection visa?

MARLES: What matters is that we are running our facilities in ways which are safe,  dignified and humane. What matters is that we are giving people protection visas on the  basis of whether or not they qualify as genuine refugees.  And in the case of those

people who have come by asylum seeker vessel after the 19th of July last year, which is  when the regional resettlement arrangement was put in place by Labor, if you like, when  Australia was taken off the table. What matters is that those people are processed in  either Nauru or Manus and that Australia genuinely is taken off the table so that we stop  seeing the deaths at sea and hopefully that's what has occurred.  But that the human  tragedy, which needed to be addressed by putting in place the facilities at Manus and  Nauru, was a circumstance of more than a thousand people dying on our borders that  needed to be brought to an end.

UHLMANN: To the case that the High Court is considering, the bottom line here for you  as a politician is the Coalition said it would turn back the boats. Its many critics said that  was impossible. It turns out that it's both possible and very effective. Do you believe  present and future Australian governments should have the power to turn back boats?

MARLES: Well, I question whether it's been effective. I don't think we can judge the  efficacy of the policy of turning back boats, Chris, to Indonesia in a context where that  arrangement has been put in place with a suspended relationship with Indonesia  existing. The real question, or the real moment to judge the efficacy of that policy, is  how it manages to survive in the context of a more normal relationship with Indonesia,  when Indonesia itself makes clear that it doesn't like this policy and this policy is clearly

eroding our relationship with Indonesia.

UHLMANN: Do you believe an Australian Government should have the power to turn  back boats if it's safe to do so?

MARLES: Well, the question is not so much the power to do it, but the question is how  we do that in a way which continues a proper and functioning relationship with our  nearest neighbour in the case of -

UHLMANN: Would you do it if you could confirm that?

MARLES: If we were able to do that in the context of a relationship with Indonesia - is  that your question?

UHLMANN: Yes, it is.

MARLES: Yeah, well, it's a completely hypothetical question in circumstances where  Indonesia have made it absolutely plain and continue to make it plain that this is a policy  they reject and a policy which is clearly eroding that relationship.  I mean the point here  Chris is a very simple one. Over the long term - not over the past few months and not  over next month, but over the long term, over the next few years, over the next decade -  how do we really imagine that we're going to have an effective policy of seeing an end  to asylum seeker vessels coming from Indonesia to Australia if we are not working  hand-in-glove with Indonesia? That's the principal issue here. And when our partner,  who we have been working hand-in-glove with over the last few years, makes it clear  that this is not a step they want to see happen -

UHLMANN: Certainly.

MARLES: Then it's clearly a problem -

UHLMANN: But the Government has clearly broken the back of this trade and the  Labor Party appears to be in denial about that, that boat turn-backs actually have been  effective?

MARLES: Well it's not, we accept the fact that they have turned back boats, but, and it's  not about being in denial in relation to that.  The people who are in denial here about  what has worked in terms of achieving an end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels is  the Government, because the principal measure which resulted in the reduction in the  flow of asylum seeker vessels has been the PNG arrangement. That was put in place  on the 19th of July last year.  Within two months of that, we saw the flow of asylum  seeker vessels reduced by 90 per cent. That persisted right through until the middle of  December without the Government doing any substantive steps in relation to dealing  with this issue. Turn-backs occur from that moment on.  The most important thing the  Government have done is actually continue the policy that Labor put in place -

UHLMANN: And in order to bring it to an end completely they have done boat turn-backs, so they took it from 90 to 100 per cent, and I guess the question the High Court  is considering now is: is that legal. And if it was legal, would you do it?

MARLES: Well, they've done that - I don't think actually that is the question that the  High Court is considering, and we'll come to that in a moment. But they have done that  in the context of a suspended relationship with Indonesia, so all of it has had a level of  unreality about it. The question of the efficacy of that policy has to be judged when we  have a normal relationship with Indonesia.  But what the High Court is considering now  is whether or not the process that the Government has gone through in assessing  asylum seekers on boats which have not come from Indonesia but have come from

reportedly India and Sri Lanka, whether that is appropriate.  Now that's actually the  question which the High Court is considering. That is an issue that we have from the  outset of this particular saga had concerns about, because it seems to us, we don't  understand how you can assess people's individual cases when collectively everyone is  steaming towards Sri Lanka.

UHLMANN: Richard Marles, we'll have to leave it there, but thank you.

MARLES: Thanks Chris.

UHLMANN: Richard Marles is the Opposition Spokesman on Immigration and Border  Protection.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES:  LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

