



THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH DAVID SPEERS   TUESDAY, 8 JULY 2014



SUBJECT/S: VISIT OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN, ASYLUM SEEKERS



DAVID SPEERS: Tanya Plibersek thanks so much for your time. Can I start by asking  whether you welcome, and Labor welcomes, Japan’s reinterpretation of its constitution  to allow its military to be used abroad in defence of friendly partners?

TANYA PLIBERSEK: Look, I think obviously that’s a matter for the Government and  the people of Japan, but there have been occasions obviously when Japan would have  been welcome in peacekeeping missions when their own interpretations of their  constitution has suggested that that’s not possible so certainly we welcome it.

SPEERS: And is that what you think this is about? Using Japanese troops in  peacekeeping missions or do you have the interpretation that Beijing has placed on  this? That it is about containing China?

PLIBERSEK: Well, certainly I take the Japanese statements at face value. They’ve said  that this is about bearing a load of international peacekeeping work and being available  to go to the assistance of friends.

SPEERS: Well, the Japanese Prime Minister spoke today in the Parliament here about  joining together to make the vast seas and skies of our region open and free. Are the  seas and skies open and free at the moment?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think it’s clear that we do have clear seas, open skies. I think it’s  important we keep them that way. The best way to do that is to continue to have good  dialogue with all our partners.

SPEERS: But when you look at what China’s doing, while he didn’t mention China  specifically, it is involved in rather aggressive territorial disputes with Japan, the  Philippines, Vietnam and it has imposed an Air Defence Zone over the Senkaku/Diaoyu  Islands, so is that what he’s getting at there, do you think?

PLIBERSEK: Well, you’d have to ask him for an interpretation of his own words. I don’t  think that in practice there have been a great number of changes in the behaviour of our  neighbours in the region. I think that there has been some increase in tension and

what’s important for us is to make sure that we keep lines of communication good and  clear with Japan, with China, with all of our neighbours in the region, not just between  us and them but also in a regional sense between our partners as well.

SPEERS: But you don’t believe, at the moment, there is any threat to the freedom of  movement in these sea lanes and in the skies as well?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think it would be irresponsible to pretend that there hasn’t been an  increase in tension but I don’t think there’s been a change in behaviour and it’s very  important that we do whatever we can to reduce tension and not to contribute to it.



SPEERS: Do you believe part of what Prime Minister Abe has been doing today and  during his visit is building a coalition of regional allies to protect against Chinese  territorial aggression?

PLIBERSEK: No, I think it’s perfectly natural for Japan, for Australia, for China, for  Korea, for Indonesia, for India, for all of the significant powers in our region to seek to  establish good relationships with one another. There’s nothing unusual about that and  people shouldn’t go looking for hidden meaning.

SPEERS: The two agreements, firstly the defence cooperation agreement, the two  leaders have struck, do you welcome that? Are you in favour of this?

PLIBERSEK: Yes. Yes, I think that military technology transfer agreements can  potentially be beneficial. I think it’s going to very important that we hold the Government  to its commitment to build our future submarines in Australia though because we know  there are significant employment benefits from doing that but there’s also significant  technology developments in Australia that come from that very high-tech military  construction.

SPEERS: And would you like to see further defence cooperation in terms of training, the  use of Australian bases and bombing fields as well for training exercises?

PLIBERSEK: I don’t think there’s any harm in further cooperation with Japan and I’d  also point out that Australia was very welcoming of China’s participation in the PACRIM  naval exercises. I think it’s good to have close relationships, good friendships, including  military cooperation with all of our neighbours. That really becomes apparent at times of  natural disasters as well, so being able to work together, communicate well under high  pressure situations, you really see the benefit of those exercises at times like this,  peace times, when you see those natural disasters.

SPEERS: And the other agreement, the free trade agreement or economic cooperation  agreement, that’s been struck between the two countries. How significant is that, do you  think?

PLIBERSEK: Well, who knows? We haven’t seen the text of it. This is an extraordinary  thing isn’t it, that three months after the text has been finalised, the Government of  Australia still hasn’t trusted the people of Australia to be allowed to read the text of the  agreement. Of course we welcome closer trading relationships with Japan, we began  the process of negotiating this agreement in 2007, so of course we welcome closer  trading relationships. But how can it be that the Government can sign an agreement,  make an announcement, months ago, and release only you know, a few glossy pages  on a departmental website in explanation.

SPEERS: Parliament ultimately will have to ratify this, are there any red flags to be wary  of?

PLIBERSEK: Well, how can we possibly know? I mean, I go back to the fact that this  agreement has been finalised for months and the Parliament hasn’t been trusted with it  and the people of Australia haven’t been trusted with it. Our Government really has got  a pretty bad record on keeping these things a little too secret, a little too long.

SPEERS: Well, turning finally to asylum seekers, an area where Labor has also been  quite critical of secrecy around what’s been happening at sea, in the High Court this  afternoon, the Government has acknowledged that yes, there is a boat of 153 people.  It’s going to give notice it says before handing them over to Sri Lanka, 72 hours’ notice.  Labor’s main criticism here seems to be the fact that they were processed or subject to  enhanced screenings, as it’s called, at sea. Is that the problem here, that it wasn’t done  on land?

PLIBERSEK: Well, there’s a few problems. The first problem is it takes the High Court  of Australia to confirm to the people of Australia that this boat actually exists and that  the Australian Government is in contact with the people on this vessel. It is  extraordinary that it takes the High Court to confirm this to the people of Australia. We  have been learning more about our asylum seeker arrangements from the governments  of other countries and from our own courts than we learn from Australian Ministers or  the Prime Minister. That’s the first thing. The second thing is because we know nothing  about the way these people are being processed, who they are, what potential threats

they may be subject to on return, we don’t have a lot of confidence in the way they’re  being processed.

SPEERS: But under Labor’s policy, say Labor was still in power, correct me if I’m  wrong, but these asylum seekers would have been brought to Christmas Island,  would’ve been subject to the same enhanced screening there and quite likely sent back  to Sri Lanka then.

PLIBERSEK: There’s nothing wrong with making a quick decision if someone’s not an  asylum seeker and they’re not going to be given refugee status in Australia, keeping  them for months or years doesn’t benefit them and it doesn’t benefit us. What is  unacceptable about this is the secrecy and the fact that we don’t know how these  interviews are being conducted, if they’re on Christmas Island at least we would know  that we have proper interview processes.

SPEERS: But you had enhanced screening processes as well, and returned more than  a thousand Sri Lankans.

PLIBERSEK: If someone’s not a refugee, you might feel sorry for them but  unfortunately with millions of people around the world who require protection, feeling  sorry for someone isn’t a good enough reason to keep them in Australia. If they’re not  refugees, they have to be returned swiftly.

SPEERS: Well, how do you know that’s not the case with these people as well?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I don’t know.  And you don’t know. And nobody knows. And the only  things that we’re finding out -

SPEERS: But if they’re subject to same enhanced screenings, whether it’s on a boat or  on land, does it matter?

PLIBERSEK: But we don’t know that they are. We don’t know who’s doing the  screening, we don’t know the circumstances, we don’t know anything because this  Government is addicted to secrecy. They’re addicted to keeping from the Australian  people the details of the trade agreement with Japan, and the details of what’s  happening on this boat.

SPEERS: But if we did know that they were subject to enhanced screening on a boat,  on a customs vessel -

PLIBERSEK: You’re asking me to make up a hypothetical, you know, if this happens  then this would happen, then this would happen, would that be okay? You can’t have  these kind of hypothetical wanders through what might be happening somewhere in the  middle of the ocean.



SPEERS: I get Labor’s objection to the secrecy here, I’m just trying to establish on the  policy that is, as far as we know, being carried out. Is it the fact that they are processed  on a boat? Is that the problem?

PLIBERSEK: It’s the fact that we don’t know how they’re being processed. We don’t  know where they are, we don’t know what conditions are being applied to them. If they  were on Christmas Island, you could process them quickly, and you could return them  quickly if they’re not refugees, but we would have some insight, some oversight, some  guarantee that people are being treated fairly.

SPEERS: Tanya Plibersek, thank you.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

