

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC NEWS RADIO   MONDAY, 30 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S: Scott  Morrison  refusing  to  answ er  questions  about  reported   asylum seeker vessels.

JOURNALIST: Richard Marles, do you know what it happening with these asylum  boats that are reportedly perhaps being intercepted by Australian vessels? Because  there is some Labor information from Alannah MacTiernan, your colleague who has  been on Christmas Island.

RICHARD MARLES:  Look, I know as much as has been reported in the media,  and all of those are unconfirmed reports. There appear to be two vessels, there is a  large vessel which is reportedly come from India with Tamil refugees on board -  about 150 odd, many of whom are women and children and there seems to be a  smaller boat as well. Exactly what is the fate of those people, of course, we don’t  know and this is why we need to be hearing from our Minister today, who would  absolutely know all the details. There are very legitimate questions that are in the  public interest that have been asked of the minister and all he has done is essentially  told everyone to go away and that isn’t good enough. It is not good enough to be  beating your chest on the good days and going into hiding on the bad, but that is  the form of this minister.

JOURNALIST: Well the Minister has been providing very little information even  through the six months during which the Government has pointed to the success in  having no boats arriving in Australian waters, so this is no different today is it?

MARLES:  Well, I actually think there is an enormous difference between the way  the Minister behaves when it comes good news and when it comes to bad. On more  than 60 occasions this year we have seen the Minister go out with press releases or  with Dorothy Dixers in Parliament and pat himself on the back. This is the most self-congratulatory Minister we have ever seen. Just last week we were looking at this  Minister and Prime Minister crowing about six months without a boat. They have set

up this political score board, and of course now there is some inconvenient news in  relation to it, and as a result we are not hearing from him and that is not how you  run public policy. But I think if we are to judge this Minister it shouldn’t be judging  him on how well he pats himself on the back, we actually ought to judge him on the  basis of how he deals with difficult and complex matters and today it is very clear  that on that regard he has failed.

JOURNALIST: You are critical of the minister for not talking about the policy, but is  it the case that Labor still supports the policy of the Government, that people who  are met on asylum boats if they are intercepted should be sent to offshore  detention?

MARLES:  Well, Labor put in place the PNG Arrangement. It has been a really  important measure in reducing the flow of asylum seeker vessels, and it is true that  we want to do everything we can to see an end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels  because we want to see an end to the loss of life at sea. But we need to hear from  our Minister is exactly what is going on. What state are these people in? What action  have our Navy and our Customs personnel undertaken? These are legitimate  questions, they are in the public interest and we ought to be hearing from him.

JOURNALIST:  Just to repeat you want the Minister to say what is going on, but in  terms of the policy substance you fully support him?

MARLES:  Well we support offshore processing, in terms of whether we support  him, it is impossible to explain that in circumstances where he is not saying exactly  what the Government is doing. But we absolutely support offshore processing, we  support doing everything we can to bring an end to the flow of asylum seeker  vessels because we want to see an end to the loss of life at sea, and hopefully that  is where we are now at. But it is impossible to make a judgement on that when we  have a Minister who won’t tell us what is going on.

JOURNALIST: Specifically what information do you want? The broad picture is that  boats may be there and may be intercepted, do you simply want that clarified?

MARLES: We want to know that everyone is okay. That is a really legitimate  question to ask - is everyone okay? Is everyone being looked after? What exactly  has happened on our high seas? They are very reasonable questions and in  circumstances where there are a whole lot of reports in the media about women and  children being on board these vessels, about people being in situations of distress. It  is completely reasonable that there is concern shown for these people, and utterly  reasonable that we hear from our Government about knowing that everyone is being  looked after and is okay.

JOURNALIST:  Richard Marles, thank you very much.

ENDS

