

DAVID FEENEY MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS’ AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE CENTENARY OF ANZAC  SHADOW MINISTER FOR JUSTICE

MEMBER FOR BATMAN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA   WEDNESDAY, 20 AUGUST 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Beheading of American Journalist by ISIS, National  Security, Clive Palmer/ Jacqui Lambie comments, Mathias Cormann’s  comments on the Budget.

KIERAN GILBERT: With me now the Shadow Assistant Minister for Defence,  David Feeney, David thank you very much for your time. I want to start with the  shocking news out of Iraq and the Islamic State releasing a video reportedly  showing the beheading of an American journalist- the latest outrage from that  region.

DAVID FEENEY, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: As you  say it is the latest atrocity, in what has been a ghastly and grotesque train of  atrocities in recent days and weeks. And really since ISIS burst into Iraq some  weeks ago we have just seen this story get ever more ghastly. And today,  unfortunately, is another installment in what is a very serious set of issues and  events there in Iraq and more broadly in the Middle East.

GILBERT: It is such a difficult scenario to deal with given that you have the  United States and Syria and Iran all lined up in opposing this group but short of  troops on the ground it is hard to see how they can be repelled entirely.

FEENEY: I think, perhaps, we can be a little more optimistic than that. I have  actually just come back from the Middle East, where we saw US forces together  with French Air Forces and British Air forces and even Australian humanitarian  flights being run by the Royal Australian Air Force, all contributing to the effort of  helping the refugees fleeing ISIS. In more recent days we have seen the US  forces and others providing close air support to some of the local forces,  particularly the Kurdish Peshmerga who have started to roll back the ISIS forces  in northern Iraq. We saw only in the last 24 hours Mosul Dam, a very key piece  of infrastructure, in northern Iraq, was again secured by the Kurdish Peshmerga  with the support of the US Air Force. What I am saying is that I think with  carefully calibrated support from the Unites States and perhaps others,  particularly air support and humanitarian support we can see local forces  manage this very serious and terrible crisis.

GILBERT: One of the related problems that Australia has to deal with, and other  countries with Indonesia as our close neighbors, is the issue of returning  jihadists, so big a problem is it that Barack Obama is going to be chairing the  security council next month when the United Nation General Assembly is on to  push this very point-to try to generate momentum in dealing with this problem.  As you well know from our intelligence agencies it is a real threat to Australia as  well.

FEENEY: Yes, and we have seen this phenomena of foreign fighters in the  Middle East really start to affect every country and sadly this includes our own. I  think you have heard the numbers, I think there is in the order of 160 persons  who are either there or have been there working with Islamic Jihadists in recent  times. And that is a threat that the whole nation needs to take seriously. Bill  Shorten and the Labor Party have made it very plain to the government that we  stand ready to work with them collaboratively in managing that issue, it is  obviously a serious issue, but one that we have some experience of, we did have  a number of jihadists come back from Afghanistan. So successive governments  have had to manage this but the challenge continues. And we welcome the fact  too that the Islamic community has been engaged and needs to be engaged so  that this becomes something that is managed by the Australian community as a  whole. And that it is not used as an opportunity to create social discord- but it is  something we need to take very seriously and the Labor Party supports any  reasonable effort to do that.

GILBERT: I want to move on now to the comments of Clive Palmer and Jacqui  Lambie, what are your thoughts on this? The Chinese coverage has been rather  sympathetic to the Australian government’s response saying that people have  been outraged by Palmer. But is there any longer term strategic problem here  from what he has said or, I guess, any longer term damage that may have been

done in the bi-lateral relationship that you might be worried about from what  Lambie and Palmer have said?

FEENEY: Look I don’t think so. The Chinese are very sophisticated and  intelligent analysts and interlocutors with Australia. I think they well and truly  comprehend the fact that the commentary from one lone Member of Parliament  or even a handful of parliamentarians doesn’t signal an Australian government or  an Australian national perspective. So I don’t think that is going to be a  challenge. China understands that Australia has a far more mature and better  developed sense of dealing with the international scene than perhaps Clive  Palmers comments might indicate. Perhaps the real issue here is what is Clive  Palmer trying to do? Perhaps he has succeeded in his mission in that he has  made himself the story again. Hogging the limelight was perhaps his chief  mission. As to the substance of the comments: obviously inflammatory, obviously  absurd and I don’t think they will have any real impact on the relationship with  China. The trading relationship, the booming people to people relationship, the  Australians studying in China and more and more Chinese studying in Australia,  and even our militaries cooperating in exercises just recently in Hawaii for  RIMPAC. So at all levels our relationship is continuing to do really well. And the  peaceful rise of China is something that foreign policies of the globe, including  Australia, are all very keen to embrace and continue to support.

GILBERT: What is your sense of the politics of this, do you think the electorate  will have a backlash towards Palmer, not only are some of the comments absurd,  particularly that of Jacqui Lambie talking about an invasion, they are also  hypocritical given that he was courting China for Business.

FEENEY: Well I think that is a key point and he has made these remarks in the  context of having his own dispute, his own legal dispute, with his Chinese  business partners, or his former Chinese business partners. That context is  obviously very important. How that will be judged by the Australian Public? I  don’t know. Perhaps the caravan will move on, perhaps Clive will change the  channel to another subject tomorrow. As I say, the main point might be, from  Clive’s perspective, an absolute resolve to hold center stage.

GILBERT: I think that is a fair point, just to finish on the budget if we can. The  government says that it is situation normal- that was the message from Mathias  Cormann last night, that 99 per cent of the budget or there about’s has gone  through, expenditure measures and so on, we are only talking about a fraction  here.

FEENEY: Obviously they are trying to talk up their circumstances, this budget  has been a rolling disaster for the government now for some three months, I  don’t think we have ever seen a budget capture the political debate and hold it

for so long like this budget has managed to do. Given the Treasurer’s recent  performances he now seems to be in the witness protection program for the  government and poor old Mathias has been thrown into the frontlines. But no  matter how hard Mathias Cormann works on these issues he can’t escape the  fundamental truth and that is that this is a budget that broke a swag of  promises. We have seen Tony Abbott set a new standard in terms of breaking  promises in Australian politics. And it is a budget built on a budget emergency  that people just don’t believe exists and most importantly the government  doesn’t believe exists.

How could it be that we have a budget emergency yet the government can give  $9 billion to the Reserve Bank, can continue to promote a gold plated parental  leave system and of course a Medicare co-payment that is not raising money to  retire debt but is in fact raising money so that it can fund a new initiative of  government, a research fund? So even the government’s own deeds don’t bear  out their language. And as people have seen the budget emergency story fade to  grey the whole political rationale for government, about why so many cruel  measures and promises had to be broken also fades. We have seen the budget  unravel and we are seeing it unravel still.

GILBERT: Do you accept though, that we are talking about margins here, that  the vast bulk of it has gone through like the government asserts?

FEENEY: Sure, listen there is an awful lot of budget measures that have gone  through because they don’t require legislation. That’s the normal business of  government; there is obviously some key measures that they are going to be  locked into contest with in the Senate. The key point is those parts of the  program they got through, those parts that they are still negotiating with Clive  Palmer and the Greens all of it goes towards a sad and sorry story of a budget  that has misfired politically and does not have the confidence of the Australian  People. And we now see the government languishing as a result and a Treasurer  who is forced to be in hiding because he has so mismanaged the sales task of  convincing the Australian that the harsh measures and broken promises were  justified.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LAURA WOOD 0423 815 604

