Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP

Terrorism, Coalition Government's anti-terror measures, Operation  Sovereign Borders, Manus Island, unaccompanied minors,  government's actions to remove children from detention

Wednesday, 10 September 2014

Interview with Fran Kelly, ABC Radio National Breakfast

Fran Kelly: Scott Morrison is in our Canberra studio, Minister welcome back to  breakfast.

Minister Morrison: Good to be back, Fran.

Kelly: Minister you are a member of the National Security Committee of Cabinet  which met last night. Is the federal government planning to increase the terror threat  level?

Minister Morrison: This is a matter for David Irvine. He said what he said last night.  What he said last night obviously doesn't surprise me in terms of the advice that he  has been providing but where that threat level is set is a matter for the Director  General and I think he has made some pretty clear comments there.

Kelly: David Irvine did say he has 'an elevated level of concern about the potential  risk' and he also suggested concern in terms of what some of the Australians who  have been going to Syria and coming back are doing right now here in Australia.  What are they doing here in Australia that ASIO is so concerned about?

Minister Morrison: Again, these are very sensitive matters but I think it is important  to note that these threat levels are set by the Director General. They are not set by  politicians or anything like that and the sorts of issues that he is talking about  obviously have been concerning the government for some time and that is why we  have announced the $630 million package which the Prime Minister did some time  ago and within that there is a $150 million package for Border Protection and  Immigration. Within that the measures I am announcing today, Fran, which you  referred to in your introduction for both Advance Passenger Processing as well as for  our Airline Liaison Officer network.

Kelly: I will come back to that in a minute but just to stay with this because I think  people woke up today and saw the threat level could be increased to high which  means a terror attack is not only possible but also likely. Can you tell us if that is  based on intelligence of a specific threat?

Minister Morrison: What I can say is that what David Irvine has been doing now for  some time has been alerting and bringing to both the government's attention and I  think in his own public commentary as the government has as well, that we are living

in very uncertain times. The issues in Iraq and Syria are not just occurring there in  terms of their potential reach. They can reach countries such as Australia. The  United Kingdom as you know has elevated its threat level already. These are very  serious matters and that is why the government is taking such a strong approach  and response to the information we are receiving from our intelligence agencies.

Kelly: If the threat level does move up to high, which we haven't experienced here in  Australia, will we notice it? What will it mean for all of us?

Minister Morrison: There is a gradated level of activity here Fran and even though  we have been at the current level since 2003, what David Irvine said last night is that  we have obviously been at the upper end of that. I know in my own portfolio we have  had our Customs and Border Protection officers leaning very much forward at our  airports particularly over the course of this year. We reversed the previous setting  which had facilitation over security which had been in place for some time. We  changed that earlier this year and our security is the top priority and I know that on  occasion there may be times where a plane can't leave on time or people may be  offloaded. That is just putting diligence over convenience.

Kelly: You will be announcing some new measures in your portfolio today to close  some security gaps at airports. Can you tell us about what you will be announcing?

Minister Morrison: First of all we have already announced the Counter Terrorism  Units around our airports, we have already announced eGates. I was up in Brisbane  launching that last week. They use the facial scan technology for departures. That is  a new initiative, 62 new departure eGates around the country will be rolled out.  Today we are outlining the fact that we are going to our departure Advance  Passenger Processing. What this means is already we do that on the way in and  have been doing that for some time. That is working with airlines, that is working with  others to ensure we know who is getting on planes. We are now going to be doing  that on the way out. In addition to that we are looking at the Airline Liaison Officer  network and we will be expanding that. That is a highly effective unit of people who  are stationed around the world, it basically takes our border on our shores and puts it  at the point of embarkation for people. So this is all about tightening up, it is all about  extending our reach, it is all about giving us as much heads up and time, notice, and  information to ensure we interrogate the likelihood of threats that may be presenting  and we have the time to address that in a responsible way.

Kelly: It is seventeen minutes to eight. Our guest this morning is the Federal  Immigration Minister Scott Morrison. Minister the first anniversary of Operation  Sovereign Borders is next week. Today I understand you will tell the National Press  Club that border protection is not just about stopping the boats, this is a quote, we  also need to do all we can to stop the drugs, the guns and the gangs, we also want  to stop the terrorists. The two of course are quite separate; asylum seekers are here  asking for help they are not here to threaten us. You need to be pretty careful don't  you as the Minister not to conflate boat arrivals with the threat of terrorists unless you  are suggesting they are coming in on boats?

Minister Morrison: No, I am not suggesting that and nor did my statements today  reflect the conflation that you have just put to me. Our focus on border protection has

very much been on the people smuggling challenge but there are many other  challenges that present at our border. They are gangs, they are trans-national  criminal activity, there is the threat of drugs, there is the importation of guns. We  need to ensure that we are addressing all of these threats not just the people  smuggling threat. So I think you are reading a little bit too much into that Fran.  People smuggling is something we have to deal with, it was out of control under the  previous government. We have addressed that head on and what I am saying is we  are a government that is very committed to border protection and we are going to  counter all the other threats that present as well and they are the ones that I have  outlined.

Kelly: Minister you will also tell the Press Club quote the grand policy experiment on  border protection is over; it is the Coalition's policies that effectively stopped the  boats. That argument, that debate is settled and it is time to move on. Are you  declaring an end to this? Are you saying you have come up with a solution to stop  the boats for good?

Minister Morrison: What I am saying is that for some period of time, ten years  almost we have had this debate in Australia about what the most effective measures  are to try and deal with this problem. We had the grand experiment under Kevin  Rudd where the measures that worked under John Howard were removed and those  measures under Kevin Rudd completely failed and it made their entire government  dysfunctional and it paralysed that government. Now I know a lot of people find this  debate very difficult, very controversial and very upsetting. At times in the past  people used to say to me why do we even have to talk about this? Well we will stop  talking about it when we get it fixed and what I am saying is we are well on the road  to doing that. I think the measures that we talked about in opposition, we  implemented when we were last in government and we have implemented again  show that this is the way you fix this problem. That is what we are doing. I think we  can now move on in this debate.

Kelly: A lot of people, I mean the community I think is split on this issue as you just  referred to, a lot of people who don't think it has been worth the high cost. There  have been two deaths of two asylum seekers on Manus Island, widespread criticism  of poor mental health of detainees in offshore processing. Yesterday of course the  incoming UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in his first speech in Geneva  censured the Australian government saying the offshore policy was leading to a  chain of human rights violations. Your argument seems to be that the ends justify the  means, that's it.

Minister Morrison: Well Fran are you suggesting that 1,200 people dying at sea  was an acceptable situation…

Kelly: No I am not accepting that at all.

Minister Morrison: I know you are not saying that Fran. My officers who work with  me today who were out there on the seas were pulling those corpses out of the  water. Now this is a very difficult issue where there are no easy solutions and there  are no consequence free policies in this area. All policy decisions in this area have  very difficult consequences. At the last election I think the Australian people made it

very clear they had seen enough people die at sea. That is stopping. We haven't  seen a death at sea now since turn backs were introduced at the end of last year…

Kelly: But we have seen deaths in detention.

Minister Morrison: We have seen two terrible incidents in detention with those  deaths. One Reza Berati for whom two people have now been charged in Papua  New Guinea and we have had a full investigation into that matter which was released  in full. Mr Hamid Kehazaei who tragically passed away last week we understand as a  result of septicaemia - this is a matter before the coroner and is a matter that is also  being reviewed by my Chief Medical Officer. Now these are difficult environments  where we have to manage people under the leadership of the PNG and Nauruan  Governments but if anyone is going to put to me they would rather see 268 boats  that turned up in the first eight months of last year rather than just the one that turned  up this year, if they want to make that argument Fran they can. I am not going to  make that argument. I believe our policies are working and I believe the Australian  people do too.

Kelly: The tragic death of Reza Berati, the murder of Reza Berati at Manus earlier  this year, just on that evidence given before a Senate inquiry this week suggests,  and I am wondering what it will mean for you, if it is established the Salvation Army  acting on behalf of the Australian Government of course, was aware in advance that  an employee harboured malicious intent before he went on to allegedly murder this  man.

Minister Morrison: Well I have seen that report Fran and at the moment that really  is a matter for the Salvation Army. There will be other matters that will progress in  the PNG justice system and I will see how those progress. But I always seek to try  and approach…

Kelly: It is a very slow progression in the PNG justice system isn't it?

Minister Morrison: Well Fran this was a difficult investigation for them to carry out.  They had to track people down which is, we are not talking about an Australian  situation here we are talking about a PNG situation and I am pleased that there were  two arrests. I remember people said constantly after February there will never be any  arrests just like they said that the boats could never be stopped. People are very  quick to rush to judgement here on these things. I am pleased there have been  charges. I think that is a very good development. Now the justice system has to  operate and I am sure Minister Pato and Prime Minister O'Neill are very aware of the  need for that system to work effectively as well.

Kelly: And can I just ask you finally Minister a former Immigration Minister Chris  Bowen told the Human Rights inquiry yesterday that he often struggled to maintain  the role of guardian of unaccompanied children with his Ministerial position and that  he had considered changing the legislation on this front. The Greens want the  guardianship of unaccompanied children taken from the Minister and given to an  independent office. Do you think more distance should be put between the Minister  and the decisions you take that affect unaccompanied minors?

Minister Morrison: Well I have not found such a conflict but these are matters the  government can consider but what I would stress is this in terms of Mr Bowen's  testimony yesterday — he made the same point I had made to the Human Rights  Commission when I presented there a few weeks back. He wasn't going to release  children out into the community in a situation where he thought they would be worse  off on bridging visas. That is the same decision that we took when we came to  government and I have now fixed the situation with bridging visas where those  children can be released. The opportunity to deal with others who may be in the post  July 19 caseload can only really be addressed with a satisfactory resolution of the  temporary protection visa issue which Labor have dealt themselves out of but Mr  Bowen also said there was no way he could get children out of detention consistently  as the boats kept arriving. That is what happened under Labor. We have had the  number of children in detention now fall by more than 40% since we came to  government. The key factor for that is Fran we are stopping the boats.

Kelly: Scott Morrison, thank you very much for joining us.

Minister Morrison: Many thanks Fran.

(ENDS)



