

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA







E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RADIO NATIONAL WITH ALISON CARABINE  MONDAY, 7 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government’s approach to the new Senate; asylum seekers;  Japan-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement.

ALISON CARABINE: Penny Wong, thanks for coming in.

PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Good to be with  you.

CARABINE: The Government wants a vote on the carbon tax as soon as the new  Senators are sworn in this morning. Aren’t you just delaying the inevitable by trying to  put the vote off for another week?



WONG: What the Government is doing is trying to talk about anything other than a  deeply unpopular budget which hits families and hits our pensioners.

They are bringing the carbon price on today, despite the fact that they Senate is  prepared to debate it, not in a few months’ time but next week. The only reason they are  bringing it on is to put pressure on the crossbench to upend the rules of the Senate and  to give the Government a bit of a win. I’m sure from their perspective is sorely needed  given the extent to which Australians know that this budget is unfair.

CARABINE: But the Coalition has campaigned relentlessly for a number of years  against a price on carbon. It clearly has a mandate to repeal the tax, we know where the  crossbenchers stand, aren’t you just being a nuisance by trying to stall the vote?



WONG: I know that Coalition Governments might think that accountability and the  democratic process of the Senate is a nuisance. I happen to believe that the Senate is  an important part of our democracy, that’s why so many millions of Australians, so many  more Australians voted for non-Government Senators than Government Senators.  That’s why we have the Senate we have and the Senate has a range of processes and  rules in place which are about ensuring there is proper scrutiny and proper  consideration.

Now the Carbon Bills were referred to a committee and they were due to report on the  14th of July - it’s not a long time and that’s what the rules of the Senate say and if the  Government does this it’s quite clear the way the Government’s going to treat the new  Senate.

CARABINE: So you, want the report into the repeal Bills to be tabled before a vote?  Does that mean…

WONG: That’s not what I want, that’s what the Senate has agreed.

CARABINE: Does that mean you still hold out some hope of convincing enough  crossbenchers to block repeal. It must be a pretty forlorn hope.

WONG: I have to say, I am not going to, as Leader of the Opposition in the Senate,  going to be in the habit of predicting which way people are going to vote in this Senate. I  suspect those people who do that might be in for a pretty hard time over the next few  years.

I’m simply saying this, the Senate has rules which are about making sure every Senator  has the right to scrutinise legislation, has the space and capacity to do their job.

CARABINE: The repeal will be back dated to July 1, the longer the vote is delayed  doesn’t it become even more complicated for entities such as power companies to  refund whatever tax is owed back to July 1. Compliance is going to be pretty complex?



WONG: We are already, if the repeal has passed, we are already in a retrospective  world and I’d say nothing in the Bill will lessen the amount of financial pain that this  Government will inflict on Australian families from policies like their GP Tax and many  other policies that will increase the cost of living for Australians families.

CARABINE: With regards to the cost of living we keep hearing from the Government  that the repeal will save the average household $550 a year. Clive Palmer wants a  guarantee enshrined in the legislation to make sure those savings are passed through.  Surely you too would want to see households better off - does that mean you will be  supporting the Palmer amendment when that goes to a vote?

WONG: We haven’t seen amendments from Mr Palmer or more importantly from  Senators Lazarus, Wang or Lambie. We will consider those amendments as and when  they come forward which is another indication, I think, as to why, the Senate should, as  its rules indicate, vote on the Carbon Price next week.

CARABINE:  The crossbenchers will hold the balance of power in this new Senate. The  Prime Minister has promised to neither hector nor lecture them. Eric Abetz describes  them as all being God’s children. You will be leading any negotiations on behalf of  Labor, what kind of approach will you be taking?



WONG: Well if the Coalition aren’t going to hector or lecture anybody, I wonder if  anybody has told Senator Abetz or Senator Brandis because I have to say their  performance in the Senate Chamber suggests that that is their primary way of  operating.

CARABINE: Maybe with the Labor Party. They will be cosying up to the crossbenchers.

WONG: George can’t help himself. I think he hectors and lectures everybody, that  seems to be the Brandis way. We’ll put our position to them and we will do so  courteously and respectfully. If we have differences we will explain why. But I think there  is a very fundamental point here which is not about how but is about the what. This is a

Government which is seeking to impose, essentially, an attack on Medicare, it’s seeking  to make sure poorer people find it harder to go to University, it’s punishing our  pensioners and our young people. No Australian voted for these things. Now that is  what we will be putting to the crossbench. We will be putting to them very clearly,  Australians did not vote for these things, they are unfair and we want your support to  defend Medicare and equality in this country against this Government’s assault.

CARABINE: I take it you will therefore be looking to develop a constructive relationship  with the crossbenchers. Now you yourself have a fan in Jacqui Lambie. She’s  nominated as her female political heroes, yourself and Margaret Thatcher. Now the

quote from Jacqui Lambie: “I think Penny Wong is the same as Margaret Thatcher in  that she can hold her own, she doesn’t back down, she wears her heart on her sleeve,  she’s sweet, I like her.” Will you return the compliment?

WONG: It’s very kind of her. I was going to say to Jacqui when I see her in person  again, not very often I get on the same list as Margaret Thatcher.

CARABINE: No, never.

WONG: And it is kind of interesting that she’s put me there. But look, you know, I think  that women in politics as we know do have to hold their own and I think Jacqui  demonstrates a capacity to do that and good on her.

CARABINE: Penny Wong if we could move on to the asylum boats, the Government  has confirmed that it’s handed over 41 Sri Lankan asylum seekers to the Sri Lankan

Navy, 37 Sinhalese and 4 Tamils. Do you accept the Government’s assurances that 40  of the 41 were economic refugees and therefore have no real risk of persecution?

WONG: I make a few points. Australians shouldn’t have to read about what their  Government is doing in reports from international news agencies.

CARABINE: Well the Government has confirmed that today.

WONG: Hang on, confirmed some facts, belatedly, after dropping some facts to one  newspaper. These are serious issues and the Government should treat them seriously.  Australians also expect that their Government complies with what are ethical and legal  obligations which are not to return people to the risk of persecution. Both parties of  government have always held that that is their position.

If the Government says they have complied with that then they should be full and frank  about how they have done so, in the face of so much concern, grave concern, that has  been expressed by Richard Marles, our spokesperson, and other members of the  community.

CARABINE: And did the Labor Government comply with ethical and legal obligations  when it returned more than 1,000 Tamils to Sri Lanka under the so-called enhanced  screening process? Really what moral authority does Labor now have to criticise the  Coalition?



WONG: Are you suggesting that we didn’t comply with the Refugee Convention,  because I don’t, no-one has put that to me.

CARABINE: Well, the Government is saying that it’s also complied with the Refugee  Convention.

WONG: Then, they are the Government and they should explain how. And here’s an  offer for the Government. Under our system, the Westminster system, Ministers are  accountable to the Australian people through the Parliament. The Senate is sitting  today, so why doesn’t Mr Morrison’s representative, Senator Michaelia Cash, instead of  coming in and telling everyone, and I quote, “We’re big enough and ugly enough”, “big  enough and ugly enough” is how she, to deal with this problem, why doesn’t she come  in and give a full and clear explanation about the Government’s assertions.



I don’t think on something as important as this it’s good enough for the Government  simply to allow rumour to run, concerns to grow, and to simply drop a few lines into one  newspaper and believe that accountability has been met.

CARABINE: Penny Wong, we do need to touch briefly on trade, you are also the  Shadow Trade Minister. The Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe will be in Australia.  Tomorrow he will sign the free trade deal with our Prime Minister, or at least the two

Governments will sign the deal. Are you satisfied that this agreement will be in  Australia’s best interests?

WONG: Look we are supporters of trade liberalisation because trade, good trade  agreements bring great opportunities. Our concern is two-fold. First is transparency.  We’ve got a Prime Minister who is about to sign an agreement. If it is good enough to  sign, surely it is good enough to release to the Australian people. They still haven’t put it  out.

CARABINE: You mean you haven’t seen the wording?

WONG: Well have you? I don’t think Australians have and he is going to sign it. I think  that is fair enough, it is fair enough for people to demand that it be seen.

The second point is quality. You want good quality trade agreements and I would note  that a number of industry groups were highly critical of some of the provisions of this  agreement. I’d just say to the Prime Minister, if it is good enough to sign, surely it is  good enough to release ahead of signing.

CARABINE: Penny Wong thanks for your time.

WONG: Good to speak with you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SACHA FENTON 0467 784 528



