

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC INTERVIEW WITH MARK PARTON  WEDNESDAY, 27 AUGUST 2014

SUBJECT/S: Humanitarian intake program, asylum seekers, Marles’  fervour for the Geelong Football Club

MARK PARTON: With some amazing scenes in Belconnen outside the  immigration department yesterday, there was a refugee pop up embassy that  popped up yesterday, and this is part of a long campaign, it was outside the  Department of Immigration, about 60 people gathered in peak hour traffic on the  median strip along Benjamin Way, and they described this as the start of a long  campaign against Immigration Minister Scott Morrison and his policies.  Refugee  Action Committee Convener John Minns was the one that was doing most of the  talking and he eluded to this a little during the protest that although they’re  saying it’s a protest against Immigration Minister Scott Morrison and the  Government, its essentially a protest against the two major parties because  despite what Richard Marles may say, the two major parties, their immigration  policies although there are some differences in them, are broadly speaking the  same.  And I think this John Minns said yesterday that yeah he acknowledged  that there were many similarities between the policies of the two major parties  but they were fighting for a long term change.  Richard Marles, Immigration  Spokesman for the Opposition, joins us now, what do you say to that Richard?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: There are elements of the policies which are similar  Mark, there are areas which are very different, we have a different view about

the size of our humanitarian program as a starter, at the end of Government we  had a program of 20,000 people a year, it was reduced by this Government to  13,750, that’s more than 6,000 people each and every year given an opportunity  to live in Australia I think that’s a big difference.

PARTON: Richard, we’re really tinkering around the edges here.

MARLES: Well really that’s not tinkering around the edges, that’s almost a 50  per cent difference in the size of the humanitarian program and sure we are in  agreement about the question of having offshore processing, we’re probably not  in agreement about how those centres should be run but we both agree that  they should be there.

PARTON: But that’s the biggest single thing they were protesting about  yesterday isn’t it, and that’s the biggest drama, and it’s a policy which is shared  by both Liberal and Labor.

MARLES: Well that part of it is shared by Liberal and Labor I’m not going to  contest that, I guess what I do think is that often we see people looking at this  question solely through the lens of the issue of offshore processing, it is  important, obviously it’s important, it’s not the whole story either.

PARTON: No I don’t suppose it isn’t the whole story but it’s the one they’re  going to continue to focus on and I guess there’s a pretty good reason why this  policy is shared by both major parties and that’s because, I mean you’re not both  going down this track because you’re in love with processing people offshore it’s  because the majority of Australians are pretty much in favour of it.

MARLES: Well actually I’d cast it differently, we had a human tragedy unfolding  on our borders, that’s the reality, more than 1000 people dying at sea, Angus  Houston in his report said we needed a circuit breaker, that was the language  that he used, a circuit breaker, so that we could see the end of that human  tragedy right now, offshore processing is the circuit breaker and you know Mark  the truth is that it’s worked, in that we’ve seen a dramatic decline to a point we  hope where we see the end of the loss of life at sea and I do think that those  who hold a different view need to answer and grapple with the question of how  they would have policies which would save those lives at sea because this is a  very, it’s a much easier question to deal with if you don’t build in the whole issue  of needing to stop those drownings and we needed to do that.

PARTON: Alright let’s talk about this story involving the 29 year-old Afghan  man, asylum seeker believed to be the first to be sent back to Afghanistan under  the Coalition Government, he lost the last minute legal battle to remain in

Australia, we don’t know his name, we know that he’s 29 years of age, we know  that he was distraught, do you know if he’s gone back to Afghanistan?

MARLES: I don’t, I only know what I’ve read on The Guardian as you’ve read it.

PARTON: So they’re not all that forthcoming with that information for you  Richard?

MARLES: Well I guess to be fair, actually if I was to be fair when I seek  briefings they give them to me so I’m not making that criticism, but also this is a  recent report.  Look the point I’d make about this is that it’s hard to comment on  an individual’s case but I guess the question that it reasonably raises is do we  have faith in the system which would come up with a result like this and from my  point of view, I unequivocally do have faith in that system, we have a very  robust system in this country, people absolutely get their day in Court, questions  get to be examined, it would appear from this report that the person in question  has gone through three levels of decision making, the original review, the  refugee tribunal and then the Federal Court.  All of that says to me that the  question has been thoroughly looked at and whilst not being able to comment on  his case individually, we’ve got a good system and I absolutely have faith in it.

PARTON: Your friend and mine Ian Rintoul has commented as saying, and he’s  from the, what are they called, the Refugee Action Coalition, he’s quoted as  saying that this makes no sense to send an asylum seeker back to Afghanistan  when the country is descending into war.  But if we use that as the yard stick,  look I think the Court decided that his region of the country was in a reasonably  stable state, compared to other parts of Afghanistan, if indeed according to Ian  Rintoul we should just open the doors to everyone who’s living in a country that  perhaps may descend into conflict, that’s a hell of a lot of people isn’t it?

MARLES: Well that would be true, the last comment that the Judge makes  which is quoted in this piece, he said there was not a real risk that the Applicant  will suffer real harm in that district.  Now obviously I don’t have in front of me  the evidence he had in front of him, but that line is the test, it is whether or not  people do suffer or would be likely to suffer a real harm, a real risk of harm  going back to where they have originally come from, and so he’s made that  assessment on the basis on all the evidence that’s been put in front of him and  I’m not about to second guess that and I do think that they system that assesses  people and makes refugee status determinations is not one which is really been  criticised by anyone in this debate and I have faith in it.

PARTON: Can the Cats win the flag?

MARLES: The Cats can win the flag, we absolutely can win the flag, and I think  it was a timely defeat on the weekend  because it means that we got, the point I  was making to some people last night, it’s a good question you’ve asked, we had  the opening of the Parliamentary Friends of the AFL in Parliament last night, I’m  co-convening that august body with Steve Irons, Member for Swan, we had  every CEO of the AFL here along with Gill McLaughlin, the Prime Minister and the  Leader of the Opposition spoke, and I was talking to Brian Cook, the CEO of the  Cats, and I’ve made the point that in each of the years that we have won the  flag, we lost a game at about this stage in the season, so I’m bullish.

PARTON: Well as a West Coast man, I’m still of the belief that we’re going to  make it for at least one week of finals action.

MARLES: Well good luck.

PARTON: So time will tell there, and the way things are playing out, I think  we’d end up taking on Port Adelaide in the first week and that’s, stranger things  have happened.

MARLES: Stranger things have happened.

PARTON: I can see us potentially beating them, I don’t want to face the  Dockers in the first week so it’s the first time in my life on the weekend that I’ll  be cheering for a Dockers victory over Port Adelaide but it’s going to be an  interesting finals series.

MARLES: It’s a great series.

PARTON: Thanks for coming on this morning Richard.

MARLES: No worries, thanks Mark.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI  0427 051 563

