

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC AM WITH CHRIS UHLMANN  MONDAY, 5 MAY 2014

Subjects: Indonesia, the Budget, ICAC



CHRIS UHLMANN: Tanya Plibersek is the Foreign Affairs Spokeswoman for the  Opposition. She’s recently returned from Indonesia. Welcome to AM.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hello, Chris.  How are you?

UHLMANN: Good, thanks. Tanya Plibersek, what do you make of Tony Abbott’s  decision not to attend the Open Government Partnership in Bali?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think it’s quite concerning. We understand that the  President of Indonesia has issued a personal invitation to the Prime Minister and  ironically it’s to attend an open government forum but we don’t know the reason  the Prime Minister is not attending. It’s not credible to suggest that he is  required in Australia for Budget preparation. The Budget would be basically at  the printers now unless there’s a great deal more chaos than you’d normally  expect around Budget time. So, I think it does put light to the claim that the  Government make that the boat turn-backs policy is not affecting the relationship  with Indonesia.

UHLMANN: You’ve just come back from Indonesia. How would you describe the  relationship?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think overall our relationship is a strong one, but it is  absolutely off track at the moment and Labor wants to see it back on track. We  still don’t have an Indonesian Ambassador here in Australia. It’s been more than  a hundred days since the Australian Government said that they would sign a  document with the Indonesians that would set out some terms around our  relationship that would get it back on track. It means cooperation is suspended  in a number of very critical areas, that’s not good for Australia’s long term  relationship with Indonesia, it’s also not good for Australian businesses wanting  to do business in Indonesia. It’s an important trading partner for us, it’s an  important strategic partner for us, it’s growing and strengthening importance as  Indonesian prosperity increases - we need the relationship back on track.

UHLMANN: So, how much responsibility do you take for the poor state of that  relationship given that what really annoyed the Indonesian President was the  bugging of his phone which took place on Labor’s watch in 2009?

PLIBERSEK: Well, when Vice President Boediono was here just a few months  ago, he said to Bill Shorten and I that the relationship between Australia and  Indonesia, until a few months ago, had never been better and he gave -

UHLMANN: Of course that wasn’t revealed until after you left government.

PLIBERSEK: Well, what I’m talking about is after we left government, the visit  was when we were in Opposition and it was very clear then and it was very clear  in the warm meetings that I had in Indonesia, including with the Foreign  Minister, there’s a great deal of affection for Australia in Indonesia, that there’s a  desire there to get the relationship back on track. I think it does require the  Prime Minister to make a greater effort than he’s made up til now to see the  relationship restored to what it was.

UHLMANN: People have been talking a lot about broken promises in the lead up  to the Budget, but surely the most often repeated promise by the Coalition was  to stop the boats, and that’s what it’s done.

PLIBERSEK: You know, there was a substantial decrease in the number of  people making the dangerous journey to Australia by boat -

UHLMANN: But they hadn’t stopped.

PLIBERSEK: - after Labor worked with Indonesia to stop visa on arrival  arrangements for Iranians transiting through Indonesia to Australia. There was a

substantial drop after the arrangements were made with Nauru and Manus  Island. And, Chris, if you’re really interested in asking the question about why  those numbers didn’t drop earlier, it would be worth asking Scott Morrison when  he’s contemplating sending asylum seekers to Cambodia, why the arrangement  with Malaysia that Labor proposed, that would’ve allowed asylum seekers to  work, that would’ve allowed their children to attend schools, that would’ve  allowed people to receive medical attention in Malaysia, was unacceptable. Scott  Morrison talks a lot about 1200 people who died trying to make the journey to  Australia. 800 of those died after that Malaysian arrangement was proposed.

UHLMANN: Now, just on another issue. There was a report in The Australian  this morning that the Government is poised for asset sales in the Budget. What’s  your view on that?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think that it’s extraordinary that a week out from the  Budget, there seems to be so much uncertainty from the Government about  what’s in and what’s out. We hear them ruling things out, the previous story was  talking about the mining companies are able to get an assurance that there  won’t be an increase to the cost of diesel fuel, but ordinary Australians aren’t  able to get an assurance that their health costs won’t go up. I think there’s a  great deal of concern that if Medibank Private, which is the one that’s being  speculated about for example, is sold, that health care costs will go up. We know  that Peter Dutton’s already ticked off on the highest private health insurance  premiums increases in a decade, if Medibank Private is privatised, then there is  less competition, the Government would have to show how this would improve  health competition and prices for ordinary Australians. And my understanding is  that it doesn’t hit the bottom line, what we lose is the income from Medibank  Private. It’s just an ideological decision if it happens, it’s not an effort to improve  the Budget.

UHLMANN: One last thing briefly, the NSW Independent Commission Against  Corruption shining a harsh light on political donations. Should they have limited it  to individuals, not business groups or trade unions?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think that the first thing that it’s important to ensure is that  there is proper transparency and the reports today about this secretive  organisation that is directing money to Joe Hockey’s campaign, I think shows  that there’s people making a great deal of effort to get around the rules that  already exist. So the first thing is to thoroughly and transparently apply the rules  that already exist. And the second thing, Chris, that I think we really have to look  at, for Federal campaigns, is looking at the amount that we’re spending on  political campaigning. Whileever there’s an arms race, where parties are trying to  outdo each other during a campaign, there will be pressure from parties to raise

money. So, as well as properly applying existing rules, so that there is  transparency and accountability, we should look at what we’re spending.

UHLMANN: Tanya Plibersek, we’ll have to leave it there. Thank you.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

