

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT  WEDNESDAY, 23 APRIL 2014

SUBJECT / S: Delay on release of Manus Island report; UNHCR  criticism; defence purchase of strike fighters; Land 400 project.

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda thanks for your company. With me now  the Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles, Mr Marles thanks for your time  this morning, you’ve heard a lot of what Scott Morrison had to say, I’ll get you to  respond and including when it comes to the report on the Manus Island violence  he says “once it’s done it will be released.”

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Well we need to see a guarantee that it will be  released in full, this is a Minister who has an appalling record on being open with  the Australian people, the report into the Navy incursions into Indonesian  territorial waters was not released in full, and we need to make sure that that  happens, that the report in relation to the incident back in February is released in  full. But look, this is a Government which promised to get back to us at the end  of March, we’re now in April, we haven’t seen anything about the interim report,  we know it’s sitting on the Minister’s desk, again this is a Government which has  information at its fingertips which it’s refusing to release to the Australian people  and that’s of enormous concern.

GILBERT: He’s saying he’s doing exactly what Labor did when it came to  incidents experienced at detention facilities during your time in Government.

MARLES: Well the big difference here Kieran is that this is an incident which  saw an unacceptably tragic loss of life of a person who was in an Australian  funded facility seeking safe refuge. And patently for Reza Barati, safety was not  provided to him. Now in that circumstance, there is an enormous imperative to  see what this Government is doing wrong in relation to Manus, and making sure  that that information is in the public hands as quickly as possible. We need to be,  as an Australian people, confident that this kind of event will never happen  again, but we can’t have that confidence unless we actually know what  happened this time. And right now we’ve got a Government that’s sitting on its  hands when it comes to telling the Australian people what’s going on.

GILBERT: Isn’t there a real possibility that it was the policy itself that created  the circumstances under which that tragedy occurred, and the policy of course  was developed and implemented by Labor?

MARLES: Well the policy was developed and implemented by Labor, and  actually the problem for the Minister is that pride is getting in the way of him  fully prosecuting the PNG arrangement, I think because it was a Labor policy,  you’ve seen him try to play it down. Even in the interview he refuses to accept  the fact that it has been the major action which has resulted in a reduction of  the flow of boats from Indonesia and Sri Lanka to Christmas Island, and because  of all of that, this Government did drop the ball when they came to office. There  was no movement in relation to working with PNG around the issue of processing  and re-settlement, and that’s obviously the key to the regional re-settlement  arrangement. If you’re not processing people in this facility, if there is no re-settlement ostensibly on offer, then it’s not surprising that you’re going to see  tensions build within that centre. It took the crisis, Kieran, back in February  before we saw Minister Morrison scuttle off to PNG to try and talk to the PNG  Government about the question of re-settlement. The Ministerial forum that the  Minister mentioned, that only came into effect after we saw the crisis back in  February, but it shouldn’t have taken a crisis to get action from this Minister in  relation to action on the PNG arrangement.

GILBERT: Okay, well he says he went to Manus within a week of becoming  Minister, but I do want to ask you about the UN criticism, the UNHCR, which has  said that the turn back policy basically breaches the refugee convention, do you  agree with that?

MARLES: The Minister went to Manus back in October, he did not go to Manus  and has not been to Manus ever since. He made it clear in the Parliament that  there has been precious little contact between him and the people responsible  for running the facility at Manus Island. Now that is a distinct difference to how  we operated as a Government when we were in power in relation to the running  of detention facilities, but most importantly in relation to how we managed our

arrangements and our relationships with PNG. We have only seen any  meaningful action on the part of this Minister since there was a crisis and that is  unacceptable.

GILBERT: What about the UNHCR criticism?

MARLES: In relation to the UNHCR criticisms I make this point, we don’t know  as an Australian public what is going on, on the high seas. It comes back to this  question that this is a secretive Government who is not telling the Australian  people what their policies are, and so we can’t be sure whether or not the  Australian Government is engaged in unauthorised movements of people across  borders because we don’t know what’s going on. I think it is important for the  Government to make clear that everything it is doing is squarely within the frame  of the refugee convention. That’s certainly what we did when we were in  Government and it’s incumbent upon the Abbott Government to do the same.

GILBERT: That’s not the concern being expressed by the UN. Their concern is  that countries acting unilaterally will undermine a regional approach. Now Labor  has not said definitively one way or the other whether or not you still remain  opposed to turning back the boats, because while you’re convinced PNG is the  main element that’s working here in stopping the boats, there are others, not  just the Minister, but others in the defence and security apparatus that believe  that turning back the boats is the most pivotal policy.

MARLES: Well I don’t think we’ve seen that statement made by anyone other  than the Minister, I think those who have been watching this space closely all  accept the fact that 90 per cent of the job here has been done by the PNG  arrangement, that is what has seriously reduced the flow of boats, and I don’t  think there is any way in which whatever the Government’s doing in relation to  turn arounds could possibly work without the PNG arrangement being in place.  But you asked the question about our attitude to turn arounds, we’ve got two  concerns about this, and it’s impossible to give a definitive answer about those  concerns without the information being made public and it’s not, but the  concerns are these.

Firstly we are worried about what this means in the context of our relationship  with Indonesia, in circumstances where they do not agree with this policy , we  do accept this proposition, unilateralism is not going to be a long term  sustainable answer to stopping the flow of people coming by boat to Australia  and it is plain common sense that not over a matter of months, but through  years and in the long term, we need to have an arrangement that is one that is  accepted by Indonesia and that we can work with Indonesia upon.

The second point is we need to be assured of safety at sea and whatever is

going on out on the high seas, and again, unless that information is made public  it is impossible to make a comment about that. But I cannot emphasize strongly  enough, that we do not as a country act unilaterally, but that we actually do  have a regional approach and solution because that’s what will give us  sustainability here.

GILBERT: We’ve only got a minute left, but I do want to get your reaction of  the imminent announcement of the acquisition of 58 Joint Strike Fighters, this is  the largest defence purchase in Australia’s history. What’s Labor’s view on this  big military decision to be confirmed today by the Prime Minister?

MARLES: Well we support this announcement and this decision which follows on  from the commitment that Labor had to the JSF throughout our time in power  and it’s a very important defence acquisition. I suppose our concern Kieran is  that what we have seen from this Government is a delay in relation to the Land  400 project, this is a really important project for the Army, we’ve seen  announcements that this is a project which is going to be scaled back, this offers  the opportunity to provide important jobs for people who have automotive skills  in a context where we’ve lost that industry, in my electorate that is a case in  point and we are deeply concerned about the delay and the reduction in size of  the Land 400 project.

GILBERT: Mr Marles thanks for your time

MARLES: Thanks Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

