Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

Skilled migration, Labor's attacks on skilled migrants, Operation  Sovereign Borders, Manus Island

Wednesday, 12 March 2014

Interview with David Speers, Sky News, Canberra

David Speers: The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison is with me this afternoon.  Thank you for your time. I want to start on the 457 visas. Unions have been  expressing concern today about a loophole they say has been reopened that is  going to allow more foreign workers in at a time when unemployment is rising.  Explain to me exactly what the government has done here.

Minister Morrison: Well it is quite a minor change. What it involves is that when  someone has already been approved to be a sponsor of 457s rather than having to  go back and fill out all the paperwork again to have that renewed when they have  reached a certain number of employees they can continue to do it but every single  457 employee who has been employed must satisfy all the tests that are currently  required for finding an Australian do the job first. So there is no change to that.

David Speers: Does it mean for example that employers will no longer face a  penalty if they bring in more than they had applied for?

Minister Morrison: What it means is if they want to employ someone on 457s they  need to satisfy all the advertising tests and all of the tests of finding an Australian  worker first and if they can't find an Australian worker then we are not going to make  them go back and fill out a whole bunch more forms which costs them time and  money for their business. So this is about regulation reduction, removing the union  red tape that was put there by the previous government.

David Speers: Sure but the union claim here is that before this was put in place they  cited the example of one employer who I think applied for 100 visas over three years  and ended up bringing 800 workers.

Minister Morrison: That is the point though David. That is before they made some  changes last year…

David Speers: And this will not undo that?

Minister Morrison: No it doesn't undo that. What this does is you still have to go  back and do all the market testing to fill the position. This is just a continuation of the  union hysterical campaign joined in by the Labor Party last year which is basically  attacking skilled migration in this country. Skilled migration has been incredibly  important for Australia and we want to see it continue to be important. We do not

want to see it tied up in union red tape but there has to be integrity measures and  that is what we are focusing on.

David Speers: At a time when unemployment is going up do you believe we should  be bringing in more 457 workers?

Minister Morrison: Well I think we need to have a measured programme and I think  we have to have integrity in the programme and I think we should have to find  Australian residents first for those jobs. I must admit David I am a little disappointed  with Bill Shorten today because what I had hoped was they had buried that partisan  debate around skilled migration in the last dysfunctional Parliament but it seems that  Bill Shorten, addicted to unions, can't rise about his union background, is going to  continue that ugly debate from the last Parliament attacking skilled migration. I think  it is very unfortunate. There should be a unity ticket on skilled migration in this  country but clearly there isn't, the Labor Party is still going to oppose it.

David Speers: Let me turn to asylum seekers, more than 80 days now since a boat  made it to Australia.

Minister Morrison: That's right.

David Speers: Are you claiming victory yet?

Minister Morrison: Of course not. The tension needs to be maintained in the cord  on this and you need to be ever vigilant but it is 82 days now and that is something  that I am sure many thought would never be able to be achieved and we are making  extraordinary progress here but we need to continue to keep the pressure on.

David Speers: In relation to the Manus Island riot on February 17 there are various  reports about tensions still existing there, about contractors being locked out, how  would you describe the situation at Manus Island today?

Minister Morrison: Oh look there are still tensions and I think there will be while it is  managed and we are managing those issues very careful about the placement of  locally engaged staff and all of those issues. We have got a transition occurring  between the contractors the Labor Party had put on and we are transitioning those  contractors that we brought in so we have one set of contractors operating over both  Nauru and Manus Island. Look the situation needs to be managed sensitively and  that's what we are doing.

David Speers: Are any of the locals being locked out?

Minister Morrison: No the locals are still employed and engaged in the running of  the centre but we have not got them involved directly in compounds and I think that  is a common sense sensitive measure for a period of time but over time we will  continue to adjust that and be sensitive in how we do it.

David Speers: We haven't heard a lot about some of the other injuries that took  place in that riot, there was one asylum seeker flown to Australia for treatment. Is it  true that man lost his eye and has now been returned to Manus Island?

Minister Morrison: I am not going to go into the specifics of those things today  David. There is a review that is underway and all this will be chronicled in the  conduct of that…

David Speers: Will we see that review?

Minister Morrison: We will follow the exact same process that was followed for the  Nauru incident. That was the process the previous government set up. We will follow  exactly the same process they had.

David Speers: Which is what?

Minister Morrison: We will release the report in the same terms that the Nauru  report was released.

David Speers: Alright. Immigration Minister Scott Morrison thanks for joining us.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot.





