

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS  MONDAY, 2 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Death of Mr Leo Seemanpillai; Turn back of asylum boats.

TOM CONNELL: Federal Member and also the Shadow Immigration Minister  Richard Marles, thanks for your time today Richard Marles.  What is your reaction  today to this story obviously this has had quite an impact on the community of  Geelong.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & BORDER  PROTECTION: Well this is a set of horrendous circumstances Tom in relation to Mr  Seemanpillai I received a briefing from the Minister I thank him for that, I’ve also  spoken with the settlement provider in Geelong Diversitat, and they are in a state of  shock today, they knew him as a client, but he was also somebody who worked in  one of their social enterprises.  And I think in many ways Geelong is a small  community and when an event like this happens it is felt throughout the entire town,  my own family drove down that street a couple of hours after that incident and  obviously there were still a lot of police congregated at that point so yes I think it’s  fair to say that we’re in a state of shock today and it’s a very tragic set of  circumstances.

REPORTER: We’ve heard friends of Mr Seemanpillai speak out and say that he was  in an agitated state because of what he felt like was a state of limbo, he’d been on a  bridging visa for 18 months so he hadn’t had his refugee status approved or  otherwise, do you think it was a mistake at all for Labor to bring in this system and  have these people in the community yes, in this case with work rights, but really not  knowing what the future holds for them?

MARLES: Well I think it’s really important that people are able to be in the  community, we worked hard to try and get as many people out of detention facilities  as possible, and I think that that is an important step.  That said, I think it is really  important that we do understand all the details around Mr Seemanpillai’s  circumstances in Australia, what services he was able to access, what services if any  he was not able to access, I think it’s really important that we do have an  understanding precisely of the way in which he was able to live his life in Australia,  because I think there will be important learnings from this.

REPORTER: We heard today a fortnightly visit perhaps from a case worker, is that  the sort of satisfactory attendance or attention would you think?

MARLES:  Well I just think we need to know that sort of detail.  What contact there  was with him, I mean I do know that the settlement provider knew him well,  Diversitat, he was well known to that community as I say they’re in a state of shock,  but I think it’s very important that we understand in his specific case, what services  he was able to access and what he wasn’t. I think in a more general sense Tom  putting to one side Mr Seemanpillai’s circumstances, I am concerned about the lack  of hope that there is out there for that cohort of nearly 30,000 asylum seekers who  are on the mainland awaiting their refugee determination to occur. These are people  who are living amongst us, it is impossible for them to be treated in a way which  doesn’t have an impact on the rest of the community.

REPORTER: Aren’t some of these same people some of the ones that were put on  bridging visas in other cases without work rights that happened under Labor?   They’d be the ones with even less hope wouldn’t they?

MARLES:  In a sense work rights is a secondary issue here, the principle issue is  whether or not people who are ultimately found to be genuine refugees have a  sense of hope about their future and it makes no sense at all, for those people to be  in a situation where they are unable to participate fully in our society, and of course  that’s what temporary protection visas do, and when you have a group which  already for many of them, are in a vulnerable state in terms of their mental health,  seeing nothing other than hard-line rhetoric without any light at the end of the  tunnel will be a recipe for disaster.

REPORTER: Just to move on, within your portfolio more generally, what do you  make of this push with the new party, we’ve heard it from Melissa Parke MP and  Anna Burke MP, re-open the debate about offshore processing, and whether Labor  should even be supporting it.

MARLES:  We’ll have that discussion, it’s obviously an important discussion to have,  and there are many who have strong feelings within the party about this issue, but  let me be very clear, Labor as I said last week at the National Press Club, supports  the role that offshore processing has played in bringing to an end, we hope, the flow  of asylum seeker vessels from Indonesia to Christmas Island, and as a result saving  lives at sea.  Offshore processing is saving lives at sea. And from  a position of  compassion, it is so important that offshore processing continues so that that can

occur.  That said, it’s also important that Manus and Nauru and indeed any facility  that Australia runs, is done so in a way which is providing asylum seekers with  accommodation that is safe, dignified and humane.

REPORTER: Which wasn’t always the case under Labor either was it? And Manus  was set up in a real hurry you’d have to say.

MARLES:  Well Manus was ramped up considerably with the PNG arrangement but  let’s be clear, the PNG arrangement is what took Australia off the table on the 19th of  July last year, and as a result of that, we saw a really significant reduction in the  flow of asylum seeker vessels and it did save lives at sea.  What we failed to see  though, was this Minister properly engaged with his counterpart in PNG around the  question of processing and re-settlement in PNG and that goes to the core, as the  Cornell report itself made clear, that goes to the core of the question of anxiety and  tension within that facility.

REPORTER: You mentioned there the fact that boats significantly reduced with the  so called PNG arrangement, they’ve essentially stopped with the addition of turning  back boats, now this was something before that you’ve said it won’t work, you’ve  said that it would perhaps damage relationships with Indonesia, putting that aside  and what it might or mightn’t have done, your position must be close to shifting on  this mustn’t it?

MARLES:  The question is this, we’ve seen boats be turned around, I accept what  the Government’s said that no boats have come since September, so for now that is  the case, but our concern about turnarounds has always been the effect that it has  on our relationship with Indonesia, this is a policy which is eroding that relationship.   Let’s not forget there was a Prime Ministerial visit to Indonesia that was cancelled  because of a turnaround operation going ahead at the time.

REPORTER: So knowing what you know about the relationship and the fact that  this is one of the ingredients since the election that’s really brought an actual halt to  asylum seeker boats, on balance, would you be willing to take the vote of this  position of taking back tow backs if you like?

MARLES:  Well we remain open minded about any matter or any particular step  which substantively reduces the flow of asylum seeker vessels and which save lives  at sea, but can I make this point Tom, it’s not about doing that last month or this,  it’s about doing it this year and next.  And that means that we have to have a  sustainable relationship with Indonesia and it’s one thing to have in place this policy  in circumstances where our relationship with Indonesia is effectively suspended, it’s  another entirely to have this policy in place where we have a functioning relationship  with Indonesia, so it is impossible to make a judgement now about the efficacy of  this in the long term -

REPORTER: You need to re-visit it you would say?

MARLES:  But there’s also the issue of what’s occurring on the high seas and  whether safety at sea is being maintained and we’re simply not being told about  that.

REPORTER: We’ll have to leave it there but Richard Marles thanks for your time  today on Sky News.

MARLES:  Thanks Tom.

ENDS

