

THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE AND  TRANSPORT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW   ABC 24 BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 4 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Qantas, Manus Island

HOST: Anthony Albanese, thanks for joining us.

ALBANESE: Good morning Virginia.

HOST: You’ve had time overnight to look a little more closely at what the  Government's proposing. Is the Opposition still saying it's going to oppose this?

ALBANESE: Absolutely. You don't save Qantas by flogging it off. What they are  proposing is a wholesale getting rid of everything in the Act that makes Qantas  an Australian airline. Getting rid of the provisions not just for ownership but that  it be based here, that its headquarters are here, that two-thirds of the majority  of the board have to be Australian, that a majority of its activity in terms of  maintenance and catering and its activities have to be based here. What they're  essentially saying is that it's OK just for those jobs to go overseas.

HOST: But if you oppose this, if you don't support this, how then is Qantas and  all those jobs, how are they supposed to survive?

ALBANESE: Well, listen to what Qantas has been saying, Virginia. Qantas  themselves have been saying that the Sale Act is not the major issue, that they  wanted a debt guarantee. Now, why is that the case? This argument about equal  playing field needs to be addressed. The fact is that Virgin has access to capital  from a Singapore Government-backed airline, from a UAE-backed airline and  from a New Zealand Government-backed airline. They have that in place right

now. They’re not asking for any money from the taxpayer. What the Government  indicated over recent months was they were going to support the debt  guarantee. Joe Hockey outlined the conditions and said they had all been met.  So that was factored in by Qantas management, by the workforce and  importantly, as well, by shareholders. Then, at last minute, last Thursday, the  Government decided to go on this ideological free market crusade. The aviation  sector internationally is a very regulated sector. That makes sense when you  think about it - you don't want planes doing what they want when they want. By  definition there is government intervention in world's aviation sector. Eight of the  10 world's largest airlines are government-backed airlines.

HOST: Just to jump in there though, you're backing Qantas' calls for a debt  guarantee. We've heard from Hockey that as a Treasurer he can't countenance  that, he can't countenance the idea of burdening the Australian public with

exposure with $6 to $7 billion worth of debt. Are you saying if you're in  Government you would be comfortable with exposing Australian taxpayers to  that debt?

ALBANESE: That's an absurd figure that he must have made up over breakfast  because that's not what we're talking about here. What Qantas was seeking was  not any payment from the taxpayer.   HOST: Not the taxpayer but being exposed to that?



ALBANESE: Well, $6 to $7 billion has never been mentioned by Qantas. They're  not about to buy that many new aircraft. If you look at the restructuring that  they did last Thursday, it was about foregoing the potential purchase or the  leasing of aircraft that they had foreshadowed previously. Joe Hockey said  himself that himself this was important. Joe Hockey himself has to explain why  the position has changed. Warren Truss is the Transport Minister. When he was  the shadow transport minister he was out there opposing any lifting at all, even  of the limited restrictions, the 35/25 rule which is the amount of capital that can  be owned by individual shareholder or by an airline. He opposed that and said  that would threaten the Australian national interest and also particularly have an  impact on regional Australia.

HOST: Look, I want to get to that 25/35 matter in just a moment because with I  know it's something you dealt with back in 2009. But let's be realistic here for a  moment. The Government is not coming through with the debt guarantee.  You're going to oppose what the Government has proposed. So what on Earth  does Qantas do in the meantime? Overnight they've said that you need to help  us now. So what happens to this company?



ALBANESE: Well, the Government, the Government had indicated very clearly  that they would be helping. Last night they made a decision after interestingly

everyone in their Cabinet spoke and had different views very clearly. That shows  how controversial this issue has been within the government. It's about time that  the Government stopped playing politics with every single issue. Yesterday they  were out there having the absurd argument that this was all about the carbon  price. That was their response during the whole of Question Time. Qantas  repudiated that. It is a fact, Virginia, that Qantas and Virgin voluntarily asked to  be included in the scheme.

HOST: All right, I do want to return to that question though because they're the  Government but you have a role to play in this as well as do the in dealing with  legislation that comes before comes before the Senate. What role do you  propose to play now in making sure that Qantas survives if there's this standoff  between two positions in politics?

ALBANESE: Virginia, we are taking the position that we said we would take last  week and last month and last year. The Government, having told the markets  that they would take a different position, have back-flipped and have said no, we  won't do that, we will just go to this ideological crusade, pretending that the  aviation sector is this free market operation globally and it's OK for Qantas to

send jobs stick overseas.

HOST: Well look, let's stick with that, time is tight this morning. Virgin is  majority foreign-owned and yet there are thousands of Virgin jobs here in  Australia so if you're concerned about jobs staying in Australia, foreign  investment doesn't necessarily change that.

ALBANESE: It does, Virginia, if you move maintenance overseas. It does if you  move your head office overseas. It does if you move your focus from being an  Australian national airline into an international airline.



HOST: The international division would of course stay that way.

ALBANESE: Because it has to, Virginia. That's the belling of the cat here.  Having not noticed that that is a fact - that the whole international aviation  regime is based upon air services agreements, agreements between government  to government, based upon the location of those airlines - should have

registered with government cabinet members last night that the basis of aviation  is national interest. That's what occurs around the world. Australia is saying we'll  give up our national interest, we won't worry about having a national airline and  previously people such as Warren Truss have argued that that is indeed essential  for a whole range of reasons it's essential for other countries. But for us as an  island continent it is more important than countries that have land transport  borders.

HOST: Just one more on this and then I want to get to on a couple subjects.  Let's go back to that issue we raised 2009, of course, you proposed changing the  single investor rule and the foreign investor airline rule. Is this now for you and  the Opposition a matter of percentage negotiation between you and the  government, just what lifting of ceiling you're prepared to go through? Or is it  absolute?

ALBANESE: Not at all. When we had the Aviation White Paper we had proper  decision-making processes. We had a Green Paper and a White Paper that took  place over a year. There were consultative forums with the sector, with industry,  with the community participation in that. And what that with was a  recommendation that to maintain the 51% majority Australian ownership but  that the 25/35 provisions weren't essential.



HOST: Yes, indeed but my question this morning goes to whether now the  Opposition's is absolute or whether it's a matter of negotiations around the  percentage ceiling?

ALBANESE: No, we would be prepared to consider that 25/35 proposition if the  Government had a proposition for us to consider. December 6 was the Qantas  downgrade. Since then I have said we will be constructive. I put up a number of  options, besides a there were other options besides a debt guarantee, there  would be an equity injection, it was one option. The Government indicated that it  was going to go down the debt guarantee path. Therefore in order to be  constructive we indicated that we'd be supportive of that and now the  Government withdraws its position and says we're not being constructive. I mean  give me a break. They have been playing games and politics with the  employment prospects of Australians not just who work directly for Qantas but  those who work in the tourism sector, the freight and logistics sector and they've  been playing acting politics rather than actually acting like a government.

HOST: I just quickly want to touch on Manus Island given your former leader,  the Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, was the author of the Manus Island detention  solution. Are you feeling any personal disquiet now that it was your government  that has created a place that is clearly manifestly unsafe?

ALBANESE: I feel disquiet about the whole of asylum seeker policy in terms of  it's not easy. My position is the same as it was in government. Am I comfortable  with everything that happens in immigration? I would be amazed if anyone who  dealt with these complex issues was. These are difficult issues. There is the issue  stopping drownings at sea, that is vital. There's also a need to make sure that  we give proper respect to the dignity of people who are involved in seeking  asylum.



HOST: And is Australia doing that with the fact Manus Island solution?

ALBANESE: Look, the fact is, the fact is there aren't easy options here. What  we need to do is to make sure that there's transparency here. What is  extraordinary is the way that people are finding out more off Indonesian  newspapers or reports from overseas than they are off their own government  and I believe in the long-term that is unsustainable. It’s appropriate that Scott  Morrison and the government actually let the Australian people know exactly  what is going on.

MARCH 4, 2014

MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN - 0411 659 868



