Immigration Minister Scott Morrison

Operation Sovereign Borders, absconding detainees, Cronulla  Sharks

Monday, 30 June 2014

Interview with Luke Grant, 2GB Ray Hadley Program

Luke Grant: Immigration Minister Scott Morrison is on the line as he does every  Monday. Minister good morning.

Minister Morrison: G'day Luke

Luke Grant: Minister nice to talk to you. Do you have news you can tell us about the  claims there are 153 asylum seekers somewhere in the ocean in an Australian  vessel?

Minister Morrison: As I said on the weekend Luke, what the Australian people know  and what listeners to this program know, when there is a very serious event,  involving safety of life at sea, or when there are people that are required to be  transferred for medical reasons for things that may have occurred at sea, I have  always said when that has occurred. I have been very upfront about that. I have held  special briefings and other things on those issues. There have been no such  incidents for me to report those things to the Australian people over the last few  days. If there were than I would have and what happens is smugglers and others will  try to use every trick in the book to try and test and break down the resolve of the  government. Sometimes they try and use the media, sometimes they use advocates,  and sometimes they use Labor and the Greens, frankly, but whatever they try I can  assure them of this - I won't be changing the practice of our policy and I won't be  saying or doing anything that will undermine our ability to implement those policies  and practices which have led to the fact that for more than six months now we  haven't had a successfully people smuggling venture and there is no change to that  report today.

Luke Grant: Yeah 100% and why would you change anything; I mentioned in my  intro today Minister and you can think of all the areas where government operates  and of all the new policy thoughts by the new government, I can't think of one that  has been so spectacularly successful. Leaving that aside and good on you for your  resolve, I think most Australians respect that and appreciate what you have done,  how the hell is it that we have members of the left side of the political spectrum, the  Greens, the ALP and even some of these refuge advocates, how do they get a  phone call from an alleged boat somewhere in the ocean?

Minister Morrison: Well it's a good question, it seems that some of these advocates  have hotlines to these people and to ventures and that's for them to explain, and  what I would like to know is why don't they let authorities know when people are  about to put themselves at risk on dangerous voyages because we have  partnerships whether it is in Indonesia, Malaysia or Sri Lanka or other places where

we can take steps to ensure people never even get on boats in the first place. So by  effectively willing people to get on boats and then becoming advocates for the illegal  ventures, I just think that is not a responsible thing to do. If people have information  about potential smuggling ventures then they should tell the Australian Federal  Police.

Luke Grant: Surely they should, I don't know if it's an offence or not but if you know  that there are some people that are organising a people smuggling venture, if you  actually know that before the boat leaves, isn't it incumbent upon all of us to put our  hand up and say hey this is happening let's see what we can do to either prevent  death because that is a potential result sadly or inform authorities so they can find  some way of preventing other ventures down the track. Surely it is a responsibility for  people like Ian Rintoul etcetera to fulfil?

Minister Morrison: Well I think that is exactly right and so I think people will make  their own judgements about people who don't inform the police of these things, but  then there are the other effective accomplices if you like, not using the word strictly,  but people allow themselves to be used by the smugglers and others to try and  thwart the government's policies and that was what was happening over the  weekend. The Labor party and the Greens were out there doing the bidding of  smugglers to try and get the government to change our policy. We know they oppose  our policies. They have been quite steadfast about that. The Shadow Minister only  confirmed it yesterday when he was on Sky News. After six months without a  successful people smuggling venture the Labor party still can't say whether they  think that turn backs are a good idea. If they are not convinced now they never will  be. So when we go to the next election the Australian people will just have to ask  themselves what do they think that mob will do if they get elected, on the borders?  They will just roll over like they always do.

Luke Grant: One hundred per cent. You just said the Shadow Immigration Minister  and you started this so I have to clear this up, is that Hanson-Young or is that  Marles?

Minister Morrison: Good question, sometimes it's hard to tell if the Greens are the  opposition on this issue or the Labor party. I know both of those parties oppose what  we are doing but it seems that Richard Marles tends to follow Sarah Hanson-Young's  lead on these things.

Luke Grant: And they will of course say that this is harsh and unfair and unjust and  all those things. I mentioned earlier I think you have been able to bring about budget  savings of about 2.5 billion dollars if my memory is correct.

Minister Morrison: That's right.

Luke Grant: There are other benefits too, aren't there, in terms of being able to take  people who are stuck in horrible places all around the world without any food, let  along being able to muster together 10 grand to give a people smuggler. Surely that  helps our ability to bring people who are in fact desperate need to come to this  country?

Minister Morrison: That's right. Twenty thousand places over this year and the next  four years have been freed up because those places are no longer being given to  people who come by boat and that is a humanitarian dividend that goes along with  stopping the deaths at sea. There have been no deaths at sea since the  governments' turn back policy was introduced. The Labor party said that the reason  they opposed it was they didn't think it was safe. Well we have had six months plus  of track record and going back to your original question, if there had been any  incident that had occurred over the last few days or weeks which had required me to  report on a safety issue or people had to be to be medically transferred, then I would  have done so. So for people to be out there trying to beat that up at present when I'm  trying to be as clear as I can Luke today that if there was such a threat, if there was  such an incident, if there was such a need and that had needed to be acted upon  then we would have acted on it and I would have reported on it

Luke Grant: I hear you loud and clear. Before I let you go, a number of  unaccompanied asylum seeker children apparently running away from their  accommodation in Adelaide, any update on that?

Minister Morrison: We are still working with the service providers there and South  Australian Police. From time to time this does occur and also from time to time, I also  take people back into detention and particularly those, not necessarily  unaccompanied minors - they tend to be far better behaved in the community - but I  have had to cancel the community detention or bridging visas and/or not renew them  for over 200 people and that has included people that have been on charges of  assault, murder, rape and various other things. Now we expect people when they are  released into the community that they behave themselves and we act on that and we  work with people in the community to ensure that happens.

Luke Grant: I love the resolve but before I do let you go, you'd be as a Sharks  support devastated wouldn't you?

Minister Morrison: Well it was a bittersweet weekend, breaking that drought in  Brisbane was a tremendous game and congratulations to Paul Gallen. I mean this  bloke is a super human when it comes to rugby league and as a bloke as well with  tremendous leadership. Then within days for the club to have to go through what  they went through yesterday. I mean they have taken the right decision, good on the  board for taking action. You have got to uphold the integrity of the club, of the game.  It deserves that. It is very disappointing but just all support to the boys this week as  they rally and get together and get through what has been a very tough season for  them.

Luke Grant: Alright. Keep doing what you are doing. I think most Australians realise  it's been a massive change for the better and no doubt Ray and you will chat next  week. Thank you Scott.

Minister Morrison: Thanks a lot Luke.

Luke Grant: You too. Good to catch up again Scott Morrison, the Immigration  Minister.

