

THE HON MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR

IMMIGRATION

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 22 APRIL 2014

SUBJECT/S: Rebuilding Labor, Coalition Direct Action Con, Tony  Abbott’s GP Tax, Budget, Manus Island.

KIERAN GILBERT: Matt, will the Labor machine get out of the way and let Bill  Shorten deliver these changes because a lot of them aren’t going to be happy  about it including for example diluting union influence about who attends the  National Conference, the central decision making forum of your party.

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND IMMIGRATION: I believe that the proposals that  Bill will outline today have broad support within our party from the membership  and indeed the wider community. As Bill said it’s a proposal that will make us a  membership driven party, it will see the appeal of the Labor Party in the wider  community broaden, more people attracted to the Labor Party, removing the  requirement for people to be union members, giving members - particularly new  members - a greater say in policy development and the selection of candidates.  These are all positive reforms that will be well received in the party and in the  wider community.

GILBERT: He’s going to require those in the unions though with power and

things at stake here of losing a lot of that control that they’re going to acquiesce  to this. Are you sure that’s going to happen?

THISTLETHWAITE: Look I think anything that broadens the appeal of the  Labor Party in the wider community is a positive reform and if someone is a  member of the party be that they have a union background, or a union  affiliation, or they’re in small business, or they work for a large employer and  they might not be a union member, the important thing to remember Kieran is  that they will equally have the same say in terms of policy development, in terms  of the selection of their candidates and the opportunity if these reforms are  adopted to be elected to the national conference as a delegate. So the power of  each individual member is the same and that’s something that should be  supported because you’re broadening the appeal of the Labor Party to the wider  community.

GILBERT: Senator Ryan now Labor’s obviously been through a tough patch  here in terms of its internal processes but if it does get this right it could see a  renewal of your opponents. Will the Liberals need to have a similar sort of  discussion?

SENATOR SCOTT RYAN: Firstly Kieran, Bill Shorten and Matt here can talk  about what reforms and changes they want to take as part of their attempt to  create the illusion of real reform of the Labor Party, people aren’t interested in  politicians talking about themselves, the rubber hits the road in Parliament, the  rubber hits the road in the policies that political parties enact, and as long as the  Labor Party remains captured by the unions by blocking things like the return of  the Australian Building and Construction Commission and by refusing to listen to  the results of the last election and the genuine wishes and mandate of the  people by repealing the carbon tax and the mining tax, then they can have all  the bumper sticker reform that they want. The rubber hits the road with the  policies political parties enact and take to elections.

GILBERT: Matt Thistlethwaite, you can respond to that but I’ll also put to you  that Bill Shorten has got a big task ahead of him trying to convince people that  the Labor Party has changed and that this isn’t simply window dressing as  Senator Ryan puts it.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well these are real reforms Kieran, for the first time in  Australian politics now the election of a major leader of one of the major parties  involves the membership of that party. Close to 30,000 people had a say in the  election of the Labor leader making our party the most transparent, open and  accountable in terms of the election of our leader, you don’t get that in the  Liberal Party. A couple of weeks ago here in NSW 5,000 members of the public  voted in a pre-selection to select two candidates for the seats of Newtown and

Campbelltown, you don’t get that opportunity in the Liberal Party. We’re  broadening the appeal of the Labor Party, there’s real reform going on and that  will attract a better quality of member of the party, of candidate for selection,  and ultimately I think you’re going to see from the Labor Party a much more  consultative process in terms of the way we develop policy.

GILBERT: You previously were involved at the state level in party organisation  roles, do you think the state branches will fall into line here and give the rank  and file membership a greater say of pre-selections both in the lower and upper  houses as Bill Shorten is directing today because he doesn’t have the authority to  make it happen does he? He needs the good will of those at the state level to do  that.

THISTLETHWAITE: I believe they will Kieran, and I believe that for this reason,  over the last 10 years there’s been significant reform that’s been achieved in  New South Wales in terms of broadening our Party. I mentioned pre-selection,  the open primaries that are now occurring on a regular basis in the Labor Party  in New South Wales for the selection of candidates, we’re looking this year at our  state conference to allow members in having a say in the selection of candidates  to go to the national conference, that’s real reform and it’s already occurring  here in New South Wales.

GILBERT: Well Scott Ryan if that does happen and more rank and file do end  up at the conference doesn’t the political party then reflect its membership in the  community better if you do enable more rank and file say like the Labor leader is  hoping to do?

RYAN: Well Kieran I was part of a small team that led the reforms in Victoria  overseen and led by David Kemp here back in 2008 in the Victorian division of  the Liberal Party, but the difference between us and Labor is that we don’t have  to talk about this publically, we don’t seek the urge to advertise this to somehow  try to prove to people that we’re listening, we enacted the reforms and the  simple rule is in Victoria that every member of the Liberal Party gets to vote and  choose their local candidate at state and federal elections. Now importantly it  was that process that allowed us to win a state election in 2010 when the  candidates were chosen by that means with the biggest swing against a  government in my lifetime when the Liberal Party got elected by one seat and  that has seen the Victorian division of the Liberal Party membership grow  substantially over the last four or five years, but we didn’t win elections because  we reformed the party, we won elections because we had great candidates  chosen by these new processes and that policies we took to the people reflected  the needs.

Reform of the party isn’t an end to itself Kieran, reform of the party actually  means if it’s done well you have candidates that reflect the interests of the  community and candidates that are well placed to put forward those interests  then that is respected by the electorate. Labor here is trying to construct the  illusion of reform by saying well you don’t need to join a union anymore, we’ll  have these formulas whereby if you vote in this part of the electorate college  your vote is worth one and if you vote in that part of the electoral college your  vote is worth 1000 like their leadership construct was that’s not going to change  people’s views, what will change people’s views is what policies parties take to  the people.

GILBERT: I want to move on now and look at some policy, and policy difficulty  for you at the moment and the Government Senator Ryan and this is in relation  to direct action. Clive Palmer has said this is a hopeless policy, that he’s not  going to back it and he says it’s gone, it’s dead. I put this to the Greens acting  leader Adam Bandt and asked him whether the Greens will support Palmer in  blocking direct action through the Parliament. Senator Ryan now what’s your  response to this? How does the Government get around it, is direct action largely  through regulation, which is not through the Parliament, or do you need  legislation to get this through?

RYAN: Well firstly Kieran I’ll make a point that Matt and I might be able to agree  on which is to appreciate the irony of Adam Bandt and the Greens that vilify  Australia’s miners suddenly finally finding a reason to agree with one, surprise-surprise when it’s in their political interests. More importantly, Clive Palmer is in  the House of Representatives, there are four members of the Senate as part of  his team, one motoring enthusiast Ricky Muir and three members of the Palmer  United Party, so let’s understand there are four individuals there but more  importantly those votes and votes of the Greens only matter if Labor blocks our  mandate to introduce direct action. Now secondly I heard Greg Hunt talk this  morning about how the funding for direct action will be part of the  appropriations bills, they are not traditionally blocked in the Senate because they  allow the functioning of Government, now I’m not sure of the technical details of  whether any other legislation is required but I heard Greg say that this morning  and I think he knows that better than anyone.

GILBERT: Matt Thistlethwaite, if that is the case how does Labor go about  blocking it even if you wanted to?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well the first thing Kieran, direct action is a bad policy, it  ensures that big polluting companies get away with the notion of continuing to  pollute. Under a carbon price big polluting companies paid for their pollution and  the revenue that was raised went to ensuring that we were investing in clean  technology and that we were compensating households for increases in

electricity prices. Under direct action the taxpayer subsidises these big polluting  companies in the hope that they will install new technology to reduce their  emissions, that’s the difference between the two schemes.

GILBERT: Would Labor seek to try and revoke it or block it?

THISTLETHWAITE: We’ve said that we will block direct action. We don’t  believe that it is in the best interests of Australia, we believe that there should be  an Emissions Trading Scheme, a price on carbon in our economy because that’s  the most efficient and effective way of reducing emissions in our economy.

GILBERT: Senator Ryan what is the Government’s view though, you’ve pointed  out what Greg Hunt said in relation to the funding of this through the  appropriation bills but can it still be revoked via a motion in the Senate this  particular element of those Bills or is it safeguarded then?

RYAN: Well as I said Kieran, this is not my portfolio area so I’m not as across all  the detail, but a measure included in the appropriation bills if that’s all that is  required the passage of the appropriation bills the budget so to speak can allow  that to continue as it does many other areas of government activity but Matt  there talks about emissions trading schemes, we know that’s a carbon tax by  another measure it’s just that the price isn’t fixed its floating. We had a mandate  to repeal the carbon tax, we have a mandate to implement direct action and the  real question here is why Labor’s not respecting that mandate?

GILBERT: Gentleman I want to turn our attention now to a story in the  Australian newspaper about the $6 co-payment for bulk billing. It’s the front  page of the Australian today by Dennis Shanahan saying that the Expenditure  Review Committee has decided to go ahead with the co-payment including a  proposal to cap it at 12 visits a year meaning a maximum extra cost of $72 a  year for patients saving estimated $750 million over the next four years. Will that  be worth it though, those savings for the political costs here Senator Ryan, which  obviously this could be a difficult one to sell as part of Joe Hockey’s first budget?

Senator Ryan Loses Audio.

GILBERT: Matt, I’m guessing that you will obviously be critical of the move to  include this co-payment but Peter Dutton and the Government have been  arguing for months now that they’ve got to make the system more sustainable.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well this will be a disastrous policy if it is introduced  Kieran, it will see those on fixed incomes like pensioners, those on disability  support pensions, low income earners pay for the cost of visiting a GP and it will  impact them to a greater degree than high income earners. It means that people

don’t get the health care that they deserve, they get the health care that they  can pay for, and in respect of the argument that it will reduce costs and provide  a disincentive for people to visit the GP, the studies that I’ve seen indicate that  the nations that do have similar payments actually have greater public health  costs as a proportion of GDP, and the United States is a classic example of this,  and the reason is that people are discouraged from visiting their GP when  something might be minor but it leads to much more significant and more costly  interventions later on, and Australia’s public health care costs are about 11 per  cent of GDP which is right on the OECD average. The US has greater public  health care costs and it’s because of those payments that are built into their  system for minor visits to the GP so I’m not sure this is going to actually work.

GILBERT: Senator Ryan, to you now, I think we’ve restored those  communications, with this story of the $6 co-payment for bulk billed visits to GPs  the savings are $750 million over the next four years, that’s the estimate but  quite a political cost it’s going to be tough to sell.

RYAN: Well look Kieran, I think it’s important to note there’s only 21 more  sleeps until the budget so Labor’s only got 21 more days where they can  hyperventilate about newspaper articles. Health costs are a rapidly growing part  of the budget at state and commonwealth level that is not necessarily a  surprising thing but they do need to be managed. I’m not going to be  commenting on any newspaper reports about what might be in the budget,  we’ve got three weeks until it comes down on the evening of Tuesday May 13  and the Government will explain itself then but importantly as the Prime Minister  and the Treasurer have made clear on numerous occasions we will be keeping all  our promises so we will be saying that every day until the budget despite Labor’s  hyperventilating as they try and manufacture a scare campaign.

THISTLETHWAITE: Scott, when was this promised in the lead up to the  election? Your leader said there would be no changes to education, no changes  to health care, no changes to the pension, we are seeing that you’re considering  increasing the pension age and it’s been confirmed on the front page of the  Australian today that there’s going to be a co-payment for Medicare visits, this  was not discussed prior to the election. How is that keeping your commitment to  the Australian people?

RYAN: Well Matt firstly it’s a newspaper report, it’s not a Government  statement.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well if Dennis Shanahan has got it and it’s on the front  page of the Australian, I think it’s a pretty fair cop that it’s going to be in the  budget.

GILBERT: Let’s here Senator Ryan’s response now please.

RYAN: I recall being on TV with you Matt where something being on the front  page of the Australian led you to vilify News Limited and attack the hate media  as it was called by some of your allies, it’s a newspaper report, we’ve made it  clear we’ll keep our promises the Prime Minister has restated that we’ve got  three weeks to wait until the budget comes down and we’ll see how the  Government fixes Labor’s budget mess, it’s not going to be easy, the burden will  be shared fairly by all Australians, but it is a core promise that we made to fix  the budget mess that Labor left us.

GILBERT: I want to finish with one final story, it’s the front page of the SMH  and the Age this morning, Fairfax obtaining footage, lets put the footage up on  the screen for you. It shows asylum seekers were attacked by detention centre  guards, this is more than 24 hours before Iranian Reza Berati died in that  violence at Manus Island, this is according to the Fairfax reports this morning.  First of all Matt Thistlethwaite to you, your reaction to this latest footage and  further to that suggestions that the scene of the violence may have been  tampered with, and that of course raises questions about the validity of any  subsequent investigation.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well the events on Manus Island are no doubt concerning  but I note Kieran that there is two inquires in Australia going on into the events  and I hesitate to pre-empt the outcomes of that enquiry. I think we should just  wait and see on what the outcomes of the enquiry is, no doubt they’ll look into  this particular footage and those events and make a determination, and I think  once we’ve got those determinations then we can make an informed decision  about the goings on and what’s occurred.

GILBERT: Senator Ryan your thoughts on this latest vision which seems to  show guards still attacking a group that had tried to retreat into a building there  on Manus?

RYAN: Look Kieran I’ve read the reports, I haven’t seen the video, look there is  a PNG police investigation and there is an independent enquiry into this. The  Minister has stated that he’d be releasing the results of the enquiry so I think we  do wait and see what they say before we make any judgement but I’d also say  there hasn’t been a boat and they haven’t arrived over the last four months.  Over the same period last year, over 6,000 people arrived illegally. Now the best  way to not have these issues is to not have people arrive on our shores illegally,  and that’s what this Government’s policies seek to do and to this point over the  last four months we are winning that battle.

GILBERT: Matt Thistlethwaite, finally to you, this is an area where both sides of  politics seem to be articulating the same sort of messages at least the two major  parties that’s largely because Labor was responsible for setting up this situation  in the first place isn’t it?

THISTLETHWAITE: Yeah look Kieran in Government we needed to provide a  policy that took away that incentive for people to get on boats, we developed the  Regional Resettlement Arrangement as that disincentive and it appears to be  working, so we don’t want to jump to any conclusions. I think we need to wait  on the results of the findings of the various enquiries that are going on into  Manus Island.

GILBERT: We are out of time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK MONCRIEFF-HILL 0408 687 497

