

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RN DRIVE WITH WALEED ALY  WEDNESDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: UN climate fund; foreign aid spending; Tony Abbott’s GP  Tax; MYEFO

WALEED ALY: So it's 11 minutes past 6. Josh Frydenberg is the Parliamentary  Secretary to the Prime Minister and he joins me along with Shadow Assistant  Treasurer Andrew Leigh. Sadly he's only on the phone today, but I'm sure he'll  be no less pugnacious for that fact. Thanks for coming in, or being on the phone,  guys, good to have you with us.

JOSH FRYDENBERG, PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE PRIME  MINISTER: Nice to be with you, Waleed.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Good to be here,  Waleed.

ALY: [On the UN Climate Fund] First we were not going to contribute; now we  are.

JULIE BISHOP, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS: I have been tasked by  the Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott to announce today at this meeting that  Australia will pledge a contribution of 200 million Australian dollars over four  years to the Green Climate Fund.

ALY: Yes, that was Foreign Minister Julie Bishop. As you can hear there, there  was much applause and merriment and much confusion because the government  had previously told us this was impossible, it was a bad idea, it was a Bob Brown  sort of an idea to contribute to a climate change fund of this sort; and all of a  sudden $200 million. Why the change of heart, Josh? This is an outrage.

FRYDENBERG: Well this is a good outcome isn't it? Here we are...

ALY: It was a bad outcome a couple of weeks ago.

FRYDENBERG: Here we are, an Australian Government investing $200 million  of taxpayers' money in a fund which will help mitigate the impact of climate  change and go towards various measures in our region, which is the crucial part  here.

ALY: When did it become a good idea?

FRYDENBERG: Well I have always believed, and so has the government, that  investing in climate mitigation strategies and processes and projects is a good  idea. It's been part of our aid program - we’re in Kiribati; we're in Vanuatu;  we're doing work in Indonesia and Kalimantan and other areas; and we even  have funded the climate innovation centre in Vietnam. So we have constantly  done these sort of programs and now with this additional $200 million  commitment we'll see more in our region and I think that's what we want to  emphasise.

ALY: ‘A Bob Brown bank on an international scale’ - Tony Abbott never  compliments Bob Brown, that is never used as a statement that something is a  good idea. So I ask again, when did this fund become a good idea?

FRYDENBERG: Well I think we've now got assurances that the money can be  spent in our region, which is very important. We hosted, back in, I think,  November, here in Australia - in Sydney - a rainforest initiative; when we were  last in government we were working to preserve the rainforests in our region.  This money will be going to similar type projects.

ALY: You're not going to answer my question are you?

FRYDENBERG: Well I'm saying this a good commitment, this is a good fund,  this should be welcomed by people like you and the listeners to your  programme, rather than being so cynical of why it was done.

ALY: You paused over the adjective for my programme there, I'm not sure if I  should be offended. Andrew, I'm...



FRYDENBERG: Only positive!

ALY: I'm having a lot of fun with this, being all cynical about it. But cynicism  aside, this has to be a welcome development, doesn't it?

LEIGH: It's certainly welcome Waleed, despite the fact that we only need to go  back a bit over a fortnight to find the Abbott Government rubbishing this idea.  They were left out in the cold in the G20 when even Canada said that it was  going to make a contribution to the climate fund. I think Australia is in a parlous  state with climate change. The latest OECD report confirmed that we're the  highest per capita emitter in the OECD, and on the Climate Change Performance  Index, we've sunk to the bottom.

ALY: Right, but we have seen the government kind of a do a few mea culpas  this week, this clearly seems to be another one of them. We can say that we're  in a bad position now, we can also acknowledge that we're heading in the right  direction can't we?

LEIGH: It's absolutely welcome that the government that has made this  commitment but let's be clear Waleed, that just brings them into step with the  rest of the developed world.

ALY: Ok, well a question I want to put to Josh Frydenberg, but I want to ask  you about this first Andrew: this is money that's coming out of foreign aid  budget. I'm a little suspicious of this trick because - and I think it's a bipartisan  trick so if I can get you to reflect perhaps more broadly: what is it about political  culture, Andrew, that means that we can so easily take money out of foreign aid  and pretend we're doing something that's beneficent in a way, as the previous  Labor Government did by reassigning money for its asylum seeker policies and  reclassifying it as foreign aid?

LEIGH: Waleed, that's simply not right. Aid, total aid either as a share of  national income or in dollar terms, increased every year under Labor. Labor did  not cut foreign aid. At certain points such as during the Global Financial Crisis we  slowed the growth in foreign aid, but that's in complete contrast to this  government which is constantly taking from the poor to give to the rich. So  Waleed, they have found a billion dollars to give away to multinationals, but  they're taking from not only the poorest in Australia but also the poorest around  the world, cutting into programs such as sanitation, and programs that improve  the lives of children through providing them with simple vaccinations.

ALY: Do you deny the claim I made before, that I specifically remember  interviewing Bob Carr about, that things were being reclassified as foreign aid

that previously had never been called foreign aid and thereby was a kind of de  facto cut.

LEIGH: It's true that we went back to using foreign aid for the onshore  sustenance of refugees, it had been done before but I was not comfortable with  that decision that we made. So I think that's a fair criticism but you've got to  look at the big picture on this Waleed; aid under Labor doubled, aid under the  Coalition has fallen significantly.

ALY: Josh Frydenberg, we're going to speak to the leader of Kiribati in the next  hour of the program and I wonder what he will have to say about the fact that  we give with one hand and take with the other?

FRYDENBERG: I don't think we do that at all, we've got a $5 billion aid spend,  that's a significant amount of money. There'll be some people in Australia who  want it to be higher; there will be some people who'll want it to be lower. But  what we're doing in terms of these climate mitigation strategies coming out of  the aid budget is actually consistent with what previous Liberal and Labor  governments have done. I mean, we're supporting a whole range of projects -  whether it’s around land degradation, biodiversity, other climate change issues,  contributing to the global environmental facility which has nearly four thousand  projects around the world in developing nations, giving support - we give $93  million to that facility. I mean, we do a lot of good things through our aid  project, our aid budget, and that's how it should be.

ALY: Right, but we're not expanding this aid budget at all this money that is  going into the climate change fund is not an extra cent that comes out of  Australian coffers. It's just that we're going to take part of our aid budget and  call it climate change spending.

FRYDENBERG: No, because it's actual money that is there for purposes like  this. For important projects, particularly that can be spent in our region. It's a big  spend, it's $5 billion, all of that is not previously allocated, so there is capacity for  a commitment such as this.

ALY: So there's $200 million that was going to be spent on other foreign aid  projects that will now not be spent on other foreign aid projects?

FRYDENBERG: Well like I said, it's a $5 billion spend that can be allocated in  various ways. That $200 million is not being taken from a specific project and  now put to this new fund, it's about money that is yet to be allocated for specific  purposes.

ALY: All right, let's go to the GP co-payment and the revising of that policy.  Andrew Leigh, I want to start with you on this. What exactly is Labor open to  considering about this new proposal and what is it implacably opposed to?

LEIGH: We believe in the universality of Medicare, Waleed, and as best I can  tell, the government is not changing its policy. Under their old proposal they  were going to raise the fee to go to the doctor, so patients would pay more.  Under the new proposal they're going to cut the amount that the pay to doctors,  so patients will pay more. Now, putting aside the "no cuts to health" promise  that the Prime Minister made before the election, this is surely the same set of  symptoms, and therefore it's the same disease.

ALY: Well, except that the criticism or the claim that this hit the most vulnerable  clearly is no longer true, is it? Because of the revisions they've made about which  people are going to be exempt from this co-payment.

LEIGH: I don't think that anyone would argue that someone who is a few bucks  above the healthcare card cut off is doing it easy. Many people find it tough to  find the money to get kids to go to the doctor; particularly as often happens in  our household with three little boys, you get illnesses that strike everyone at the  same time. Now, we're comfortably off but for a family with a few kids when  everyone gets ill, that money adds up fast and people in my electorate will often  comment to me that there seems to be more months than money. This  government's making that harder rather than easier.

ALY: So how do you propose to make sure that Medicare can survive into the  future as a financially sustainable operation, given that we have in the medium  to the long term - and this is by consensus - we have budgetary pressure, we  have a budgetary problem here.

LEIGH: We do, but we have a first class system in Medicare which does a good  job of containing costs. If we look at explosions in cost, you look at something  like the Private Health Insurance Rebate, which was the fastest growing single  area of expenditure in the budget. That's why Labor, under the opposition of the  Coalition, chose to means test that program. Medicare is fundamental to  Australia, it's a great part of the Whitlam legacy and this government is now  trying to do with its GP tax what it did with its fuel tax. Having been unable to  get it through the parliament, which is to find a sneaky back door way of  implementing another broken promise.

ALY: Josh Frydenberg, I've got a bit of confusion about this policy, because on  the one hand we need to make Medicare sustainable, so we're going to have to  cut back effectively the amount of spending we do on it. We've got all this debt,  we've got to pay the debt and we're going to put it in a fund that has nothing to

do with paying off debt. And that fund might be great, but it has nothing to do  with the problem, the emergency we're trying to deal with. So what exactly is  the thinking here?

FRYDENBERG: Well, there's two points. I think this is really a revamped and  positive outcome in terms of this new policy that has been announced by the  Prime Minister and Peter Dutton. What we have done here is assured money will  go into the medical research future fund, up to $20 billion, after which it goes  into consolidated revenue.

ALY: That's about what, 12 years or something, to get us to that point?

FRYDENBERG: It's going to take a few years, but then the other point is that  we are sending a price signal because we are creating an optional co-payment  for non-concessional patients who are over the age of 16.

ALY: So you're cutting the health budget effectively and asking doctors to make  up the shortfall?

FRYDENBERG: Well we're saying that people who aren't on the concession  card, and eight million Australians are, people who are not pensioners, people  who are not veterans, people who are not in residential aged care facilities  where they get this particular treatment, and people who are not under the age  of 16, they will now be asked in some cases, if the doctor decides, to pay this  extra $5. I think that's a good outcome, particularly when you bear in mind that  today our Medicare spend is around $20 billion and in ten years’ time it goes to  $34 billion and ten years ago it was at $8 billion. So we were very conscious of  that, now we have a price signal when it comes to the PBS co-payment and  Andrew's side of politics supports that. Bob Hawke when he was in government  proposed a Medicare co-payment.

ALY: He got rid of it very quickly.

FRYDENBERG: I think, no Paul Keating rolled him, and then got rid of it.

ALY: Well, because it was unpopular, people realised it wasn't good policy.

FRYDENBERG: But if we are going to be serious about this broader fiscal  challenge that we face, if we're going to be serious about medical research too,  Waleed - and there'll be a lot of people listening to your show who support  medical research because the proof is and the evidence is that for every dollar  invested in medical research there's $2.17 worth of benefits to the community. If  we're going to be serious about playing to our strengths in medical research, if  we're going to be serious about a price signal for an escalating cost, namely

Medicare, then I think a reform like this, a modest $5 optional co-payment for  people who don't fall into all those other categories of lower socio-economic  backgrounds, I think that's a good outcome.

ALY: But you're pulling in three directions here. You're saying fiscal responsibility  and medical research and price signal.

FRYDENBERG: Yes, and I'm happy with that.

ALY: These are not coherent.

FRYDENBERG: Well, I'm trying to make them coherent because I think we  needed some sort of policy response, now clearly our...

ALY: Do you want to stop people going to the doctor, or do you want to fund  medical research, or do you want to pay debt?

FRYDENBERG: Clearly the Labor Party here is playing politics, because even  this modest reform is not being supported by them. Now, they said last time  they didn't like the fact that money was going into a future fund, into a research  future fund, they said before that they didn't like the fact that people who're  from lower socio-economic backgrounds weren't exempted. Well, we've made  some adjustments and we've ensured that the group of people, the cohort of  people who will now be affected by this optional co-payment are in a position to  pay. I think that is a good outcome and we have to take these sort of measures  if we're going to prepare for tomorrow. This is what our big job is, by the way,  going into 2015, to probably better explain our case to the Australian public  because we were saddled with a huge amount of debt...

ALY: Which we're now not paying back because...

FRYDENBERG: …We are also saddled with demographic challenges, and if we  are going to deal with these issues then reforms like this, which by the way do  go into consolidated revenue after $20 billion, I think we've got a good outcome.

ALY: All right, Andrew Leigh, why is it different for pharmaceuticals?

LEIGH: Well Waleed, going to the doctor is absolutely fundamental - not just  for you not getting sick but for you not passing your sickness onto me. We all  benefit from a healthier community, and one of the great things about popping  into a GP regularly is that the GP will often notice that something else is wrong.  When you stop people from getting primary health care it ends up being more  expensive down the track. We know that we've got reports that more people will  end up in emergency rooms if you deter people form primary healthcare. Josh

talks about medical research, and I'm all for medical research, but it shouldn't be  funded by a tax on the sick.

ALY: Right but, answer my question about the pharmaceutical element of it.  Great I can go get cheap primary healthcare, but I get prescribed medication I  then can't afford. Why is that better?

LEIGH: Well seeing a doctor is, I think, the cornerstone of a healthcare system,  Waleed.

ALY: Even if I can't afford the treatment that they give me?

LEIGH: Well what we provide is, we provide heavily discounted pharmaceuticals  but we don't put any barriers in the way of someone going to see a doctor.

ALY: Aren't we providing heavily discounted access to the doctor if they're  paying a co-payment as well?

LEIGH: Well it's still putting a barrier in the way.

ALY: But there's a barrier to the pharmaceutical, why the difference?

LEIGH: Well, when I've chatted to medical practitioners they see this as being  the most important. Talking to doctors in my local electorate, particularly those  operating the Winnunga Nimmityjah Health Care Clinic in the South of  Canberra, they talk particularly about the barriers that this could have for  Indigenous patients.

FRYDENBERG: But you personally supported this Andrew, in previous writings.

ALY: Here we go; we're going back to the vault, are we?

LEIGH: We can go through this for the fifteenth time. Eleven years ago I wrote  an opinion piece; I've changed my mind and I've changed my mind because I've  spoken to the experts on this. I just urge the government to do exactly the  same. They were claiming yesterday that they'd spoken to the AMA about this  and the AMA Deputy Vice-President came out very quickly to say ‘we got a  phone call thirty minutes before the announcement but we didn't get  consultation’. These guys are cutting the consult fees, they're pretending they're  doing consultation but frankly it's a joke.

ALY: Well the AMA did confirm they hadn't been consulted on this program as  well. By the way, how are the royalty cheques going for all those writings that  have been cited in parliament?



FRYDENBERG: I don't think he's selling many books to his colleagues, that's for  sure.

LEIGH: I'm more concerned about what Tony Abbot said when he was  campaigning to be Prime Minister last year than I am about what I wrote when I  was a university student.

ALY: Dexterously avoided. I'm not going to talk about Paid Parental Leave  because the fact is, Josh, you're going to tell me that we're thinking about it and  give me no details, so let's just move on from that. I do want to talk though  about MYEFO. Deloitte Access Economics are forecasting for 2014-15 a deficit of  $34.7 billion, which is $4 billion worse than what we were told in the most recent  forecast back in May, which was $29.8 billion. No surplus before 2018-19, that  will not be helped at all by the co-payment situation because as I say, it's not  paying off debt in the interim and you've got rid of significant revenue streams.  This is now a deficit of your making; this is now a deficit that is your problem.

FRYDENBERG: Well quite clearly you haven't read Chris Richardson from  Deloitte Access Economics' full statement because when he talked about MYEFO  and the upcoming numbers, he did say only the Coalition provided a pathway  back to surplus.

ALY: He didn't say it was the only pathway he could conceive of, he didn't say...

FRYDENBERG: Hang on, Waleed, come on now. You are avoiding the  admission that here was Chris Richardson, an expert in his field with no political  axe to grind, saying that the Labor Party were being opportunist and populist  and were opposing everything, where as we were at least having the courage of  our convictions.

ALY: I'm not avoiding that at all, I'm just saying it's not the question I'm asking.  Which is that this is a deficit that you have contributed to.

FRYDENBERG: Well, the problem is on the revenue side as well as on the  spending side. On the revenue side, iron ore prices have fallen by 35 per cent  since May, this is $9 billion in our revenue projections just over the next couple  of years. Australia is set to become the largest LNG exporter in the world by  2017, overtaking Qatar, and what's happened? The oil and gas prices have fallen  dramatically, this hurts us. On the expenditure side, $28 billion worth of  spending cuts that we have proposed, including $5 billion that Labor took to the  last election, are being blocked by our political opponents in the Senate.

ALY: I understand this argument. But at the same time you've gotten rid of  billions of dollars in revenue in a carbon tax, you will not look at other forms of  revenue to do with superannuation for example, you're closing off options. This  is now a deficit that is partly a result of your policy settings.

FRYDENBERG: Well, we are trying to deal with the situation as best we can,  which involves a number of new savings which are running into interference in  the Senate. On the revenue side there are things that are beyond our control,  and you are right this is not a good situation to be in without budget surplus  forecast being pushed out even further. Let's see more in MYEFO, but it has to  be said if we had more co-operation in the Senate for our budget and the  savings that that involved, we would be in a better position than we look like we  are.

ALY: I'm looking forward to MYEFO greatly. Andrew Leigh, do you acknowledge  that while there are certain decisions the government has made that have  exacerbated this, there are none the less obstructions in the way that would  really help deal with the deficit?

LEIGH: Waleed, the starting point is that even if Parliament simply rubber-stamped the budget, the deficit would be bigger not smaller than when the  Government came to office. That's because as you've said they refused revenue  from the carbon price, they gave money back to multinationals and back to  people with more than $2 million in their superannuation accounts. The result  now is that we have an economy which is languishing; the Westpac-Melbourne  Institute Consumer Sentiment Index just fell again. Westpac's chief economist  calls it a very disturbing result and says there's ongoing disillusionment about the  May budget. The experts are clearly pointing to the decisions the government  made as having hurt confidence, and part of that is when you take from the poor  to give to the rich you're taking from people who spend all their incomes to  people who save part of it, so that really hurts consumer confidence.

ALY: I understand your argument. Josh is very angry, he's punching the air  here, so I just want to give him a very quick rebuttal.

FRYDENBERG: I'm just saying that actually some of the economic indicators  are not as negative as Andrew just points out. Housing starts are up in terms of  consumer confidence and retail spending; it's the fifth month on record that  they've consecutively gone up. New business registrations, particularly for small  business after 500,000 were lost in the Rudd and Gillard years, this is also up  somewhere near 100,000. So we are seeing some very good stories, and we're  also in our 23rd year of consecutive economic growth.

ALY: All right, well we'll see how good those stories ultimately end up. Being I'm  well over time, producers are screaming at me; kind of in the way that you guys  would like to scream at each other, I'm sure.

FRYDENBERG: No, not at all.

ALY: Well, I better wrap up. But this promises to be the last time I will have the  chance to speak of both of you in at least in this format.

FRYDENBERG: Oh no.

ALY: But what I'm going to do, I'm putting an invitation to both of you right  now. My final show on RN Drive will be in the lobby at the ABC in the foyer at  the Melbourne studios in Southbank. You are both invited to come along and  perhaps talk about a special topic of interest that has nothing to do with politics,  are you in Josh?

FRYDENBERG: As long as it's not New Year's Eve, I'll be there.

ALY: All right, Andrew can you make it to Melbourne to have a chat?

LEIGH: I would love to Waleed but I've had a clashing commitment next  Thursday. Might I be able to nominate one of my Melbourne colleagues to do it?

ALY: Oh God, I don't know. Should we do that Josh?

FRYDENBERG: He's counting numbers already.

ALY: Oh, oh wow! Wow zing. Ok, I'll let you nominate someone, just make it  good Andrew.

LEIGH: All right, well I'm nominate my Melbourne colleague with the most  mellifluous voice for radio, Mark Dreyfus.

ALY: All right, I hope he's agreed.

LEIGH: We'll keep our fingers crossed. It's been great talking with you over the  years, Waleed. Best of luck for the next stage in your career, you're going to  make a huge mark wherever you go.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JENNIFER RAYNER 0428 214 956

