

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC AM WITH CHRIS UHLMANN  WEDNESDAY 5 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/S: Manus Island inquiries; Kevin Rudd in Russia.

CHRIS  UHLMANN: Labor  and  the  Greens  will  combine  to  hold  two  Senate   inquiries  into  the  riot  in  the  Manus  Island  Detention  Centre  and  the  Navy’s   incursion into Indonesian waters. Multiple inquiries into the death of Reza Berati  in last month’s riot are already underway, but the Senate will add another layer,  one Labor and the Greens say is essential to get to the bottom of how Australia’s  border  protection  and  detention  regime  are  working.  Richard  Marles  is  the   Opposition  Spokesman  for  Immigration  and  Border  Protection  and  he  joins  me   now, good morning.



RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning Chris, how are you?

UHLMANN: Richard you obviously don’t believe that the Government can be  trusted with doing its own inquiries?

MARLES: Well this is a Government which doesn’t have a track record of being  upfront with the Australian people about its policy in relation to asylum seekers,  in fact it has a culture of secrecy which pervades all that it does. It has its inquiry  in place, we want to give that inquiry a go, which is why we sought to have the  Senate inquiry start after the Government has finished, but it acts as a method of  keeping the Government’s inquiry honest, making sure that it is full and open,  and if it isn’t, then there is a Senate inquiry which will get to the bottom of this,

and I cannot state enough how important it is to get to the bottom of these facts  and to find out what happened at Manus.

UHLMANN: Isn’t it true to say that if there were problems on Manus Island that  it’s the Labor Party’s fault?

MARLES: It’s not about the model Chris, it’s about the management.

UHLMANN:  You installed the management didn’t you?

MARLES: But this is happening on this Government’s watch. And what we’ve got  here is a Government which runs from responsibility, it’s time that they actually  take responsibility for what is occurring under their watch.  This Minister has not  spoken to the official in charge of the Manus Island facility since September, now  since then, we’ve had three major incidents, one in October and two in February.  This is a Government which is hands-off and they need to actually start getting  on top of this issue, both in managing the relationship with PNG and managing  the facility.

UHLMANN:  But isn’t the legacy problem the fact that you pitched this idea, the  Manus Island Detention Centre, in to an election campaign, at a minute to  midnight with a blank sheet of paper, so that the foundation stones of this were  always bad.

MARLES: I don’t accept that at all.  Firstly the Manus Island facility had been  negotiated with the PNG Government prior to that, the question about  resettlement was one which was worked through thoroughly with the PNG  Government and it is the piece of public policy which has made the single biggest  difference in reducing the flow of boats from Indonesia to Christmas Island and  as a result, saving lives at sea.

UHLMANN: So you’re happy with this and you’d keep it in Government?

MARLES: Well, we are not happy with how things are going at the moment,  would we keep it in Government? The answer to that question is that we wanted  a facility which was both humane and dignified.

UHLMANN: And is it?

MARLES:  Well we have deep concerns about that, we have concerns about it in  both the context of the Amnesty Report but obviously in the context of what has  occurred over the last few weeks and back in October and so we need to  understand why this Government is getting it wrong and what steps they need to  fix it up.

UHLMANN: I guess the question is what level of responsibility do you take for  the way this system turned out?



MARLES: We certainly take responsibility for putting in place this model, a model  which has had a huge impact in reducing the flow of boats and saving lives at  sea.  But we don’t take responsibility for the way this Government is managing it  now and that’s the issue.



UHLMANN:  The Government’s tow backs is the thing that’s having the largest  effect now, do you concede that, that that policy is having an effect?

MARLES:  Well it’s difficult to comment on that policy when the Government isn’t  being clear with the Australian people about what they’re actually doing on the  high seas. The fact is this, that with Manus in place and with the resettlement  arrangement in place in PNG, we saw a 90 per cent reduction in the flow of boats  between its implementation and the election.

UHLMANN:  Do you give the Government any credit at all for its policies having  an effect?

MARLES:  Well I certainly give the Government credit for keeping the PNG  arrangement in place. In terms of tow backs, how could anyone give a sensible  comment about that given that the Government is not telling the Australian  people what they’re doing?

UHLMANN: Richard Marles, finally briefly, Kevin Rudd has gone to Russia, will  that help?

MARLES:  Kevin Rudd has made it clear that he was going to Russia, had this  trip booked in for some time. As we all know Kevin is a man who wants to keep  abreast of world affairs, I’m not sure that Kevin is putting himself in the position of  trying to broker peace there, I think this is a visit where he’s trying to enlighten  himself.

UHLMANN:  Richard Marles thank you.

MARLES:  Thanks Chris.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES:  LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

