The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for lmmigration and Border Protection

MEDIA STATEMENT

Tuesday 13 May 2014

20,000 PLACES FOR THOSE MOST IN NEED OF PROTECTION

Stopping the boats has enabled the Abbott Government to provide 20,000 extra places within  the Special Humanitarian Program (SHP) of Australia's humanitarian intake that will assist those  most in need of resettlement, Minister for lmmigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott  Morrison, said today.

"In addition to stopping deaths at sea, these 20,000 additional SHP places are the humanitarian  dividend of the government's successful border protection policies that are stopping the boats,"  Minister Morrison said.

"They include 16,000 places over the Budget and forward estimates period and more than 4,000  in the current financial year. The places will be delivered from within Australia's existing intake.

"In 2014-15 Australia will welcome 13,750 people through our humanitarian programme and  remains one of the top three refugee resettlement countries in the world.

"Consistent with our election commitment, a minimum of 11,000 of these places will go to  offshore applicants.

"Of the 13,750 places at least 4,000 will be provided under the SHP component for the families  of offshore humanitarian entrants. Under Labor this program fell to just 500 places as those who  came by boat took the place of people who applied through the legitimate process. Stopping the  boats means we can return these places, delivering an additional 16,000 SHP places over the

budget and forward estimates, in addition to the 4,000 extra places already created this year.

"This is also made possible by the government's decision to deny eligibility for permanent  protection visas to those who came illegally by boat.

"The grant of any temporary protection visas to illegal boat arrivals will be on top of the 13,750  permanent places offered t o  those arriving legally in Australia through the legitimate process.

"Labor previously forfeited offshore places by granting illegal boat arrivals permanent visas. That  led to more than 15,000 people waiting offshore being denied Australia's protection via  humanitarian visas. This will no longer happen under the Abbott Government.

"Also in 2014-15, one thousand places will be allocated to the Woman at Risk program. This  program is celebrating its 25th year and has seen more than 14,000 visas granted to vulnerable  refugee women and their children. We are committed to its ongoing success.

"The Government's policies unde r Oper ation Sovereign  Borders are stopp ing the boats,  s aving  lives at  s ea and allowing more pla ce s  under our  hum anitarian programme fo r those waiting i n  desperate circumstances around t he  wo r ld, with out increasing our  overall re fugee  i ntake at  great expense t o taxpayers.

" We are doing what  we said  we wo uld do  an d getting the  results we said  we wo uld get. This  government is cl eaning up L abor's mess . We are kee pi ng our commitments on our borders, "  Min ister Morrison said.

Further information: Julian Le embruggen 0400 813 253,

