

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  BREAKFAST, RADIO NATIONAL  THURSDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Foreign Fighters Bill, Cory Bernardi, Cambodia deal,  Former Prime Ministers.

KELLY: Penny Wong is the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate and a  member of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Intelligence and Security.  Senator Wong, thanks very much for joining us on Breakfast.

PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Good to  be with you Fran.

KELLY: The focus of the UN Security Council meeting this morning has been on  foreign fighters. Resolution 2178, criminalises traveling abroad to fight for  extremist organisations and it has been adopted by all 15 members of the  Security Council. Are you gratified at that but also, you know, is it good that here  in Australia we are ahead of this curve?

WONG: Look, we obviously, across the world face heightened risk and here in  Australia that is the case too and Labor in Opposition will take the approach that  we took in Government, you have to put the security of Australian’s as your first  priority and we’ll act responsibly to do so.

We’ve indicated to the Government that the second piece of legislation that has  only just been introduced into the Parliament -



KELLY: On foreign fighters?

WONG: On foreign fighters, we will agree to the Government’s timetable for the  consideration of that and that legislation will go the Committee you mentioned.  The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security and we will look  at it and we will scrutinise it, just as we have on the legislation that’s currently in  the Senate.

KELLY: The Shadow Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus did suggest yesterday that  the crackdown within that legislation that you’re discussing on people travelling  to prescribed areas perhaps goes too far. Is there a danger with these laws that  people with legitimate innocent reasons for travelling to these areas could end  up in prison?

WONG: You’ve identified the balance, I think, the Government and the  Parliament have to strike which is why I think it is very important that we have a  proper inquiry with the capacity - not only for the intelligence agencies to make  the submissions that they will and have the discussions that they will but for  Australians to put their views about whether the detail of this is as it should be  and as I’ve said we’ve said to the Government we’ve agreed to your timetable  and we’ll put this through the Parliamentary Joint Committee but obviously we’ll  do what we did in Government.

KELLY: We’ve heard -

WONG: We will always do the right thing when it comes to ensuring Australia’s  national security.

KELLY: We’ve talked to many people over the last few weeks on the program  about this and there is one line of thought suggesting that preventing potential  foreign fighters travelling overseas actually places people here in Australia in  more danger because local sympathisers could vent their frustration here at  home. Now we have the case of Numan Haider he was shot dead by police  yesterday. There was some suggestion that that could be a case in point. Did  your committee consider this potential?

WONG: That’s certainly a view that I’ve seen written about and something that  people have the opportunity to put towards the committee but I’d make a  broader point which really goes to the same issue. I think it’s very important in  the circumstances that we find ourselves to both first - remain calm but as  importantly remember that bigotry, hatred, intolerance are not things which  enhance our security. We must make sure this time, we do everything we can as

political leaders, as media representatives to ensure that we promote the values  of unity, diversity, tolerance which are fundamental to who we are.

KELLY: Talking about those issues, Liberal Senator Cory Bernardi has said that  he wants the burqa banned in Parliament House. It’s a security issue in his view.  Do you agree there is a security issue about people coming into Parliament  House with their face covered. If this could be managed in some sort of  culturally sensitive way, would you support it?

WONG: I question the motivation of Senator Bernardi and his colleague in the  House of Representatives that at this time where, as I said, political leaders do  have to be very careful about acting responsibly and not fanning the flames of  prejudice but nurturing unity, diversity, tolerance that we see these sorts of  comments. They are not the only comments and of course Senator Bernardi also  is sponsoring legislation for removal of protection against race hate speech in the  Racial Discrimination Act.

Now this is not a sensible approach and the Prime Minister should really ensure  that his Members and Senators behave a little more responsibly.

KELLY: In terms of the timing though, and yes things are heightened at the  moment, but are there security issues about anyone coming into Parliament  House without having to show their face, I think, that is the only point that some  people might think, ‘Oh yes, that’s fair enough.’

WONG: This hasn’t been raised before. Why is it being raised now? There are  security arrangements as you probably know. There is heightened security  arrangements in Parliament House, there’s screening for people entering and  there is heightened police personnel presence.

I just question whether this makes a lot of sense for this discussion to be put on  the national agenda. I think the risk of it is one we can all identify, which is that  it is simply going to fan some prejudice in the community. That is not good for  us as a society and nor does it make us safer.

KELLY: You are listening to RN Breakfast, it’s a quarter to eight. Our guest is the  Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, Senator Penny Wong. Senator, on  another issue, the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison will sign a Memorandum  of Understanding tomorrow in Cambodia for the resettlement of refugees there.  Considering Labor in government did have a plan to settle refugees in Malaysia,  does Labor support the Cambodian deal?

WONG: Can I first go to the Malaysia issue. I hope that Scott Morrison will  spend a long time, as will Joe Hockey and Mr Abbott, explaining to Australians

how somehow this arrangement is a better one than the arrangement that they  struck down, that the Labor Party put in place in government with Malaysia.

I also note that this broke in the media here in Australia not because the  Government explained it, but because it was reported in the Cambodian press.  Continuing the tradition of not talking to Australians that this Government and  this Minister appears to adhere to. We will look at this, we will look at it after the  detail has been put out and we will look at what are the appropriate  arrangements and safeguards in that agreement.

KELLY: Will this have to go through the Parliament?

WONG: I don’t know. That’s one of the issues that the Government will have to  address. All we have, as you, is reports in the media and the indication that the  Minister will announce. But as I again say if he can’t demonstrate that this is  somehow different from Malaysia, I think we’ll all see that base politics was at  the heart of the Coalition’s position on Malaysia.

KELLY: So you don’t have particular concerns about a country like Cambodia  being able to manage or handle refugee resettlement like this, because there are  concerns on the ground from some people in Cambodia we’ve heard this  morning.

WONG: Yes I listened to some of your interviews this morning and of course  there are concerns. The question will be whether or not the Government has put  in place appropriate safeguards and systems to deal with that. We look forward  to the Government explaining that in the way that Mr Bowen, Chris Bowen,  explained how he put in place appropriate safeguards when the [Labor]  Government put the Malaysia arrangement as a proposition to the Parliament  and it was knocked off by Tony Abbott and others.

KELLY: On another issue, Julia Gillard has released her memoirs, it’s called My  Story. It’s triggered a fresh round of internal warfare, I guess. Kevin Rudd has  described the book as a work of fiction, he says “The Australian people have long  reached their own conclusions about Ms Gillard’s relationship with the truth from  the leadership coup to the carbon tax.” So he is effectively calling her a liar.  What is your view of Kevin Rudd going public with that kind of comment about a  former Prime Minister?

WONG: Fran, I’ve got a lot of regard and respect for the two Prime Ministers  under whom I served, Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd. I think both of them have  contributed greatly to this nation. I am proud to have been part of a government  under both of them that I think left a strong legacy both in terms of the  economy and in terms of a fairer society. But I don’t propose to engage in

further comment about them as individuals. I’m a member of a political party  that has to work to the future. And there is so much worth fighting for and so  much that has to be fought for as is demonstrated by the unfair Budget that this  government has handed down.

KELLY: So you’re not offering any criticism of someone, who happens to be a  former leader, who is so openly critical in such, pretty ferocious terms of a  former Prime Minister. You don’t think it is appropriate - you think it is OK for  that discussion to be had in public?

WONG: I don’t think it is OK for me, as a member of the leadership of the Labor  Party, to do anything other than my job, which is to work today for the future  and to take the fight up to this Government. I’m not going to be distracted from  that task.

KELLY: It’s not helpful for Bill Shorten though is it?

WONG: We’ve got a job to do and I know that everybody is very interested in  all of these comments. I think out there in the community people are much more  concerned about the changes to the pension, about university education being  put out of the reach of so many thousands of Australians, about Medicare being  dismantled. These are the things that people are concerned about and that is  what is important for people’s lives and that’s what I want to focus on.

KELLY: Penny Wong thank you very much for joining us.

WONG: Good to speak with you Fran.

ENDS

Media contact: Sacha Fenton 0467 784 528

