

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN INTERVIEW WITH WALEED ALY  WEDNESDAY, 14 MAY 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Tony Abbott’s Budget of Broken Promises and Tw isted  Priorities.

WALEED ALY: We rang the Minister for Foreign Affairs but their office did not  return our calls today, so joining me instead is the Deputy Leader of the  Opposition, the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and International  Development, Tanya Plibersek. Thank you very much for your time.

TANYA PLIBERSEK: Pleasure to be with you.

ALY: This is ultimately the extension of a story that the previous government  started, isn’t it? When they started quarantining foreign aid for the treatment  and processing of asylum seekers.

PLIBERSEK: Do you know what? We doubled the aid budget from 2.9 billion  dollars to 5.7 billion dollars when we left government. We were on target to  meet the 0.5% of gross national income target that, at that time was a  bipartisan target. And it is a little infuriating to say that meeting the 0.5% target  instead of in 2015, in 2017, because of the Global Financial Crisis is the same  thing as what the Government has done, which is cut 16 billion dollars from the  world’s poorest people. Now, you’ve spoken about this Budget, which cuts 7.6  billion dollars, that takes these four years into account. But if you look at the

spending that we had projected out to 2020, spending that, as late as December  last year and the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook, the Government also  supported, this is a 16 billion dollar cut. So, 7.6 billion dollars, you’re perfectly

right to say is the largest single cut in this Budget. But the effect as you look out  beyond this budget is a much greater effect on the world’s poorest people. Now,  just to put this into perspective, 7.6 billion dollars would teach 25 million people  to read and write, it’d provide 1.5 billion dollars - 1.5 billion doses of life saving  malaria treatments, it’d treat 10 million people with HIV/AIDS with anti-infection  viral treatments or train more than 3 million new midwives in developing  countries. So this is, on an unprecedented scale, a broken promise.

ALY: And if I may be so cynical, not a voter among any of those people you  mentioned which I suspect is why foreign aid remains an easy target. In the case  of your side’s response on foreign aid, or policy on foreign aid, I wasn’t referring  so much to the delaying of meeting the target, so much as the quarantining of

foreign aid to be diverted to a totally separate policy area which was the  processing and settlement of asylum seekers, and it got called foreign aid.

PLIBERSEK: And it’s also worth pointing out that we helped 6 million Afghan  kids, including 2 million girls, go to school. We cut malaria in Vanuatu by more  than 80% and in the Solomon Islands by 50%. We helped build two thousand  schools across Indonesia. I mean, it really is kind of, very cheap policy analysis  to say “a pox on both your houses” because we didn’t spend every dollar the  way you would’ve liked us to spend it.

ALY: No, no, it’s not about spending every dollar the way I like, it’s about taking  something that wasn’t called foreign aid and hadn’t been called foreign aid for a  long time and then calling it that.

PLIBERSEK: Actually that’s not right. It did meet the international definition of  overseas development assistance and -

ALY: Right, but it was money that we were spending anyway not under the  foreign aid budget, wasn’t it?

PLIBERSEK: It was - it amazes me that you have before you a 7.9 billion dollar  cut in aid and you want to have an argument about what the last Government  did because some of the money went to look after asylum seekers in other  countries. If we’d given money to Indonesia to look after asylum seekers in  Indonesia, that would be a bad spend of money in your view?

ALY: No, I didn’t say that. I just think that - what I’m trying to draw out here, is  the overall direction in policy in this country -

PLIBERSEK: The overall direction is that we doubled aid funding and this  Government, in this Budget last night, has cut 7.9 billion dollars, enough money  to teach 25 million people to read and write.

ALY: When you say “cut”, what you really mean is slow the growth, so that it’s a  cut for the future, it’s not a cut in what we’re spending currently, is it?

PLIBERSEK: So, there will be real cuts to countries that were expecting to get  extra money for aid, there will be some countries that will lose funding  altogether. Africa, for example, is a country - Africa is a continent where we  have previously given aid dollars, in the previous round of cuts we cut more than  90 million dollars from Sub-Saharan Africa and it looks like in this Budget, we will  end aid altogether to Africa. I mean, it is extraordinary to think that there will be  countries that used to receive development assistance from Australia that will no  longer receive development assistance from Australia.

ALY: I’m sure you’re familiar with the argument about foreign aid that there are  people here that would need a lot of the money that we are spending overseas,  particularly say, Indigenous Australians, whose life expectancy is seventeen  years less than the rest of the country-

PLIBERSEK: Absolutely, and they’re hit in this Budget, too. This is the  extraordinary thing about this argument. The United Kingdom, which has a much  worse budget position than Australia, has kept to not just to the 0.5% target of  gross national target, but they’ve gone beyond that to 0.7%, congratulations to  them. They didn’t use a hard budget to attack the world’s poorest people. The  other argument that you hear, is not just that Budget times are tough but that  we need that money here in Australia to look after poor Australians. I agree that  we need to look after poor Australians here in Australia. The choice is a false  choice. This Budget on top of these enormous aid cuts, also cuts money for  pensioners, it also cuts New Start and Youth Allowance for kids, it also cuts  money to ordinary families, it also makes people pay 7 dollars every time they go  to the doctor and an extra 5 dollars when they get medicine. I mean, the idea  that if we cut the aid budget, poor Australians will be better off, is absolutely  disproved by this Budget. Incidentally, you mentioned Indigenous Australians,  they cop a 500 million dollar cut in Indigenous programs alone, and of course  they will suffer disproportionately from the health cuts, from the education cuts,  from the pension cuts, from the cuts to housing assistance, from all of the other  cuts in this Budget.

ALY: Tanya Plibersek, why do think it is that cuts to foreign aid carries no  political consequence?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I’m not- There’s two things in that question, the first is, we  have to make moral and ethical decisions that are separate from whether there  are political consequences. So I think that the first question is, is this the right  moral and ethical decision? And the answer is plainly not. Is it a right, strategic  decision? Because stronger countries in our region, better trading partners, more  stable nations are all good for Australia. So, it’s wrong morally and ethically, it’s  wrong strategically, but you ask a question about political popularity and I think  that this is really the job of every Australian who cares about the world around  them, to say that there is a consequence to this politically, that it is not  acceptable to cut 7.9 billion dollars in this Budget from the world’s poorest  people.

ALY: Well, I suppose I’m asking whether or not you think those Australians exist  in an electorally meaningful way?

PLIBERSEK: I certainly think they exist, I mean, I haven’t considered whether  they exist in an electorally meaningful way, but they certainly exist because I’m  being contacted by many, many of them. You look at the sort of outpouring that  we’ve had for these girls that have been kidnapped in Nigeria and it is  devastating, terrifying for the girls, terrifying for their parents. The idea at the  same time that we would be cutting support to girls just like them to give them a  safe way to go to school is extraordinary, and I don’t believe that the average  Australian can say “I care about these girls because I’ve seen them on television  and the terrible things happening to them, but I don’t care about the other 65  million girls around the world who don’t have access to education” I don’t think  that’s true. So, I haven’t made a political analysis of it, I’ve made an ethical,  moral and strategic analysis about whether it’s the right thing, and the answer is  no. It’s up to other people, including aid organisations who’ve been very critical  of this, to make sure that there’s a political consequence.

ALY: Tanya Plibersek, thank you very much for your time. You’ll be pleased to  know I’m getting text messages from people who were loving the fact that you  told me off, so there you go.

PLIBERSEK: [laughs] I didn’t mean to tell you off! [inaudible]

ALY: I quite enjoyed being told off, actually, on air, it’s good, good fun. Thank  you.

PLIBERSEK: Alright, thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

