The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



PNG visit, Operation Sovereign Borders, Manus  Island incident  Monday, 03 March 2014

Interview with Chris Uhlmann, ABC AM Program

Chris Uhlmann: The Immigration Minister Scott Morrison's return from a visit to  Papua New Guinea with an agreement for a monthly joint Ministerial meeting with his  PNG counterpart. The high level talks with Scott Morrison and Foreign Minister Julie  Bishop are to directly oversee the implementation of a regional resettlement. Next  month's first meeting will deal with the recent death of an asylum seeker. During his  talks in Port Moresby on the weekend, Mr Morrison and senior PNG Ministers  agreed to coordinate the various investigations into the death and the violence at the  Manus Island detention centre. Scott Morrison joins me now, good morning.

Minister Morrison: Good morning Chris.

Chris Uhlmann: Can you tell us when PNG will begin processing refugees?

Minister Morrison: Well they already have begun and there already are quite a  number of cases which are almost decision ready and that's something we want to  see progress. I mean the key thing here is we've got to get this processing moving  and we've got to get the resettlement in place. After all, this was a resettlement  arrangement, not just a processing arrangement and that's why I'll be going there  every month working with my counterparts in PNG in partnership to make sure that  we deliver on the resettlement.

Chris Uhlmann: Does Papua New Guinea even have the machinery of government  to process refugees? Do they need to pass anything through parliament?

Minister Morrison: Well the processing they can do and we've been assisting them  with that over many months with the training and the mentoring programme which  we've had running. But what we've inherited is a very difficult situation; the  resettlement arrangements with Papua New Guinea were a blank sheet of paper  when it came to the previous government. All the detail, all the hard work has had to  be done over the last five months and there's a lot of hard work ahead.

Chris Uhlmann: That's a given, but do they have any of the processes to actually  resettle people? Will they have to pass any of that through parliament? Will that take  more time?

Minister Morrison: Well there may be some legislative changes and they're some of  the details which are yet not completely nailed down and there are pilot  arrangements which are under discussion and an expert panel of their own which  they've been seeking to advance over the last month. But we need to get progress  on this, that's why every month I'll be sitting down with my counterparts and we'll be  tracking progress on this as well as tracking the delivery of the commitments the  Australian government made under prime minister Rudd of $420 million and how that  is being rolled out. Now, we've already delivered those first 50 AFP officers and  we're doing our bit on that side of the arrangement.

Chris Uhlmann: Do you agree as long as there is no plan at all for resettlement  there's no mechanism in place for Papua New Guinea to do that then Manus Island  detention centre will remain a very dangerous place?

Minister Morrison: I do agree that we need to have all of these arrangements in  place and that is why we're doing exactly what we're doing. I said before the election  we would seek to salvage the arrangement; well we have to build the arrangement  because it just simply is not there.

Chris Uhlmann: And the building could take months.

Minister Morrison: It could take months, that's right.

Chris Uhlmann: It could take a year.

Minister Morrison: No, I don't think it'll take that long Chris. I think over the next few  months I think we're going to make real progress. That's certainly the impression I  got from my meeting on Saturday and we already have made progress. A lot of the  work has been under the surface; we do have quite a large number of cases which  are almost decision ready and we're very keen to see those decisions go forward.

Chris Uhlmann: Can you guarantee the safety of the people in that detention centre  while these talks go?

Minister Morrison: It is critical with the changeover in the security arrangements  we've put in place, I mean, all the service providers, particularly the two with direct  involvement with those in the centres, those contracts have been discontinued by  this Government. They were put in place by the previous government and our new  operators are in there now doing the transition and my level of confidence is growing.

Chris Uhlmann: But history shows us in detention centres in Australia that  frustration will grow as long as there's no pathway out. Can you guarantee the safety  of the people in that detention centre?

Minister Morrison: Well if people, as I've said before, if they're going to cooperate  with those who are looking after them and not engage in riotous behaviour then  obviously the risks that present significantly diminish.

Chris Uhlmann: Can you in good conscience send anyone else to Manus Island?

Minister Morrison: Well, there are no boats coming Chris. We haven't had a boat in  over 70 days and when there are no boats coming, I don't have to send anyone.

Chris Uhlmann: But could you?

Minister Morrison: Well I can send people to both centres. I can particularly send  them also to Nauru where there is more spare capacity, but the point is this Chris -  there are no boats coming and that's the point. Our policies are being successful and  the reason we put in place, particularly the maritime operations which have been the  key factor in stopping those boats over the last more than 70 days, that has relieved  the pressure. If that arrangement was not in place, Manus Island would've been  overrun.

Chris Uhlmann: Are you any closer to knowing what happened on the night of that  riot?

Minister Morrison: We are I think getting a clearer picture, but I'm going to leave  that to the review and one of the things we discussed on Saturday was ensuring  there was a convergence of information between the respective inquiries and  investigations and a direct participation of the Government of Papua New Guinea in  our Cornall administrative review. Now that's important because we all want to know  what happened and we want to know what we need to do as a result of what  happened and the Papua New Guineans' commitment to that is equal to ours.

Chris Uhlmann: Do you know who killed Reza Barati?

Minister Morrison: No.

Chris Uhlmann: Do you think that the inquiry is likely to find that out?

Minister Morrison: I believe the police investigation, the coronial inquiry, the other  review that we have in place with Cornall will bring together all of this information and  I'm hopeful and confident that we will be able to determine what occurred on that  night.

Chris Uhlmann: Do you know who fired the shot?

Minister Morrison: No.

Chris Uhlmann: Do you believe it was the Papua New Guinean police?

Minister Morrison: I don't know.

Chris Uhlmann: Given they were the only ones who had weapons.

Minister Morrison: All of these questions are matters for the review, Chris and I'm  going to let the review do its job; I'm not going to jump ahead of these things. I know  there's a keen appetite for information on this, but at the end of the day with the  review now in place, it's important we let the review do its job.

Chris Uhlmann: Finally then can you in good conscience say that you are  absolutely satisfied with the new processes that you're putting in place that the  people in that detention centre will be safe?

Minister Morrison: Well, what I'm confident of is the arrangements we've put in  place has significantly reduced the risks that have been present now for some time.  What we were left with was a mess; in the first three weeks when I visited Papua  New Guinea and Manus, the first time it was clear to me the security situation was  not up to standard. That's why we took the steps that we did. I think those steps have  saved lives.

Chris Uhlmann: Scott Morrison, thank you.

Minister Morrison: Thanks Chris.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm212237.htm   Last update: Monday, 03 March 2014 at 11:21 AEST



