

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC PM   TUESDAY 6 MAY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Asylum seeker policy, relationship with Indonesia,  Government report into Manus Island incident

MARK COLVIN: The Federal Opposition is demanding that the Government  release the report into the death of Reza Berati at the Manus Island detention  Centre in February.

Labor says a submission to the Senate describing beatings and grossly  inadequate facilities highlights the need for the report to be released.

The Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles says Manus should continue to  be used for offshore processing - although he hasn't been there to inspect the  facility.

Richard Marles has been speaking to political correspondent Louise Yaxley.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Manus is playing an important role in saving lives at  sea, and we should never forget that. And I have no doubt that its operation and  its existence has saved lives at sea, but it needs to be operated in a way which is  safe, dignified and humane.

And that's what we need to have confidence about going forward.

LOUISE YAXLEY: And do you have confidence at the moment it is safe and  humane?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, no, and that's exactly the point, given all the events  that occurred in February, given the lack of information that has been provided  by the Government in relation to the inquiry which it undertook, I don't think  anyone could have that confidence, and yet that's precisely the confidence that  we need to have.

I don't have that at the moment, and I can't imagine how anyone in the  Australian public could have that confidence.

LOUISE YAXLEY: Have you visited Manus Island recently?

RICHARD MARLES: I've not been to Manus, but it's important in any visit to  Manus that public officials take the advice that they are given about making sure  that visiting that facility won't make matters worse.

It's obviously a big event if a senior representative of....within the Australian  Government, a Member of Parliament, visits that facility. I think it is obviously  important that that occur from time to time, but it matters to take advice on this,  and I don't want to visit that facility and make things worse…

LOUISE YAXLEY: But wouldn't you like to see it to assure yourself that you are  able to say that it is worth keeping it open?

RICHARD MARLES: Oh of course I'd like to see it, but I also don't want to  make matters worse by going there. But all of those questions also highlight the  need for us to be given this report in full and now.

We need to do everything we can to give confidence to the Australian people  that, so that I can gain confidence in the role I hold, but that all the Australian  people can have confidence that this is a facility which is being run in a safe and  a dignified manner, and quite frankly at this moment, we can't have that  confidence.

LOUISE YAXLEY: It appears that the latest asylum seeker boat to be sent back  to Indonesia had passengers on it that combined two asylum seeker boats that  had been turned around.

What's your view of that and, in particular, do you think it's in breach of any  Australian obligations?

RICHARD MARLES: Well firstly, this is a very serious allegation which has been  made here, and we need to hear from the Government immediately that what  they are doing on the high seas is consistent with Australia's international  obligations, with the covenants to which Australia is a party, and particularly the  protocol against the smuggling of migrants by land, sea and air.

We need to be hearing from the Government right now. Now I understand that  these allegations to date are not tested, but where allegations of this kind have  been made in the past, we've heard from the Government almost immediately,  and we need to hear from them now, that what they are doing is consistent with  our international obligations.

LOUISE YAXLEY: So you're suggesting that the Government could be engaging  itself in people smuggling?

RICHARD MARLES: What I'm saying is, we need to know from the  Government that this allegation is not true; if it is unfounded, we need to hear  from the Government now, and I'm amazed that we have not heard from them  yet.

And, we need to hear from the Government that what they are doing is  consistent with our international obligations, and particularly the protocol against  the smuggling of migrants by land, sea and air.

LOUISE YAXLEY: And what would be the element of this that would make that  against that protocol? So what we understand has happened is that there was  one boat with two people on it and another boat. The two were transferred to  the wooden fishing boat that had the larger number on it, and that was  somehow pushed back to Indonesia in the last few days.

What's the element that would be of most concern?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, you've just detailed the very concerning reports. I  accept the fact that the allegations contained in those reports are not tested, but  as those allegations stand, they would be very serious indeed.

And they would raise questions about Australia's compliance with its international  obligations and it's for that reason that I'm saying we need to hear from the  Government right now, that firstly these allegations are not true, and secondly  it's the way in which they're conducting themselves on the high seas is  consistent with the international obligations to which Australia is a party.

We need to hear a denial that any of that kind of activity is going on, and we  need to hear from the Government that the way in which they're going about  their business is consistent with our international obligations.

And my concern right now is that the silence is deafening.

MARK COLVIN: Richard Marles Labor's Immigration Spokesman, speaking to  Louise Yaxley.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

