

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY AM AGENDA  MONDAY, 28 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: MH17; Work for the Dole; Joe Hockey’s unfair budget.

DAVID LIPSON: Joining me now to discuss the day’s issues, Alan Tudge from the  Liberals and Andrew Leigh joining me here in the Canberra studio from the ALP. Thank  you both for joining us. First you, Alan Tudge, on this mission in Ukraine - a reminder if  any was needed of the dangers posed to those Australian Federal Police and others  going to the site with this heavy shelling cancelling, or at least delaying, the operation.

ALAN TUDGE, PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE PRIME MINISTER: I think  that’s right, David. I think the word though is delaying rather than cancelling. We have  an absolute determination to ensure that the remains can be secured and identified and  returned back to Australia. But we want to get in there, we had hoped to get in there last  night our time and will be monitoring the situation very closely. When it is safe to do so  the team led by the Netherlands, including Australian Federal Police, will be going in  there to monitor the site, secure the remains and bring them home.

LIPSON: Andrew Leigh, the cooperation of the rebels is crucial to this mission, and as  such, we've seen the Prime Minister appropriately temper his language towards them  compared to the descriptions we used about a week ago. Are you satisfied that  everything is being done to minimise the risk for our police and others?

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Absolutely, David. This is  fully supported by the opposition. I think Alan spoke well in speaking about the  importance of securing the remains there. One of the victims was in my own electorate,  a memorial service was held for her last week and it just brings home to me how

important it is for all of those families to secure the victims’ remains and secure that  crash site, absolutely vital.

LIPSON: The Prime Minister has been pretty much universally praised for his handling  of this crisis and that's been reflected today in a Galaxy Poll published in News  Corporation papers which shows the vast majority of those who were asked who had  shown the best leadership nominated Tony Abbott - well above Barack Obama and  David Cameron. Not surprising, would you say Alan Tudge?

TUDGE: David, I don't want to comment on the polls. Tony Abbott and Julie Bishop and  the leadership team have been 100 per cent focused on this particular mission, we've  had very good support from the opposition as exemplified again by Andrew Leigh just  now. The task at hand is to secure the remains, to support the investigation, and to  bring the remains home. That is the square focus of the Prime Minister and Foreign  Minister with great support from Bill Shorten.

LIPSON: Andrew Leigh, Tanya Plibersek yesterday said that the Opposition wasn't  getting every briefing they had asked for. Do you know if that has been resolved to a  satisfactory level?

LEIGH: I don't, David.

LIPSON: But you're still satisfied with the cooperation and bipartisanship that’s been  shown?

LEIGH: In broad terms, this is an operation that enjoys bipartisan support.

LIPSON: Okay, well let's move on to another issue, the issue of asylum seekers. Today  we have seen the Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison, speaking about this group of  asylum seekers that has now been brought to Australian shores; in fact, to the  Australian mainland. They are expected to today be interviewed by Indian consular  officials, 18 of them that are being held at the Curtin detention facility in Western  Australia. Scott Morrison says that India is a safe country, a vibrant democracy and as  such, it seems that many of these asylum seekers will be returned to India. Andrew  Leigh, is that appropriate?

LEIGH: This is a situation which could have been resolved weeks ago but for Scott  Morrison's ego, David. I mean, leaving these asylum seekers - nearly 160 of them - at  sea for the best part of a month is, I think, a serious mistake. They should have been  brought to Christmas Island weeks ago and it worries me that we have the High Court  making asylum seeker policy rather than Scott Morrison.

LIPSON: Scott Morrison disputes that. He says the High Court has nothing to do with  what has ended up happening here. I suppose the question is: you're saying it should  have been done earlier but you don't have a problem at all with what's actually  happening in terms of the way that they are being processed?



LEIGH: I think the asylum seekers being brought to Australia makes sense, the stand-off on the high seas was turning into a farce. I think it was a dangerous situation for  Australian personnel and for the asylum seekers to leave them at sea there. Labor's  view on asylum seeker policy is that we ought to be able to take more refugees, and  we're disappointed the government cut back the refugee by a third when they came to  office. But it's absolutely important that we stop drowning’s at sea and the refugee  resettlement agreement we put in place prior to the election saw a 90 per cent drop in  asylum seeker boat arrivals. I don't think the sort of situation we've seen over recent  weeks has helped achieve either of those two humanitarian goals, of taking more  refugees and seeing fewer drowning’s.

LIPSON: Alan Tudge, quite a bit to respond to there. Perhaps starting with the delay in  these asylums seekers coming to Australia. Was it acceptable for them to be floating on  the high seas for so long?

TUDGE: Well, they were always under good care the entire time. I'm not going to  comment on the operational matters at sea but they were under good care the entire  time and they weren't in danger. Our policy has always been to ensure that boats are  turned back where safe to do so, and where measures including disrupting the people  smuggler's business at the point of port - in this case in India, or Indonesia or  elsewhere. The very last response that we want is to allow boats to get to Australia and  that's quite different to the Labor response which tends to, if you like, put out the water  taxi almost straight away in order to ferry those people into Australian shores.

LIPSON: The Immigration Minister has just said they've come from this safe country  and that they are essentially economic migrants. Are you confident that if they are sent  back to India, they will be safe? That their safety and security will be guaranteed?

TUDGE: Well, India is a large, vibrant democracy. We have great trade relationships  with them. And of course, they are our largest source of immigration these days. It is a  tourist destination. Most of the people on board that boat, we believe, are Indian citizens  or Indian residents. The Indian government has said that they will accept back all of the  Indian citizens and indeed consider accepting the non-citizen Indian residents back to  India, and we believe that they will be treated safely and with care when they are back  in India. It is a safe place to go at the moment, it is a vibrant democracy and we think  that they can be repatriated.

Commercial break

LIPSON: Thanks for your company on AM Agenda. The government is expected to  today provide details on its expanded Work for the Dole program that will see job  seekers compelled to conduct up to 40 job searches a month and also work up to 25  hours in community service. I'm still joined by Andrew Leigh and Alan Tudge. Alan  Tudge, first you on this, what's the need, why is this program being expanded?

TUDGE: Well, Work for the Dole can be good for the individual and good for the  community. It's good for the individual because it keeps their skills high, it keeps them  work ready because they're active and engaged and it means that they can go to an  employer that they have in fact been working for, for up to 25 hours per week already.  And it's good for the community because in return for a welfare payment, that individual  can give back to the community through doing some constructive projects which all of  us can benefit from.

LIPSON: We're told that an additional $900 million will be spent over three years to  actually extend the scheme. Is that money that the government would hope to get back  in higher employment in the long term?

TUDGE: Well in the past, when Work for the Dole was introduced by the Howard  Government, the number of long term unemployed going into employment, in fact,  doubled. But Work for the Dole is only one part of the scheme. We've also got  expanded opportunities; we've got mobility options whereby there are payments and  incentives for people to move for a job. There's wage subsidies in place for people over  50 and for younger people. All of these schemes are put in place to ensure there's every  incentive, every encouragement, every motivation for people to get a job.

LIPSON: Andrew Leigh, is this a program that will achieve its goals, that will actually  benefit Australia?

LEIGH: David, I'm a data guy. So I basically look at what the evidence shows and we  have one good evaluation of Work for the Dole, commissioned by Tony Abbott when he  was in Employment Minister in 2003. That study compared the participants and non-participants and found that Work for the Dole increased joblessness. So it was actively  doing harm.

LIPSON: So how does that work?

LEIGH: It's a perfectly reasonable question to ask. How could a Work for the Dole  program actually cause problems? They found that it was causing a lock-in effect:  that because people were doing Work for the Dole activities, they were spending less  time looking for regular jobs.

LIPSON: This scheme would also compel them to conduct 40 job searches a month  though, would that mitigate those issues?

LEIGH: Well if it did, that would be terrific. But we need to be very careful in this space  not to let ideology substitute for evidence. I think one of the standard problems as a  labour economist that we strike is that there’s a lot of programs that sound good but  don’t actually deliver. And when your only credible study is one commissioned by the  Prime Minister that showed that the program made the problem worse, then you might  want to put in place some rigorously trialled evaluations rather than simply plough on  ahead where ideology demands. Sure, the early 2000’s were a decade of falling

unemployment and there was long-term unemployment falling through that period. But  Work for the Dole hampered that effort rather than helping it.

LIPSON: Alan, what’s your response to those claims that this is more ideology at play  and that ultimately it may not work?

TUDGE: Well a couple of points on that. Firstly, the data showed that the number of  long term unemployed that got work after the introduction of Work for the Dole back in  the Howard era actually doubled from 20 per cent to 40 per cent of long-term  unemployed. The second point I’d make is that the Labor party in government actually  kept a proportion of Work for the Dole throughout their term. So, Andrew’s criticism of  the Abbott would equally apply to the Rudd, Gillard, Rudd government, should they be  correct.

The final point that I’d make that is that this isn’t ideology. In part, it is about individuals  who are in receipt of welfare giving back to the community for that welfare. And I don’t  think that there is anything wrong with that. Moreover, it keeps those peoples’ skills high  because they are getting up each day having to contribute, having to go through work-like activities. So instead of sitting on the couch and becoming debilitated over time,  which does occur, then they are staying active and they’re more likely to get a job  subsequently.

LIPSON: Well I want to just look briefly at the New South Wales Labor conference that  was held over the weekend. The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, who had just touched  down after a week in the United States, delivered a rousing speech to the party faithful.  He took aim, and personal aim, at the Federal treasurer Joe Hockey. Let’s take a look:

Bill Shorten, Leader of the Opposition: This arrogant and cigar chomping treasurer,  whose biography reveals that it took Tony Abbott to block him from deeper, harder cuts.  Seriously? If it’s up to Tony Abbott to tell you you’ve gone too far, then you’ve well and  truly gone too far.

LIPSON: Alan Tudge, he also took aim at the treasurer’s personal wealth and said that  it had essentially made him out of touch with everyday Australia. What do you make of  that attack?

TUDGE: I think it was just some good old-fashioned class warfare coming from an  Opposition Leader who thinks he’s still a union leader rather than a leader of Australia. I  would simply request that he should stop the class war rhetoric and focus on the  interest of all Australians. The thing I’d say is that I never heard him make these  comments in relation to Prime Minster Rudd, who was a multi-millionaire. He didn’t  make those comments then and I don’t think he should be making the comments about  Joe Hockey.

LIPSON: Andrew Leigh, as you pointed out, you are a numbers man and you don’t  often play the man. What do you make of your leader, Bill Shorten, doing just that?



LEIGH: I’m always surprised, David, that it’s class warfare when you refer to a budget  that takes away one-tenth of the income of the poorest single parents. The act of putting  together that budget, apparently that’s not class warfare, it’s alright to take away one  buck out of 10 for the poorest sole parent. But it is class warfare when you criticise  those who implement it for being out of touch and for being unable, or unwilling, to put  themselves in the shoes of what it’s like for a sole parent to make ends meet.

LIPSON: But to say that he is out of touch, and link that to his personal wealth -

LEIGH: I just don’t see how somebody who had been willing to walk in the shoes of  poor single parents could think it was reasonable to take away a tenth of their income,  as this budget has done. It’s a budget which has not only taken away from the bottom,  but has also given more to the top through additional superannuation tax breaks, and a  billion dollars for multinationals to profit shift. So it’s a fair critique for us to then say, well  where are your values? What are the values in which a budget like that could possibly  be grounded?

LIPSON: The budget pain, it seems Alan Tudge, is still very much in place according to  this Galaxy Poll out today. It shows that the Prime Minister is trailing Bill Shorten as  preferred Prime Minister and the Coalition is trailing Labor as well in terms of the two-party preferred vote.

TUDGE: Well, in part it’s because we’re delivering a tough budget, and we  acknowledge that. The reason we’re doing this David, and we’ve said this before  repeatedly on this program, is because Labor left the finances in an absolute mess with  the sixth biggest budget deficit in Australian political history and deficits as far as the  eye could see. We’re trying to take some responsible measures to bring the budget  back into surplus. We’re not rushing this; it’s actually coming down back into surplus  over time. But if we don’t do that, the debt will continue to rise year on, year round all  the way out to almost $700 billion. That means that should there be another  international shock, then we would be in serious risk. Now, Andrew Leigh and his party,  the Labor Party, used to believe that having a surplus was important, they never  delivered it but at least their rhetoric was the case. But now they seem to have  abandoned it all together, they seem to have abandoned any sense of responsibility to  try and support the budget get back into balance. So I ask Andrew Leigh, who is the  Assistant Treasurer, where are your plans to get the budget back into balance?  Because all they are doing now is saying no to every single measure including might I  add, to the savings measures which they themselves put up.

LIPSON: Okay, I’ll give you a chance to respond to that but I did just want to mention  that a lot of the criticism towards Joe Hockey last week was in relation to this new book  that he has given full cooperation to. Greg Combet is also releasing a somewhat  controversial book this week and Andrew Leigh you yourself are releasing a book, today  I think it is? The Economics of Just About Everything, any mud-slinging going on in this?

LEIGH: It’s funny, David - my seven year old son said “well, it’s the economics of just  about everything so surely, you’ve got the economics of dragons in there”. The answer  is no, no economics of dragons and no economics of leadership either. But love, sports,  bit of art, bit of music. Essentially, the message is that economics has not only  something useful to say about politics and the sorts of issues that Alan and I are  enjoying debating this morning. But is also a tool for helping us make better decisions in  life, whether that’s in dating, in trying to lose weight, in trying to quit smoking or in trying  to stop ourselves procrastinating.

TUDGE: I think in Andrew’s last book he actually advocated for a Medicare co-payment  and was just wondering whether this book includes such measures?

LEIGH: I love it, Alan! Unfortunately that was an opinion piece written over a decade  ago, but I will get you up to speed by giving you a copy when parliament next sits. I’ll  forgive you too for referring to me as the Assistant Treasurer rather than the Shadow  Assistant Treasurer, given the country hasn’t had an Assistant Treasurer since last  December.

LIPSON: Okay well we’re out of time Alan Tudge, Andrew Leigh. Thank you both very  much for joining us. We’ll have more on AM Agenda coming up after this.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JENNIFER RAYNER 0428 214 856

