

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC   WEDNESDAY, 25 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Clive Palmer; Senate deliberations; Tony Abbott’s unfair  budget; Asylum seekers.

MARK PARTON: Richard Marles, regular guest on this program, always on the  phone is the Immigration Spokesperson for the Federal Opposition, but blow me  down if he’s not here in the flesh, Richard, hello.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Good to be here Mark, good to see your digs and be  able to talk in person having spoken so much on the phone.

PARTON: And the opulent surroundings here, the skylight and the bar fridge  and the mood lighting.

MARLES: It’s fantastic, and the view out over sunny Canberra this morning it’s  great.

PARTON: I had Greg Hunt on the program earlier in the week and I suggested  this last week of goings on under the big flag pole before Clive takes over, is sort  of like a dead rubber, because it’s like whatever, you know you’re going through  the motions, Greg assured me that that is not the case, is there a bit of that?

MARLES: I think there’s definitely a sense of the game changes in a week or so,  when Clive Palmer, or when the Senate re-configures and clearly Clive Palmer  has more say at that point.

PARTON: Does that frighten you that Clive Palmer is going to have so much say  in what goes on in this country?

MARLES: Look I think there is a sense of apprehension about the make-up of  the Senate but at the end of the day, that’s democracy, and that’s what the  people have chosen, it’s not clear how it’s going to work in a sense of how much  Clive is going to control the show, I think there are very disparate personalities  within the Senate and we won’t be taking any of that for granted by which I  mean when there’s a piece of legislation to go through and we’re seeking to win  the support of the Senate we’ll be dealing with all the members of the Palmer  United Party and indeed Ricky Muir and others. So what it is going to mean is  that there is going to be a lot more work involved, this is going to look a lot more  like democracy. I think 150 years ago when you really needed to work on every  member in order to get their support to get a proposition through.

PARTON: I’m sure I saw Ricky Muir in at Lowes at Woden yesterday so it looks  as though he does have a suit which is a start, but there’s a lot to be learnt as  far as Ricky goes isn’t there?

MARLES: Well there’s going to be a lot to be learnt for all of them and it’s going  to be a really steep learning curve, and one of the experiences which they’re  going to have which, former life I witnessed from outside the building and that is  that as an independent, holding a vote which can make the difference between  legislation getting up or not, you need to be across the whole gamut of public  policy, for me I’m obviously very focussed on the immigration sphere and I have  some staff to help me do that. But if you actually need to be across every single  element of public policy and you have very few staff in order to do it, I can  remember Brian Harradine in his valedictory speech talked about that term of  government where he was the balance of power as being the most stressful and  onerous to get through that time, and you know I think this is going to be a rude  shock for a number of them.



PARTON: A lot of homework.

MARLES: They’ve signed up for it and we’ll see how they go.

PARTON: The thing that’s dominating national discussion right at the moment  and I hope it continues to dominate discussion for quite some time is the Peter  Greste case and the verdict and the sentence of seven years and I think the  Government’s being cautious at the moment because they have to be.



MARLES: Yes they do.

PARTON: You can’t, although you know the Australian public’s baying for blood  and saying send the Ambassador home and do this and stop the aid and  everything else, they’re going to have to try to go through a process to see if  they can achieve something. Certainly the words of the Egyptian President  overnight didn’t give us much hope though did they?

MARLES: No, and it is a really distressing case, consular cases are always  difficult, and the Government is right to be cautious in what it says because at  the end of the day if what you want to do is try to be able to wield whatever  influence might be able to be wielded it’s best done behind the scenes rather  than through the media. So I understand the steps that they’re taking. But I  think what particularly disturbs me about this is if you look at what he is accused  of, I mean often there are consular cases where all sorts of things are  accusations that are thrown at people and what you tend to focus on is the  process that they are afforded, but if you look at the height of the accusation  against Peter Greste, it is at the end of the day, just about being a journalist. It’s  about doing his job, and the idea that he is looking at spending seven years  behind bars for getting up and going to work each day, is really extraordinary  and I think all of us feel obviously for him and his family and it’s just an appalling  situation.

PARTON: A bit of jousting going on, back to the goings on under the big flag  pole regarding the Budget, and we understand that you and the Greens have  wiped another $3.3 billion from Tony Abbott’s budget savings. It is an escalating  political fight and you know there are still those that are still suggesting that  there is still some outside chance that we’ll go to the polls early, that ain’t going  to happen is it?

MARLES: I don’t think we’re going to go to the polls but I do think in the words  of an un-named Liberal source, this is a stinking carcass of a Budget, and I think  the Government is going to have to go back to the starting board and actually  talk to people about re-negotiating this Budget through. There are so many  elements of it which are unfair, the GP co-payment, what they’re looking at  doing in relation to pensions, the de-regulation of the higher education system  and of course for this city, what they’re proposing in terms of cuts and therefore  the loss of jobs, all of that you know is just a huge impact on the Australian  people, without there being a credible reason for doing it. I mean the reason  that is stated is this Budget emergency and yet we all know we all live in just  about the best performing economy in the world so they haven’t made out a  case for this.

PARTON: But Richard you can’t keep on spending more than you earn. That’s  what it gets down to, it’s really basic household economics and you can’t do it.

MARLES: Well over the long term of course that is right, but if we’re really  going to have a sober look at this and say what is the issue that is facing the  Budget, look I think there are challenges and we acknowledge that, an ageing  population, increasing health costs, and we definitely need to take steps in order  to meet those challenges, but those challenges are going to play out over the  course of a decade.

PARTON: And so you’d just be putting it off, you‘d just be saying -

MARLES: It’s not about putting it off.

PARTON: Just trek a bit further out to sea and we’ll see if we can swim back  later.

MARLES: No that’s not the point, the point is about making sure that we work  through what measures we take in a sober and sensible way, rather than  confecting a budget emergency in the sense that it needs to be dealt with in the  here and now and causing a shock to our economy which could have the very  real impact of slowing down demand and not being good for the economy. And  the reality is that when you look at our economy beyond the public spend, and  our economy in general, it is one of the best performing economies in the world,  and so the right thing to do and the sensible thing to do is to address the  challenges in the Budget in a sober and measured way.

PARTON: Is your greatest fear though, that you talk about these measures  being tough and unfair, you could say that the asylum seeker policy is tough and  unfair but it’s worked. Is your greatest fear that these budgetary measures,  although people will agree and can see that they’re tough and unfair, that maybe  they’re required and maybe they’ll work, and maybe after a short period of time  Australians will say, yeah you know what, I guess this is what’s needed to be  done.

MARLES: No that’s not our greatest fear and I think it’s important to unpick  each of the elements of the issues that you’ve raised, this is a budget which is  unfair, and the basis upon which the unfairness is being brought upon the  Australian people just doesn’t exist. It is a confected budget emergency, the fact  that the debt and the deficit has doubled since Tony Abbott came into power is  the best example of that, and also the fact that in the midst of all of this, the  Government is still finding room to pay cheques of $50,000 to millionaires. That  is the issue which means this is clearly a budget emergency which is confected,  but if you want to look at the question of asylum seekers, measures that were

taken by Labor in power were tough, but they were fair that in the sense that  what they have done is stopped people drowning at sea, and that’s ultimately  the objective that we sought. So we’re not concerned about how this all plays  out, we’re dealing with each of these issues on the merits, and we’re very  prepared to contest those merits with the Australian people.

PARTON: Richard I’ve got a question without notice for the Member for Corio, if  that’s okay, if I can do that I’ve got Noel standing by on the open line, G’day  Noel.

CALLER: Yeah G’day Mark how are things, Richard how are you mate?

MARLES: G’day Noel how are you?

CALLER: Not bad, listen just on your watch letting those people come in mate  when you stand back and I’m an old, I voted for Gough back in the early 70s but  after the last two leaders you’ve had, mate you crippled me and also getting in  bed with Christine Milne. But whilst she’s in bed with you guys she not teaching  kids in schools, but I’m just wondering about these boats coming in here mate,  geez you made a balls up of that mate, it’s just terrible. We’ve let some terrible  people into this country and now we’re looking at stopping some people coming  back from overseas fighting the stuff, I’m not saying that they’ve come in the  boats lately, but why the hell have we let all these people come in when they’re  the ones with the money?

MARLES: Well firstly if we go back to the time that Labor was in office, we  faced a very difficult situation, and I think when we look back at it, if we’d had  our time again we would have done things differently and I’ve made it clear that  I think that the decision to close Nauru and Manus back in 2008 didn’t help  circumstances. Having said that, nor do I think that those issues on themselves,  or those decisions on themselves, would have been a magic wand, but the reality  is that there was a surge in people that came, there was a terrible circumstance  that arose in terms of the numbers of people who were drowning at sea and we  did everything we could to bring an end to that. Now the most significant step  that we would have taken would have been the arrangement with Malaysia and  you’re talking about people jumping into bed with the Greens, it was at that  moment just over three years ago in fact 1,007 days ago today, that Scott  Morrison teamed up with the Greens to vote against the Malaysian Arrangement  and keep the boats coming. That’s actually what occurred. So if we are going to  look back over this period -

PARTON: The Malaysian Agreement, I mean how many numbers? Noel I know  we’ve had discussions on this in the past when it comes to the Malaysian

solution, surely the problem was that there weren’t enough involved, you were  talking about three or four boats weren’t you?

MARLES: No, it’s a good question Mark and it’s important that people  understand this. Scott Morrison would right now, argue that his turning around  of the boats has been the critical factor of the end of boats coming to Australia.  Now I actually think that the PNG arrangement that Labor put in place has been  the main thing, but even if you take Scott Morrison on his own logic, there can  be no more than 300, 350 people who have been turned around, we don’t know  exactly, because of course those numbers aren’t publically available, the  Malaysian Arrangement provided for an effective turnaround of 800 people. Now  if Scott Morrison today is arguing that his turn arounds over the last six months  is what has made the difference, well them by his own logic, we would have  resolved this issue three years ago, and what’s stopped that from happening was  Scott Morrison at that moment, jumping into bed with the Greens and voting  against Malaysia. Now that’s something that he needs to own, and if we’re  talking about issues of securing our borders, there’s been a lot of talk about  Jihadists coming into Australia, on Scott Morrison’s own watch, we saw Khaled  Sharrouf leave this country last December on his brother’s passport. Now Khaled  Sharrouf was on the no-fly list, and he’s gone off to fight in Syria. So we need to  be having a good look at what Scott Morrison is doing in this when we’re about  to cast judgement on whose ballsed things up and who hasn’t.

PARTON: Noel you’ve got 30 seconds to reply.

CALLER: Before I go I’d just like to say that, listen we’re all Australians here  mate, and I think everyone bipartisan should have a real look at it because I can  see in 20 or 30 years this place not being a very good place to live and we love  the place, and we’re just getting overrun, it’s just a joke. We’re being talked  about overseas, people can’t believe you get the dole here, you don’t work for  money. I was talking to someone in Singapore I said what do you do if you don’t  work, they don’t eat, they’ve brought a bloke back mate thinking we’ve been  drinking mate, they couldn’t believe we’re getting handouts, now they’re going to  hand out $10,000 to these people to go and leave places. They should have  never have got here, they’ve come past in boats, from perfectly good countries  to get here so what does that say about the whole system?

MARLES: Well a few things, obviously we live in a great country, and you make  that point right, and we’ve got to make sure that we have a system which does  not see people drowning at sea and that does require difficult decisions and  we’ve been up for making those.

PARTON: Richard thanks for your time this morning. Noel thanks for your call.  We’ll talk again next week.



MARLES: Look forward to it.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

