

THE HON AMANDA RISHWORTH MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 22 JANUARY 201

SUBJECT/S: G20, Australia’s relationship with Indonesia, asylum  seekers.

KIERAN GILBERT: I want to start off with Tony Abbott first of all. He’s in  Davos ahead of the world economic forum and laying the platform for the G20 in  Australia - chairing the G20 later in the year. But he is saying both settings and  the strength of the economic situation globally is important for Australia -  bringing it back to a local focus. Let’s hear a little of what he had to say in  Switzerland overnight

TONY ABBOTT (CLIP): I’m here because the people of Australia expect their  government to be working for a stronger national economy and a stronger global  economy. Because a stronger national economy and a stronger global economy  means more jobs for the people of Australia.

KIERAN GILBERT: Josh Frydenberg the Prime Minister also said he wants  practical outcomes when it comes to the G20 - Australia chairing it this year with  the leaders’ summit in Brisbane in the second half of 2014. Are practical  outcomes realistic Josh, given you are talking about 20 world leaders in a room.  It is always hard to generate uniform thinking isn’t it?

JOSH FRYDENBERG: Well firstly Kieran, Australia it must be said works very  effectively in multilateral forums, whether it is APEC or East Asia Summit and  now the G20 and people like Peter Costello can take a lot of credit for developing  the G20 into the group that it now is. In fact Australia hosted the finance leaders  from the G20 back in 2006 and now Brisbane will host the G20 which will be the

biggest meeting we have ever held. More than six thousand delegates, in terms  of media and world leaders. And not just the 20 biggest economies in the world,  but also the United Nations head and the OECD and the World Bank head. Now  what Tony Abbott has said is that we need to focus on practical outcomes. He  will outline his speech in Davos on Thursday a number of areas where we think  work can be done. Now that’s trade because we do believe in the multilateral  trading system and if we get countries to work more closely together we can get  progress there. Tax, because there’s an erosion of the tax base and lack of  proper profit sharing between countries when you particularly in the context of  this digital age and so it’s in Australia’s interests to get some collaboration and  movement there and then there is infrastructure -

GILBERT: Josh, given on trade, you look at the DOHA trade talks which remain  stalled for so long. Getting countries and leaders together and making practical  progress on any issue let alone trade is tough, so while he’s talking a practical  agenda - the point I make to you is, that is very, very hard to deliver from those  sorts of settings isn’t it?

FRYDENBERG: Well actually there was a Ministerial meeting in Bali just a few  weeks ago which was a multilateral round and Andrew Rob represented us there  and there was some movement, and there are things that you can do behind the  scenes to get greater cooperation on trade, not just a multilateral trade  agreement for example, closer collaboration in terms of customs and those sorts  of areas. There’s many, many facets to the world trade agenda and it has to

start somewhere, and where better to start than at a meeting of the people of  the likes of Barack Obama, Xi Jinping from China, and the other world leaders?  So that’s one area, tax is another and infrastructure Kieran - in fact Australia has  a lot to offer the world in terms of infrastructure financing. We have big  superannuation funds, we have global banks like Macquarie. The OECD has  estimated that there is a $50 trillion infrastructure deficit between now and 2030  and what the G20 will be looking at is ways in which to enhance financing of  infrastructure in various countries, and Australia will be a big beneficiary of that  if it was to move forward.

GILBERT: Okay, one of the comments from Tony Abbott on foreign policy closer  to home, Amanda Rishworth, was on Indonesia. He reminded President  Yudhoyono that the stopping the boats and that issue is a sovereignty issue for  Australia as well. He’s correct in saying that, is he not?

AMANDA RISHWORTH: What we’re seeing from Tony Abbott since he’s been  elected, and Julie Bishop, and Scott Morrison, is constantly putting at risk our  relationship with Indonesia. Indonesia is an important country to Australia. It is  important we have a constructive and strong relationship. It’s important in  regional security, it’s important in stopping people smuggling and it’s important  in trade. Josh was mentioning trade - Indonesia is incredibly important, and a  potential increase in our trading partner. But what we’re seeing from Tony  Abbott, Julie Bishop and Scott Morrison, is constantly putting at risk our  relationship with Indonesia. I think it’s really time for Tony Abbot, Julie Bishop  and Scott Morrison to start actually working on how they focus on getting a  constructive relationship with Indonesia because so far since they’ve been  elected to power, they’ve constantly been putting at risk this relationship.

GILBERT: Josh, Tony Abbott said that SBY of all people should understand that  sovereignty - that countries take their sovereignty seriously. Was that sort of  language a bit blunt, a bit more blunt than you normally see in international  diplomacy?

FRYDENBERG: Not at all, look SBY and Prime Minister Abbott do work well  together. Australia and Indonesia do work well together. These are difficult  issues on the border protection situation but we can’t divorce the current issues  we are dealing with from the context from which the Abbott Government came  to power and that was after the Labor Party unravelled what was successful  border protection measures and lead to more than 50,000 unauthorised boat  arrivals. Kieran, something had to be done - more than 1,000 people had lost  their lives at sea. So what we are doing and what we have done is to bring the  policing role, the intelligence role, the naval role, under one central command,  under Operation Sovereign Borders. It is difficult work, it’s challenging work, but  we need to send a message, a very strong message that Australia is not open to  the people smugglers and we will go back to the Howard era policies - and look  that’s the fact of it Kieran. That’s the fact of it.

GILBERT: That’s all okay, I want to look at a related issue, something I asked  Eric Abetz about - these claims that have emerged via the ABC that asylum  seekers have suggested that the Navy beat them and inflicted burns on them.  Amanda Rishworth what do you make of these claims? This was apparently,  according to the asylum seekers’ version, when they were being forced back on a  boat being towed back to Indonesia.

RISHWORTH: I think that it is up to Minister Morrison to provide the details to  the Australian people on this and in fact on many, many related issues around  asylum seekers. So what we’re seeing is Scott Morrison constantly hiding -

GILBERT: So you think the claims are credible do you, is that your sense of  this?

RISHWORTH: No, no, what I am saying is we need the information because  Scott Morrison continues to not provide information on issues around border  protection. But what we also see Scott Morrison do is hide behind the Navy. The  Navy is a very professional organisation and what we’ve seen previously with the  incursion into Indonesia’s sovereign waters is Scott Morrison hide behind the  Navy. He needs to come clean. These are his policies that he is implementing so  we need to get the information from Scott Morrison. But on the whole issue of  asylum seekers, he needs to actually be a lot more transparent. Tony Abbott  promised a transparent government and we’re just having hiding behind the  Navy from Scott Morrison.

GILBERT: We saw the Minister, Josh Frydenberg, Eric Abetz, he said a bit  earlier in the program that it is too early to come down definitively one way or  the other, although he had been leaning towards believing the Navy. What’s your  view on that? Are you categorical in your response?

FRYDENBERG: Look, Eric Abetz is absolutely right. You know, I do reject the  notion that there be any inappropriate behaviour on the part of our Navy.  They’re a very professional force, you know they are doing a very difficult job so  we stand right behind the Navy, particularly around these unproven allegations.

GILBERT: Although he did say it is too early to say definitively that the claims  are wrong. He did make that point as well.

FRYDENBERG: Well, until we are proven otherwise I would totally reject any  assertion of inappropriate behaviour on the part of the Royal Australian Navy.  And can I just say to Amanda - she wants a fact, well, from Scott Morrison, well  he did say publically that the last unauthorised boat was on the 19th of  December. That was more than four weeks ago. So Amanda -

RISHWORTH: Well unfortunately he also told the Australian people that he  rejected the notion we had incurred on Indonesian sovereign borders, when he  was briefed on the same day that it actually occurred. You can’t believe anything  this Minister has to say.

FRYDENBERG: Amanda your Government was characterised by defeatism and  failure on this issue. We are having some success. There is a long way to go.

GILBERT: Josh, it’s sounding like you are being more definitive than Eric Abetz  was though. You’re willing to go a bit further in saying that these claims were  unfounded?

FRYDENBERG: Well until, I mean, what Eric Abetz and I are both saying  together is until proven otherwise we do not believe in any wrongdoing on behalf  of the Royal Australian Navy. So Eric Abetz is absolutely right. Until proven  otherwise, we do not believe there was any inappropriate behaviour by the Royal  Australian Navy and we are on one on that issue.

GILBERT: Josh Frydenberg, Amanda Rishworth appreciate your time. First time  for the year 2014. Thanks for being here, chat to you soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: EMMANUEL CUSACK 0417 807 332





