The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Australian Government returns Sri Lankan people  smuggling venture  Monday, 07 July 2014

The Australian and Sri Lankan governments have moved swiftly to return a group of 41  Sri Lankan nationals who attempted to arrive illegally by boat to Australia as part of a  maritime people smuggling venture.

The suspected illegal entry vessel (SIEV) was intercepted by Border Protection  Command West of Cocos (Keeling) Islands in late June. At no stage was the vessel in  distress and all persons aboard the SIEV were safe and accounted for.

Forty one potential illegal maritime arrivals who were intercepted on the SIEV were  returned to Sri Lankan authorities yesterday (Sunday 6 July). The 41 Sri Lankan  nationals were transferred at sea, in mild sea conditions from a vessel assigned to  Border Protection Command (BPC) to Sri Lankan authorities, just outside the Port of  Batticaloa.

All persons intercepted and returned were subjected to an enhanced screening process,  as also practised by the previous government, to ensure compliance by Australia with  our international obligations under relevant conventions.

This process includes identifying any person who may need to be referred to a further  determination process. In such cases, the government's policy is to transfer such  persons to either Papua New Guinea or Nauru for offshore processing.

In the single case where such a referral was recommended, the individual, a Sinhalese  Sri Lankan national, voluntarily requested to depart the vessel with the other persons  being transferred and returned to Sri Lanka.

This transfer of 41 persons, including 37 Sinhalese and 4 Tamil Sri Lankan nationals,  follows previous returns to Sri Lanka including 79 illegal maritime arrivals under  Operation Sovereign Borders last year.

The Australian Government will continue to act in accordance with our international  obligations, including applicable international conventions and to protect the safety of  life at sea. At the same time we will not allow people smugglers to try and exploit and  manipulate Australia's support of these Conventions as a tool to undermine Australia's  strong border protection regime that is stopping the boats and the deaths at sea.

Accordingly, the Government will continue to reject the public and political advocacy of  those who have sought to pressure the Government into a change of policy. Their  advocacy, though well intentioned, is naively doing the bidding of people smugglers who  have been responsible for almost 1200 deaths at sea.

We will continue to do what we said we would, consistent with our obligations, and  achieve the results we said we would achieve.

Today is the 200th day since the last people smuggling venture successfully arrived. In  that time no one has drowned at sea. This is an outcome the Government welcomes.

Australia and Sri Lanka have a strong history of cooperation at the operational level to  disrupt people smuggling ventures departing Sri Lanka. We are grateful for the efforts of  the Sri Lankan Navy to combat people smuggling, as well as other Sri Lankan  authorities.

Sri Lanka is one of many close partners with whom the Australian Government works in  our region. The Australian Government looks forward to continued cooperation with Sri  Lanka. Australia's cooperation with Sri Lanka is as important as it is effective.

The Australian Government does not deal in half measures and has the policies and  resolve to fight people smugglers and stop illegal boat arrivals.

People should not trust the lies of people smugglers and seek to come to Australia  illegally by boat. It is dangerous and the Australian Government's strong border  protection policies under Operation Sovereign Borders mean they will not succeed.



