

22 October 2014



ICC REQUESTED TO INVESTIGATE PROSECUTION OF ABBOTT  GOVERNMENT



The Independent Member for Denison, Andrew Wilkie, and eminent human rights  advocate and lawyer, Greg Barns, have formally requested the Prosecutor at the  International Criminal Court (ICC) investigate crimes against asylum seekers by  members of the Abbott Government. A copy of the letter is attached.

Andrew Wilkie will be available for comment in Canberra.  WHEN: 10:30am TODAY Wed 22 October  WHERE: Senate Courtyard, Parliament House Canberra

Greg Barns will be available for comment in Hobart.  WHEN: From 10:30am TODAY Wed 22 October

“The actions of the Prime Minister and members of his Government against asylum  seekers are criminal,” Mr Wilkie said. “Actions such as forcible deportation, detention  without trial, detention of children and conditions of detention constitute breaches of  Article 7 (Crimes Against Humanity) of the Rome Statute, the treaty that governs the  jurisdiction of the ICC.

“The Abbott Government’s conduct in relation to asylum seekers also contravenes the  Refugee Convention, Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.



“The Government is pandering to racism, xenophobia and selfishness instead of acting  like leaders. This is why I’ve asked the Prosecutor to initiate an investigation into the  Prime Minister and the Cabinet because, if they won’t listen to the swathe of community  outrage, then hopefully they’ll listen to the International Criminal Court.”

“The ICC clearly has jurisdiction in relation to the Abbott Government’s systematic  mistreatment of asylum seekers.  Australia is a signatory to the Rome Statute,” Mr Barns  said.



“Article 7 of the Statute defines ‘crimes against humanity’ to mean acts such as  deportation, imprisonment or other severe deprivation of liberty in violation of  fundamental rules of international law, torture and other similar acts that are committed   as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population.

“There is little doubt, and in fact it is well documented, that the Abbott Government’s  mandatory detention of men, women and children in inhumane conditions, and the  forcible deportation of individuals, are of a systemic nature and designed to deter.

“What Mr Wilkie and I are asking the ICC Prosecuting authority to do is to gather  information, analyse evidence and make a report to the pre-trial chamber of the ICC  asking it to authorise an investigation into the commission of offences by the Cabinet of   the Abbott Government”



For more information: Alex Moores 0417 382 542.

Mr Barns can be contacted directly on 0419 691 846.





