

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   CAPITAL HILL, ABC  WEDNESDAY 2 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S:  Scott Morrison’s refusal to comment on reported asylum seeker  vessel

JULIE DOYLE: Richard Marles, no one seems to know exactly what’s going on with this  boat. Is that good enough?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: It’s absolutely not good enough. What we have is a situation where  there are 150 people who are seeking asylum on our high seas and we have no idea  what assistance they have been provided, or whether or not they’re ok.  We have a  Minister who is saying that this is a mere curiosity for the Australian people. It’s hard to  imagine a more contemptuous statement. Australian people don’t have just a curiosity  about the fate of these 150 people, we don’t just have a curiosity about what our forces  are doing, the Australian people have a right to know. This is a matter which is  legitimately in the public interest.

DOYLE:  How much of a balancing act is it though, between giving out too much  information which the Government says aids people smugglers?

MARLES:  It has never been a good enough reason to hide behind operational matters  as being an excuse not to answer legitimate questions which are in the public interest.  This is a media policy, not an operational security policy, and what we have is an  inconvenient set of circumstances for the Government in terms of their political  scorecard, and as a result, we see our Minister go to ground. I mean he is very happy,  on an almost daily basis, to pat himself on the back when matters are going well, but

when there is an issue that is inconvenient for his political scoreboard he has gone to  ground and that is not good enough.

DOYLE:  Well, he says if there is a significant incident involving the safety of life at sea  then he’ll give a briefing, and at this point there’s been no reason to give such a briefing.

MARLES: We are seeing really concerning reports in the media this morning about the  potential transfer of these asylum seekers to the Sri Lankan Navy. Now I hasten to say  we don’t know that’s what’s occurring, but that is the reports which are out there. That  would be a very significant development in relation to the handling of asylum seekers  and so what we need to hear from our Government is whether or not this is the case.  What are they planning to do with these asylum seekers? Are these asylum seekers  ok? What assistance has been rendered by Australian agencies and authorities? And all  of this is not just a curiosity, these are matters that are in the public interest where the  Australian people have a right to know.

DOYLE:  If these reports are true about a mid-sea handover to the Sri Lankan Navy,  would Labor oppose that?

MARLES: Well this would be a very concerning development if this is the case. It goes  well beyond anything that occurred when Labor was in office indeed it’s gone well  beyond anything which has previously occurred, we would have much to say if this is  what has transpired. But I hasten to say, I don’t want to add to the speculation in  relation to this. We don’t have any confirmed reports about it, what we have is silence in  this space, and what we need to hear from the Government is an account of what they  are actually doing, what their policies are, and what their plans are.

DOYLE:  Do you think handing asylum seekers, these are reportedly Tamil asylum  seekers, over to Sri Lanka would be a breach of Australia’s international obligations?

MARLES:  I think this would be a deeply concerning development and we would have  much to say if that is what’s occurring but I don’t want to add to the speculation now  because we don’t know exactly what’s going on.  What we need to hear from our  Minister today is what the Australian Government is doing, plain and simple, this is a  matter legitimately in the public interest, it’s not a mere curiosity and we shouldn’t be  treated with the contempt that this Government and this Minister is currently displaying.

DOYLE:  More generally, how would the Opposition handle the relationship with the Sri  Lankan Government when it comes to dealing with issues like people smuggling?

MARLES:  Well we worked co-operatively with the Sri Lankan Government and we  facilitated the return of a number of Sri Lankans from Australia.  But we did that after  there was a process that was gone through, after those people were assessed in terms  of their claims for becoming refugees, all of that occurred, and we worked closely with  the Sri Lankan Government and that is completely appropriate, of course what we’re  talking about here on the high seas is people who have not gone through any process  of being assessed at all and that is a critical difference, but that is why we need to hear

from our Government now about exactly what they are doing and what their policy is  and it’s not good enough to run and hide.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  LIDIJA IVANOVSKI  0427 051 563



