

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW with VIRGINIA TRIOLI and MICHAEL ROWLAND -   ABC News Breakfast  WEDNESDAY 7 MAY 2014

SUBJECT/S:   Asylum  seekers,  turn  back  in  Indonesia,  Relationship w ith  Indonesia

PRESENTER - VIRGINIA TRIOLI: The Opposition Spokesperson is Richard Marles and  he’s with us now in the studio, Richard Marles good morning.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  Good morning Virginia how are you?

TRIOLI:  Is the Government’s determination to turn back boats de-stabilising the  relationship with Indonesia?

MARLES:  Well as is evident from the interview you’ve just heard with Marty Natalegawa  it’s certainly an impact on our relationship with Indonesia which has been our concern  from the outset because we need a policy here which is not just about stopping boats last  month and this, but being in a position where we can see a reduction in asylum seeker  vessels this year and next year and that requires a sustainable and cooperative  relationship with Indonesia and jeopardising it makes no sense.

PRESENTER - MICHAEL ROWLAND:  What do you know about these reports that  three extra asylum seekers were put on board this boat?

MARLES: Well Michael my problem here is that I don’t know anything more than what’s  in the public domain, and the real issue I think here is that the silence from our own  Government has been deafening.  If the allegations out there are true, and people have  been added to an asylum seeker vessel, it really does represent a significant development  in the tactics being used by the Government, we’ve heard no denial of this from the  Government, in fact we’ve heard no explanation at all, what we need to hear is an  assurance that the behaviour that our Government is engaging in is consistent with our  international obligations and particularly the protocol against the smuggling of migrants by  land, sea and air, that’s what we need to hear from our Government today.

2





TRIOLI:  We have discussions about this boat turn back, there was the one that reached  Melville Island where people landed, and before that the media reports of a boat held off  Christmas Island, what do you estimate are the number of boats which actually reached  Australian waters since the election?

MARLES: There are unconfirmed reports in the media that there are something in the  vicinity of eight boats which have been turned around since the 19th of December, but I  don’t know that, that’s just what people are just trying to add up, but I think this goes to  the critical issue Virginia, we need to hear from our Government about this, there is a  culture of secrecy around this issue which has been pervading since the time that the  Abbott Government was sworn in.  Now it’s not good enough to go out there and chest  beat on the good days but be silent on the bad days and see that as a sustainable way  about going on with responsible government.  That’s not what we should be seeing from  our Government, it actually treats the Australian people with contempt, we just need a  plain and simple explanation of what they’re doing out there, giving us an assurance and a  sense of confidence that they’re acting in accordance with our international obligations  and keeping the Australian people in the know.

ROWLAND:  Well what the Government would say in its defence, Scott Morrison this  morning is not commenting this morning because he describes this as an “on water  operational matter” and that’s the same approach he’s taken all the way through, it’s no  different to previous incidents.

MARLES:  And we’ve heard that from Scott Morrison from day one, I simply don’t accept  that that makes a material difference to the issue here and any kind of keeping it quiet is  going to help the relationship with Indonesia, well that’s been scotched in the last couple  of days.  To hear the comments from Indonesia’s first diplomat, the Foreign Minister that  you’ve just heard today, says everything about the way in which this Government is going  about its business here and what impact it’s having on our relationship with Indonesia,  and that only bodes badly for the future.

TRIOLI:   Well the Rudd Government were actually the architects of the PNG solution and  you’d have a similar situation to deal with yourself, how do you answer to the fact that we  now have this situation on Manus where people are living in fear, where there is chaos,  where there is deadly violence going on, and what responsibility does your party take for  that situation?

MARLES:  Well firstly Virginia, it is really important that Manus operates in a way which  provides asylum seekers safe accommodation, dignified accommodation and operates in a  humane way, now obviously for Reza Barati that is not what the Manus Island Detention  Facility was, were we in power, that’s the first thing that we’d be doing.

TRIOLI:   But how exactly would you do that?

MARLES:  For starters, we would be seeing that people are being processed, and we  would be working with Papua New Guinea to see that re-settlement is actually occurring,  so those in that facility can see movement.  What we saw from our own Government,

3



from the time that it was sworn in, was a dropping of the ball when it came to the PNG  arrangement, there was not a single conversation with PNG prior to the incidents in  February about processing and re-settlement of those who are in that facility, and it’s not  surprising that in those circumstances you’re going to see tensions build within the facility,  and re-settlement in PNG was at the heart of the re-settlement arrangement that we  negotiated with PNG.

TRIOLI:   So you’re happy for Manus to keep operating ?

MARLES:  Manus and Nauru are saving lives, the situation that we have . .

TRIOLI:   Except of course for Reza Barati . .

MARLES:  Sure, but the situation that we had, where hundreds of people, more than a  thousand over a number of years, died on our border, was unacceptable.  And Nauru and  Manus are saving lives, but Nauru and Manus need to operate in a safe, in a dignified, in a  humane way and as you point out, it was not that for Reza Barati, and that’s where the  Government actually needs to release the report that it said that it would do, they said  they’d get back to the Australian people at the end of April - today is the 7th of May, we  need to see that report in full so that we know why and how the Government is going  wrong in relation to Manus Island.

TRIOLI:   But how can you sit here and say that it’s saving lives and it needs to continue  existing when as I understand it, you haven’t even been there.

MARLES:  Well I’ve not been there, but whether or not I’ve been there is not . ..

TRIOLI:   So you’re speaking in hope?

MARLES:  Whether or not I’ve been there is not at the heart of whether or not Manus  and Nauru are performing a role, from the time that Australia was taken off the table on  the 19th of July last year which was when the Regional Re-settlement Arrangement with  PNG was put in place, we’ve seen a significant drop in the number of asylum seeker  vessels and we’ve not seen a loss of life at sea, now that is a significant fact and so I think  you can sit here today and say that Manus is saving lives, but that doesn’t give licence for  Manus to be a hell hole, it’s important that Manus is operating in a way which is dignified,  humane and which is providing safe accommodation and you rightly point out that is not  the case, was not the case for Reza Barati , and that’s why we need to get the report of  the Government right now, understand where they’re going wrong and have a sense of  confidence that this will not happen again.

ROWLAND:  Malcolm Turnball said overnight that nobody in the Government, was in his  words, comfortable, with border protection policies including Manus and Nauru, I’ll turn  that to you, are you entirely comfortable with the Labor party’s support for the  continuation of those facilities?

MARLES:  Well I’m absolutely comfortable with doing everything that needs to be done to  ensure that we see the end to the loss of life at sea, I come back to that point, a situation

4



where more than a thousand people died on our border over the last few years is utterly  unacceptable, and I don’t understand how anyone can have a position of compassion  which doesn’t accept responsibility for Australia in relation to that, so we’ve got to be  doing something about it, but in saying that Manus and Nauru need to be operating in a  safe, dignified, humane way, do I feel comfortable that that’s going on at the moment, no  I don’t, and that’s why we need to see this report that the Government was dragged to  kicking and screaming to doing an inquiry into what occurred at Manus, but we need to  see the report, they said it would be due at the end of April, it’s the 7th of May today, we  need to see it now.

TRIOLI:   Richard Marles we’ll leave it there, thanks for your time.

MARLES:  Thanks Virginia and Michael.



ENDS

