

RICHARD MARLES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CORIO



SPEECH

“THE POSITIVE CONTRIBUTION OF MIGRATION TO AUSTRALIA”

ADDRESS TO THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL  AFFAIRS

WEDNESDAY, 2 JULY 2014



*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***





Bob Hawke has said that the great influx of migrants after the Second World War  is the most defining feature of Australia today. He is right.  Around two in five Australians are born overseas, or with a parent who was born

overseas.

Migration has enriched Australian society and contributed strongly to economic

growth and productivity.

Migration currently accounts for almost two thirds of Australia’s population

growth.

Look at any community in this country and you will see examples of the

wonderful contribution migrants have made to Australia; it is on offer in varied

and diverse restaurants, in food stores, places of worship, sport and even

architecture.

In my own community of Geelong we have large and vibrant Balkan communities

amongst other nationalities. And while many of these people were drawn to

Geelong for its manufacturing opportunities back in the 60s and 70s, these first

generation migrants have formed a part of the fabric of Geelong, they may have

originally come for a job but they have stayed and helped shape our community.

It is not only in the diversity of cuisine that different cultures have brought to our

country. If your children want to play the world game, and join the North

Geelong Soccer Club, they will be coached at a junior level by three coaches, all

of Croatian descent, two of whom were Socceroos and the third who played in

the Croatian national side.

And for those bleary eyed that watched Wimbledon overnight - Nick Kyrgios is

another fine example. Here is a young Australian star that just beat the World

Number One, Rafael Nadal, at Wimbledon last night. His father comes from

Greece and his mother hails from Malaysia.

Nick is just one of many first, second, and third generation migrants who have

contributed significantly to the social and economic fabric of Australia.

Communities around the country will have similar stories. Though the migrant

group may change the narrative remains the same.

In fact in regional Australia alone, there has been a four-fold increase of skilled

migrants permanently settling over the last 14 years.

Sadly, the positive story of the contribution migrants have made to our country

has struggled for air-time because of the asylum seeker debate that has

punctuated immigration in our country over the last decade.

We are all poorer for this. All the chest beating and dog whistling has left little

room for being able to articulate, debate and discuss the important role of

migration now and into the future. Not only does this suck up oxygen, the

overtones that are allowed to permeate through the debate demonise the very

notion of those who seek to settle in our country.

The fall-out is that a corrosive, politically motivated debate which seeks to

demonise migrants in the country overrides any attempt to celebrate the role of

migrants in Australia and to talk meaningfully about migration issues.

The only way we move past this terrible debate is through genuine bi-partisanship.

Since taking on this portfolio, I have set to recast the way the opposition

approaches this area of public policy. It is essential to move beyond pandering to

the lowest common denominator and approach this area of policy with the

dignity, compassion and common sense it demands.

This is in the national interest.

This Government will benefit from bi-partisan support - something which they

never bestowed on Labor - particularly in striking down the Malaysian

Arrangement which could have helped save hundreds of lives at sea more than

three years ago.

That means when there are legitimate and correct policy approaches, we will not

run Opposition out of political convenience - however that support must not be

taken as a given and will not come with a blank cheque.

In this critically important area of public policy, it is about putting the national

interest ahead of politics.

Migration is about improving Australia. Improving our living standards, improving

our economy, improving businesses in their ability to operate at their full

potential and to find the people they need to do that.

All Australians benefit from a skilled migration program as it can increase the

workforce and create more economic opportunities for continued growth.

What is fundamentally important for our migration program is that it needs to

adapt to Australia’s demographics, in terms of our ageing population, and it

needs to be able to ensure future economic opportunities

Without an immigration program our labour force would stagnate within the next

twenty years and eventually go backwards.

This is Australia’s challenge. We need a migration program that will assist our

continued economic growth.



Permanent Skilled Migration Program

In 2012 it was reported by the Department of Immigration and Citizenship that

more than 7million permanent migrants settled in Australia since World War II.

Originally a program motivated out of national security concerns in the aftermath

of World War II - populate or perish - today we see the permanent skilled

migration program as a demand-driven skills booster to our workforce and

underpinning our economic growth and prosperity.

The goal today is to build a stronger and more resilient future for Australia and

Australians.

This is a target within reach but demands a well-balanced and well-managed

migration program. This means not only bringing bright and talented migrants

into our workforce but providing them and their families an opportunity to

integrate into our society and culture.

Australia has already seen the benefits of migration. The pride that we have in

our multicultural and diverse origins is highly indicative of this.

But a constant challenge for our country is finding the right skilled workers

where we need them.

The 457 visa program was created to specifically address these potential threats

to economic growth and job creation. In addition, to a well-planned permanent

skilled migration program, Australia needs to effectively respond and address

these shortages in order to be competitive on the world stage.

This is not a program about ‘stealing’ jobs.

Temporary skilled migrants assist Australia’s industries in finding the skills they

need, when they need them. It has been an adaptable and highly responsive

program to industry needs, and needs to continue to be so.

We need to be able to fill the skills gaps in order to promote job creation and

economic growth. This is a sure fire way to improve the way of life for all

Australian’s into the future.

But in having a temporary skilled migration program it is very important this is

not abused as an industrial tool. Where workers are in Australia with an

employer sponsored visa it provides employers with more power than in the

traditional employment relationship, namely the power to influence whether

these workers remain in the country. S.457 visas therefore must come with

protections. And it is important Australian workers are given the first opportunity

to undertake potential “S.457” jobs.

That is why the previous Labor Government sought to reform areas of temporary

skilled migration to better respond to businesses and industries, better protect

both local and migrant workers, and create more employment and training

opportunities for Australians.

If we can make sure we are filling the skills gaps through a sustained and fair

457 program we all stand to benefit from a stronger economy.



Significant investor program

When considering a migration program we must not overlook innovation and

capital investment. Australia is a lucrative option for investors who need security

and stability.

To commit a small portion of Australia’s migration program to encourage

investors is a smart and forward looking initiative.

The significant investor visa, which was created by the former Labor

Government, is for people looking to invest a minimum of $5 million in Australia,

either through state or territory bonds, ASIC regulated managed funds or direct

investment in Australian companies.

What this small number of people with their investments can bring to Australia

can’t be underestimated. With these investments going directly into our

economy, they play an active role in contributing to our economy as well as

helping underpin investment in infrastructure and services.

We need to maintain our competitiveness with the international community by

attracting significant investors. What they bring to the table is increased

opportunities for the nation through increasing our international reputation as a

prudent and sound country in which to do business.

Working holiday program

Investing in our economy and building growth, while important, is not the only

objective of a migration program.

Australia also needs to promote and enhance the cultural and social development

of today’s youth and build mutual understanding between Australia, our region,

and the world.

The working holiday visa program is a key initiative for regional Australia and for

Australia’s youth. Where specific industries, especially in regional centres, benefit

from a short-term casual workforce, the reciprocal nature of this program allows

our young Australians to travel overseas and experience the world.

The tourism and hospitality industry, for example, benefits greatly from those

who are on a working holiday visa and we need to do all we can to ensure this

industry specifically is able to have the full benefit of this important workforce.

But it is also about encouraging cultural exchange and closer ties, not only with

our neighbours, but with many nations around the world.

I personally benefited from a similar experience, like many spending a gap year

in the United Kingdom. And while parts of that time are slightly bleary thanks to

a pleasant discovery of warm beer, the experience afforded to me by this

opportunity provided a young man with a glimpse of Europe and that passion for

the world abroad has stayed with me forever.

According to the ATEC 2012 position paper, in June 2011 there were more than

185,000 international tourists holding a working holiday visa that boosted

Australia’s GDP by over $320 million and boosted expenditure on goods and

services by around $630 million.

This program continues to grow and is highly beneficial for Australia and for our

youth.

Seasonal workers program

In another example of the benefits of temporary migration to Australia, the

seasonal workers program is a standout. In both regional and central hubs of

Australia, hospitality and accommodation services see a high proportion of staff

turnover and unnecessary expenses for retention.

The seasonal workers program can provide this industry, the agricultural

industry, and others with a temporary and reliable workforce for 6 months. In

addition, what really makes this program exceptional is the ability for those

industries to obtain experienced and knowledgeable workers season after

season.

The program promotes enhanced international relations and an exchange of

cultures. Seasonal workers can share their social and cultural experiences as well

as their knowledge and skills with the Australian people.

I have had the pleasure of visiting Guyra where a number of Tongans have been

working in the tomato hot houses operated by Costas. Not only have these

workers been fantastic for the productive output of Costas’ tomatoes, I’m told

the Guyra rugby team is now unbeatable.

Currently, there are nine regional nations, Timor-Leste, Kiribati, Nauru, PNG,

Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu, who participate and

assist Australian businesses in hospitality, horticulture, aquaculture, cane, and

cotton.

It’s not just businesses that are benefitting from this program either. The global

impact on seasonal workers’ lives worldwide from programs such as this is huge.

These same Tongans, for example, are investing their hard earned back home

and providing benefits to their communities that overseas aid alone could never

hope to deliver.

According to the International Organisation for Migration (IOM), “in 2012 alone,

migrants remitted more than $400 billion dollars to their families and

communities in developing countries, and that amount is expected to increase to

the half a trillion mark in just a few years.”

The IOM also reports that through programs such as the ones stated above,

migrants have reduced their household poverty levels, generated a 15-fold

increase in household income, reduced infant mortality rates and doubled the

rate of school enrolments for their families.

Migrants are key to stimulating trade and innovation in both their home and host

countries. They bring with them new skills and ideas, new perspectives and

experiences.



Population

Ultimately our migration program has a bearing on the number of people

inhabiting this continent. The future population of Australia is a debate we need

to have. Attitudes to Australia’s population vary greatly. Population growth is

welcomed in regional Australia as a stimulus for economic growth. In parts of

urban Australia we need to ensure that Australia’s infrastructure and essential

services can absorb the population increase.

This is not a unique challenge but it will require a long-term vision and significant

forethought. Cooperation between agencies, policy-makers, stakeholders, and

governments is essential.



Conclusion

We need a skilled migration program that gets the balance right.

Australian workers need to be able to access the opportunities that our growth

presents and we need to allow industry and business to have access skilled

workers when they need them.

Our continued prosperity relies on the balancing of this equation.

We need migrants to grow and we need skilled migrants to meet our demands.

Allowing Australian business and industry, and in turn allowing our country, to

reach its full potential is the goal.



ENDS





