

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  TALKING CANBERRA 1206 2CC  WEDNESDAY, 30 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/ S: EU/ US sanctions against Russia; Government’s handling of  the 157 Sri Lankan asylum seekers.

MARK PARTON: Richard Marles, is the Opposition’s Immigration Spokesperson he  joins us regularly and he’s on the line right now.  You were off overseas last week  Richard where did you end up?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: I was in the US Mark, I was part of the American Australian  Leadership Dialogue which is a really unique institution which has been going for  more than 20 years which brings together business, political, public servants, media,  leaders from both America and Australia and we talk about the issues affecting what  is Australia’s most important bilateral relationship, it’s a good experience.

PARTON: You must have been fascinated to hear the address from the American  President this morning regarding their tougher sanctions on Russia, the world is  closing in on Vladimir Putin, but I get the distinct impression that at home in Russia  he’s being fated as a hero for somehow standing up against the rest of the world?

MARLES: Well it actually was an issue last week in our discussions with the  Americans, obviously the terrible events around MH17 really cast a pall over our  entire meeting, and it did raise the question of Russia in the international  community. There are a lot of challenges associated with that, and Russia is a  country which is increasing its presence within the Pacific and in our neck of the  woods as well. We deal with Russia in a number of important international forums  now, the G20, APEC, The East Asian Summit, and how we deal with Russia I think is  very important going forward but the point was made that this is an economy which  is struggling, sanctions which have been announced by President Obama this  morning, the increased sanctions, will only further make life difficult for Russia. But I

think all of us would want to see Russia change its ways and participators are  responsible international citizens, and this is where it’s got to ultimately end up.

PARTON: While you were out of the country we had a boat arrive, finally, obviously  we know the one we’re talking about. It was the boat that didn’t exist according to  Scott Morrison for quite some time, there were no questions to be answered on it  but now there are, 157 asylum seekers, where’s it at?



MARLES: Well those people are now at the Curtin Detention Facility. But it took the  High Court really to put Scott Morrison in the position where he came clean to the  Australian people about what exactly was going on and that only made it completely

clear that the policy that this Government has in place of secrecy and refusing to  make clear to the Australian people what they are doing in this area is simply  unacceptable. Really Scott Morrison has been treating the Australian people like  mugs in not telling us what’s going on.

PARTON: The policy’s working though isn’t it?

MARLES: Well I’m not sure we can necessarily say that, boats are still coming but  exactly -

PARTON: Well hang on, we’ve had one of them in nine months.

MARLES: Well we’re unsure as to exactly how many boats are making their way to  Australia and what interceptions are occurring.

PARTON: I don’t think we are, we’ve had one get to the mainland in nine months.

MARLES: I repeat the point, there is still a high degree of secrecy about what  ventures are being undertaken -

PARTON: Are you suggesting to me that it wouldn’t surprise you if there was  another boat that had come through and made it to the mainland?

MARLES: No, no -

PARTON: I don’t think that’s the case.

MARLES: No that’s not my point Mark. My point is this, to have a circumstance  where we have 157 asylum seekers on an Australian customs vessel floating around  in the Indian Ocean for the better part of a month for me is not a policy which is  working.

PARTON: He’s a stubborn man this Morrison isn’t he?

MARLES: Well, but not stubborn in the national interest, stubborn in his own  political interest and to protect his own political reputation. Look all of this could  have been resolved weeks ago if these people had have been taken to Christmas

Island, processed there, and those who were found to be genuine sent to Manus or  Nauru. There was never any question of anyone on board this vessel getting a  permanent protection visa in Australia, that was not something which was ever on  the table, that is now not on the table, but the stubbornness in which he sought to  protect his own political interest at the cost of Australia’s national interest is  breathtaking, and that’s the real issue here.

PARTON: Senator Sarah Hanson-Young from the Greens is most passionate about  this issue and has been for a long time, is she helpful in the debate?

MARLES: Well I think there are comments that are made on the Greens side of this  debate which I certainly wouldn’t ascribe to, and which I think are not necessarily  helpful. We do need to be stopping asylum seeker vessels coming to Australia,  there’s no question of that, and we need principally to be doing that to stop the  drownings at sea, and one of the questions that I never hear answered by those on  the Greens side of politics is what we would do to stop the drownings at sea, I mean  it’s very easy to analyse this issue if you pretend those drownings never occurred  but they did. And so you just never hear an acceptance of a need to do something  about that from the Greens side of politics, and that’s my concern about how things  are analysed from that perspective.

But I think what we need to be understanding about the way in which the  Government is going about its business is that we really actually do have a situation  of a portfolio which is being run in a shambolic way. We’ve now had two High Court  decisions in the last few weeks which have effectively dictated to Scott Morrison  about what he needs to do, there’s no way this would have played out that it has  but for the High Court’s intervention, and we’ve now seen Scott Morrison say that  he’ll never issue a permanent protection visa to somebody who has come to  Australia by boat. Well the High Court has told him that there is a circumstance now  in which that has to happen and he’s now issued a permanent protection visa, it’s  actually the High Court whose calling the shots here not the Minister, and that’s not  an acceptable state of affairs.

PARTON: Richard thanks for coming on this morning, it’s good to have you back.

MARLES: Good to talk to you Mark.

ENDS

