

THE HON MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR

IMMIGRATION

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 17 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S: Iraq; Debt Levy; Government Division; Abbott Government  budget of broken promises; Asylum Seeker Policy; Newspoll.

KIERAN GILBERT: Before we get onto politics obviously there’s a very  concerning situation in Iraq, the Foreign Minister says that contingencies are  being put in place, Matt Thistlethwaite, for our diplomatic officials but so hard to  predict just where this goes and what sort of international intervention there’ll  be, if any.

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND IMMIGRATION: Yeah, very, very concerning  situation in Iraq Kieran. Labor sought an urgent briefing from the Government on  this and I understand that that’s going to be delivered and very concerning  situation, we need to keep a vigilant eye on it, and note what’s going on there.

GILBERT: When you look at the history of that strife torn country, Senator Ryan  again as I say it’s very hard to predict what’s going to go on, and also I suppose  to work out how to respond because if you’ve got militants based in civilian areas  around the nation it’s hard to just respond with air strikes.

SENATOR SCOTT RYAN: Look it’s volatile and it’s extremely violent, the ISIS  has been listed under UN sanctions provisions, it’s been listed under the criminal  code in Australia as a group that is subject to anti-terrorist provisions, as the  Foreign Minister made clear, we’ve got plans in place to evacuate diplomats but  it is a situation the world is watching closely.

GILBERT: Let’s look at politics now and yesterday as the Government is trying  to sell this budget which hasn’t gone down very well you’ve got two of your  colleagues in the Senate, Liberal Senators speaking very passionately against the  debt levy, this revenue raising measure which was meant to be a key part of the  message I guess to say that this is a fair budget, that those on a higher income  are contributing, two of your own colleagues can’t cop it and are likely to abstain  or cross the floor.

RYAN: Well there’s two things that are important about this Kieran, firstly this  part of the budget is getting through, this part of the budget is being  implemented, and we made that clear that everyone should share the burden so  this will become law and on the first of July it will become a temporary tax  measure, but it also is a sign of the strength of the Coalition and the Liberal  Party, we are not scared of having people have different opinions and this is a  great difference between us and the Labor Party that the threat to cross the floor  and crossing the floor in the Labor Party is automatic expulsion. We know  whether it was the NBN, whether it was the ETS, that there were internal voices  of Labor dissent but they never had the courage to speak out.

GILBERT: But when you talk about this legislation getting through that’s true, it  will with Labor’s support, but Senator McDonald seemed to flag taking a similar  action down the track when it comes to the Paid Parental Leave Scheme and that  might not be as successful in the Parliament.

RYAN: For all but three years in the last three decades really a Government has  needed the support of cross benchers or the Opposition to get legislation  through in the Senate so whether it’s the carbon tax now -

GILBERT: But is it a good look when you’ve got Senators crossing the floor  saying that you’ve got the wrong priorities, the budget approach is wrong and  misplaced, that’s essentially what Senator McDonald was saying yesterday?

RYAN: Well I don’t agree with what Senator McDonald said, but I think that  people value politicians having the opportunity to speak their conscience and  that is a profound difference between us and the Labor Party. Now I disagree  with Senator McDonald but he has that right to speak out in the Liberal Party  and that’s a right that goes back to our founding. People like politicians speaking

the truth rather than the automatons that we saw for years under Julia Gillard  and Kevin Rudd.

GILBERT: And the fact is they will get their legislation through anyway with  your help.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well Kieran I admire Scott’s attempt to try and dress this  up as open policy debate within the Coalition but what it really is is open  warfare. This is a Government that is hopelessly divided and it’s not just this  issue of the budget proceeding through the Parliament, it’s the Paid Parental  Leave Scheme, there’s been open dissent regarding this policy for a number of  months now, it’s senior members of the Government backgrounding journalists  last week and telling them that they openly deceived the National Party when it  came to the passage of the petrol tax increase through the Coalition party room.  This is open warfare in a Government that is hopelessly divided and Scott can do  all he likes to dress it up but I guess that the Prime Minister wouldn’t be too  happy with what’s going on in the Senate at the moment.

GILBERT: But surely when you’ve got a party room of so many individuals and  a party that has prided itself on having a broad church as they describe it, you’re  going to get different opinions.

THISTLETHWAITE: Isn’t that what the party room’s for? Isn’t that where you  have these discussions, where you work as a team?

GILBERT: But not everyone’s going to agree.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well that’s right and you sort it out within the party room  and if you’re a united Government you work together in the Parliament on issues  that affect the Australian people.

GILBERT: These are back benchers you’re talking about.

THISTLETHWAITE: But they are still members of the Government and the  great disappointment of all of this is we are seeing these members of the  Government make these claims with regards to the deficit levy, why aren’t they  standing up for Medicare? Why aren’t they out saying that the Medicare co-payment is a disastrous policy? Why aren’t they standing up for students and the  de-regulation of student university fees and pensioners? No, it’s about this  particular issue and it’s a symbol of the divided nature of this Government.

GILBERT: Is it the issue as well I guess $8 billion worth of savings and cuts that  need to be legislated by the end of next week if they are going to come into  force on July the first, are you confident that will happen, that will eventuate?



RYAN: I don’t know if they will need to be legislated by next week to take effect  on the first of July, for example excise measures can be legislated after they’re  announced. The point is that we announced our budget and we intend to try and  get the budget through the Senate and we expect that the Senate will respect  the mandate that we have been elected to do particularly on repealing the  carbon tax and the mining tax. Matt there talked about the party room as if no  one was allowed to have an opinion outside it yet under Labor for the last four  years we had the farce of a Labor Party room fighting amongst itself, and we  knew they all had different opinions in Parliament but they never actually said  them. We respect diversity but we also expect that the Senate will respect our  mandate to get our budget through.

GILBERT: Sure but there’s no guarantee that that’s going to happen. How much  do you need to have legislated within the next fortnight for those measures to  kick in?

RYAN: We’re still dealing with dozens of budget measures that Labor left us  announced but as yet unlegislated, in some cases legislation wasn’t even drafted,  we are still playing catch up to the Labor Party’s mess that it left on dozens and  dozens of budget measures particularly tax measures.

GILBERT: So does this mean that you might not have legislated multi-billion  dollar savings cuts that Joe Hockey announced in his budget?

RYAN: We intend to have them all legislated so they take effect from the 1st of  July in order to bring this budget mess back into balance.

GILBERT: When you talk about division in party rooms today two members of  your caucus are going to move to argue that Labor should change its position on  offshore processing, Melissa Parke and Anna Burke, they reflect a broader view  in the party that think that that approach should be changed, so while you’ve  been having a go at the Government for internal division there’s a fair bit of  division on that policy continued division on that policy which has caused you so  much heartache over the years.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well the difference Kieran is this debate’s occurring in the  party room, it’s part of an internal Labor Party process of dealing with policy  issues, it’s in accordance with the rules of the Labor Party caucus, it’s in  accordance with over a century of practice of working out policy in the party  room and it’s the right of any member to move a motion such as this and notice  was given in accordance with the party’s rules. We’ll debate that today but I’m  confident that Labor’s policy on this important issue won’t change and that is

that we’ll support the regional resettlement arrangement and offshore  processing.

GILBERT: Does it show that Labor’s heart is not in it as the Immigration  Minister asserted earlier in this program?

THISTLETHWAITE: No it shows that there’s a diversity of views in the Labor  Party when it comes to an issue such as this, but at the end of the day we’ll have  a debate and we’ll work out what the policy will be and we’ll go out in a united  front and support that policy, and as I said I’m confident that the policy of the  regional resettlement arrangement which has been effective in deterring people  smugglers will work and will stay in place.

GILBERT: Well after criticising Labor for not having diversity of opinion you can  hardly criticise them now can you for having this debate again?

RYAN: But the problem is Labor’s record in this case, so Kieran, Matt talks there  as if their record in Government was that they still maintained all these policies.  Labor unwound our border protection policies, they left us with 50,000 people  arriving unlawfully on our shores and then in the dying days, in a desperate  political move they announced this plan but they didn’t fund it and they didn’t  have any plans to implement it. What we’re seeing today in the Labor caucus is  exactly what we would see if ever Labor had responsibility for our borders again.  They would water down all these policies, they’ve done it once, this shows they’ll  do it again.

GILBERT: When you talk about this legal action I asked Scott Morrison about it  on the vessel that hit the rocks off Christmas Island back in December 2010 he’s  described it as shameful legal action. Why shouldn’t groups representing those  asylum seekers seek some recourse if they think that there should’ve been more  resources in the area to provide for people in distress?

RYAN: I think the Minister also made clear that they had a right to undertake  this action, he described it as shameful, because according to the mentality that  underpins what I heard George Newhouse being interviewed on ABC Radio this  morning is that, as the Minister said, should we have been running a bigger  water taxi service? I mean let’s put in context we had some incredibly brave  actions by service personnel in Australia that saved over 40 people on a very  tragic day and I don’t think that we should be supporting or underpinning attacks  on the work that they undertook often at great personal peril.

GILBERT: Matt Thistlethwaite?

THISTLETHWAITE: That was a really, really concerning incident Kieran, it was  horrifying and I think it actually changed a lot of views in the Labor Party and in  the wider community about the approach to asylum seekers. I wasn’t there of  course but I saw the images on television and they were quite shocking and we  saw Australian personnel doing all they could to save people and in doing so  risking their lives throwing rescue tubes from a dangerous situation on the rocks  there to try and save people, so it’s a concerning situation but it’s the right of  someone to take this action in the court so we’ll have to wait on the outcome.

GILBERT: I want to ask you about the Newspoll to conclude, we’ve seen the  Independents and the Minor Parties their numbers are up to 17 per cent in the  latest Newspoll. Does this reflect pretty much looks like it that people are  disenchanted with the two major parties, certainly the Government in the wake  of the budget?

RYAN: Well what it reflects Kieran is that we were left with an enormous mess  and it’s taking some very difficult and occasionally unpopular decisions to bring  the budget back into balance. We always said that we would never shy away  from very difficult decisions and we know that we do, as with any budget, have a  job to convince people that these difficult decisions are necessary and that’s  what we intend to do.

GILBERT: Matt Thistlethwaite, your thoughts on these numbers because Bill  Shorten his approval rating went up in the wake of the budget but he doesn’t  seem to be able to hold it there, it’s dropped back to where it was prior.

THISTLETHWAITE: If we assume the Parliament goes the full term Kieran  there’s about 86 Newspolls between now and the next election, the numbers are  going to go up the numbers are going to go down, the numbers that I’m really  concerned about at the moment are the number of residents in my constituency  that are going to lose bulk billing because of the co-payment, the pile of letters  that I’ve got on my desk from parents of high schools students that don’t want  to see their kids opportunity to go to university being whittled away by increases  in student fees and the number of pensioners that are going to be worse off  because of the budget.

RYAN: You should stop lying to them then and you wouldn’t scare them.

THISTLETHWAITE: You’re the one that told them the lies before the election,  not us.

GILBERT: Gentlemen we’re out of time.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NICK MONCRIEFF-HILL 0408 687 497

