

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SUNDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2014  CANBERRA, PARLIAMENT HOUSE

SUBJECT/ S: W estern Sydney W anderers; Abbott Government’s broken  promise on GST; Abbott Government’s unfair budget; Climate change.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Thanks very much  everyone for coming out today. My name is Andrew Leigh, the Shadow Assistant  Treasurer. I want to open with my congratulations to the Western Sydney  Wanderers, Asian Cup Champions. Just a great result for all Australians and many  hearts will be swelling with pride tonight.

Also wanted to say a few words about the statements that we’ve seen Joe Hockey  and Mathias Cormann making on GST distribution. It would be pretty clear to  anyone who follows the GST debate that if one state is going to get a larger amount  of GST that either means other states get a smaller share of GST or that the rate or

the base of the GST goes up. The only way that doesn’t happen is if the GST is a  magic pudding. And right now Joe Hockey and Mathias Cormann seem to be  auditioning for the roles of Bunyip Bluegum and Sam Sawnoff.

But the GST is not a magic pudding and if this government wants a mature and  responsible debate about tax they need to stop saying one thing in the west and  another thing in the east. They need to be very clear with the Australian people  about the implications of increasing any state’s share of the GST and they need to  be clear about the implications of that either for states getting a smaller share of  GST or for the rate of GST going up.

Tony Abbott said 33 times that he wouldn’t be increasing the GST so it’s pretty  strange now that he’s starting to starve states into submission and getting them to  accept what is clearly an underlying Liberal agenda of a higher GST. Happy to take  questions.

JOURNALIST: On another magic pudding, a lot of people think income tax and  bracket creep is going to be unsustainable, do you think there is an argument to link  it to inflation rather than rather than wages growth?

LEIGH: Well we certainly see from this government just taxes going up and up. We  were promised no new taxes before the election but the Prime Minister has broken  that promise along with so many others. He’s put on a new GP tax, he wants to  increase the fuel tax, he’s increasing income taxes and so we’ve seen on so many  fronts this being a Government that is putting up tax where it’s claimed before the  election that it would never do so.



JOURNALIST: Andrew, does Labor reject any shift from direct to indirect taxation?

LEIGH: Labor’s always open for sensible debates over taxation, but we were very  clear before the election that we wouldn’t be supporting changes to the GST and,  unlike to Coalition, we’re sticking that that promise.

JOURNALIST: Do you think income tax specifically needs to be overhauled the way  it is collected?

LEIGH: Labor’s not supporting increases in the income tax burden on low income  Australians. We’ve got at the moment from Tony Abbott so many slugs on the most  vulnerable. You know, if you look at poorest single families, a single mother earning  $65,000 a year, Tony Abbott’s budget has her losing $6,000. To me that’s simply  unconscionable and so we’ll apply the test of fairness to any proposals that Mr  Abbott brings forward, particularly after a generation in which we’ve seen billionaires  make out so much better than battlers.



JOURNALIST: We’ve got predictions that if nothing changes that’s a $25 billion  windfall for the Abbott Government, what sort of impact do you think that could  have, not just on the budget bottom line, but on low income earners?

LEIGH: Tony Abbott still seems incapable of balancing the budget. He said before  the election that he was going to bring down the deficit; in fact he’s increased the  deficit. His first economic update doubled the deficit, and even if parliament had just  rubber stamped the last budget, it would have brought down a higher, not a smaller,  deficit than under the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Outlook.



That’s because Mr Abbott is saying no to so many sensible sources of revenue, for  the mining tax, the carbon price, and through fair taxation of people with more than  $2 million in their superannuation accounts. That test of fairness is one that I think  all ordinary Australians would apply to anything that a Government is doing. The  Abbott Government seems unwilling to do that basic, moral act of placing itself in  the shoes of the most vulnerable.

JOURNALIST: Do we need income tax cuts then to sort of counter the bracket  creep?

LEIGH: If the Abbott Government wants to bring forward proposals to the  Parliament we’re always happy to look at them. But at the moment what it’s doing to

vulnerable Australians is it’s making it harder for them to afford the essentials in life.  Increasing the cost of going to the doctor, increasing the cost of driving to the  doctor, and on the long run, imposing cost of living impacts on Australians by kicking  the climate change can down the road.

JOURNALIST: When it comes to, perhaps as you say, mature debate over tax or  mature discussions, essentially what we’ve had is a mention of forward revenues,  what you do with the states and federal governments, just a mention of it in a  speech or two, and Labor straight away saying no GST, not over our dead body. Is  that a mature debate Labor’s involved in?

LEIGH: Well both parties before the last election were very clear that we didn’t  want to see increases in the GST. Labor has stuck steadfastly to that pledge but Mr  Abbott has instead cut $80 billion out of states health and education funding, very  clearly in an attempt to have as allies in this campaign for a higher GST - people like  Denis Napthine. We’re open for a tax debate; we brought down the Henry Tax  Review, we put in place an important tax reform in an emissions trading scheme  which raises the price of pollution and lowers the price of work. Textbook tax reform  undone by the Abbott Government.



JOURNALIST: Should with the GST though shouldn’t you, for example, look at well  would there be possible compensation for low income earners, would there be more  services out of it, a discussion about what it means rather than a blanket no way?

LEIGH: Look, if you think that low income earners are going to come out well out of  any Abbott tax reform, I’ve got a bridge you might like to buy. We have seen on  every twist and turn the Abbott Government’s changes hurting the most vulnerable.  The decision to focus only on spending and then to focus later on tax expenditures  has a regressive impact in and of itself and we’ve seen that independent modelling  from NATSEM showing that the poorest single parents lose one dollar in ten of their  incomes. So I’d be very surprised if the Abbott Government brings forward reforms  that are fair for Australians, and particularly that assist the most vulnerable. This  matters so much because we’ve had a huge rise in inequality over the past  generation, and so governments which want to give more to the affluent at the  expense of the vulnerable are running against the tide of history.

JOURNALIST: If there are changes that would address the concerns about bracket  creep, and that’s a $25 billion shortfall, how would you go about it or how would  Labor go about addressing that funding that’d be lost?

LEIGH: We’ll have our tax policies released well ahead of the next election and  certainly I would expect ahead of the timetable that the Abbott Government brought  its policies to the people. Certainly though you can judge us on what we did when  we were in office which is to deliver personal income tax cuts, to deliver a price on  carbon pollution, another textbook economic reform and then to begin looking at tax  expenditures such as the fact that if you’ve got more than $2 million in your  superannuation account, you’re getting a superannuation tax break that exceeds the  value of the full rate pension. So there the sorts of issues that we looked at in the  last government and that’s how you can expect a future Shorten Government would  approach tax reform.



JOURNALIST: Mr Leigh on climate change the Environment Minister says that the  Direct Action program will kick off next year. Labor’s position is that Direct Action  won’t work, but you also said that asylum seeker, turning asylum seeker boat  wouldn’t work and that seems to have worked. So is it now time for Labor to allow  this Direct Action policy to run a bit of its course to see if it does work and if it does  work and they get, reach their reduction targets where does that leave the  Opposition?

LEIGH: Climate change is not a policy that Australia is alone in approaching and  other countries around the world are asking themselves what’s the right way of  tackling climate change. And universally experts in those countries, economic  experts, are pointing to the importance of carbon pricing. It is very clear that putting  a price on carbon pollution gets you lowest cost abatement and that the effective  carbon tax that is Direct Action is going to be a bigger slug on Australian households  than an emissions trading scheme. And that’s simply because a pay-the-polluters  scheme is more expensive in order to get every tonne of abatement. RepuTex has  said that Direct Action will get maybe a fifth of the total emissions abatement that  Australia needs to hit. Ken Henry has said you’d need to spend around twice as  much as the Government’s budgeted in order to come anywhere close to the  targets.

So it’s very clear from theoretical evidence, from empirical evidence and from simply  listening to the experts that Direct Action won’t hit the mark, where as a carbon  price had seen the biggest fall in Australian emissions in 24 years, just in January  this year. That’s why countries around the world are shaking their head at Australia  dropping the ball. Australia is now unique in the world in being the only country that  has removed a nationwide price on carbon pollution and economic experts just  scratch their heads in bewilderment as to why we’d do that.

JOURNALIST: So to clarify you think, just using your phrase there, I don’t think the  Coalition would be too impressed with you describing it as a carbon tax given their  attacks over the years?

LEIGH: It’s very clear that the Coalition is slugging Australian households with  higher taxes, $2 billion of fuel taxes is about the cost of Direct Action. Mr Abbott in  the past has described other policies as being simply a ‘money-go-round’. That  seems a very apt description of his pay-the-polluters’ scheme.

Thanks everyone.

ENDS

