

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW  ASSISTANT TREASURER  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR FRASER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  BREAKING POLITICS - FAIRFAX MEDIA   MONDAY, 26 MAY 2014  CANBERRA

SUBJECT / S: Federal Budget negotiations; Speak er Bronw yn Bishop  and Liberal P arty fundraising; R efugee resettlement and the mental  health of asylum seek ers.

CHRIS HAMMER: Joining me now in the studio is the Shadow Assistant  Treasurer Andrew Leigh, Labor Member for Fraser here in the ACT, and Andrew  Laming, the Liberal Member for Bowman in Queensland. Good morning  gentlemen.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Morning Chris.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, is it time to start compromising on the Federal  Budget? Christine Milne and Nick Xenophon say they haven’t even been  approached by the Government as yet?

ANDREW LAMING: Well there is no time line on when you approach the  Greens, but clearly politics is a game of compromise. It’s more important to win  over the Australian people that the budget as a package is the right thing for the  long term. I would be silly to say that there won’t ever be a compromise but  that’s something for the treasurer and the leadership group but right now the  package gets us back on track by 2017-18, something that could never have  been conceived under the previous Labor government.

HAMMER: If you need to compromise, what are the policies that you would  nominate as a backbencher in touch with your constituency which you think

might be worth putting on the table? The Medicare co-payment, the Paid  Parental Leave scheme?

LAMING: First Chris, I’ll be campaigning not only for the budget in to be passed  by the upper house I’d like to see it go even further. I think that there is room  still to reduce government waste and there is room to better target welfare and  there is room still to tweak our health system to get better value for money. Far  from compromising I’ll be urging my leadership team to over the term of this  government at least to go further.

HAMMER: So don’t go softer, go harder?

LAMING: Correct.

HAMMER: Andrew Leigh, is it time to compromise?

LEIGH: I think the government is recognising that no budget in the recorded  history in Australia has gone down as badly as this one. That’s fundamentally not  just because it breaks promises, not just because it has a slower return to  surplus. (Andrew said before that a return to surplus in 2017-18 couldn’t have  been contemplated. In fact, the books when the Coalition took over had a return  to surplus a year before that.This budget increases the deficit.) But I think it’s  fundamentally the unfairness. Don’t take my word on this. The modelling  organisation that the Prime Minister once described as Australia’s most  authoritative and reputable modelling outfit, NATSEM, has found that for families  with children, the burden is 15 times as large for those in the bottom fifth than  those in the top fifth.

HAMMER: Now, one of the principle cases that the Opposition is prosecuting  against the Government is that of broken promises, including the promise not to  raise taxes. Why then is Labor supporting the introduction of the so-called  deficit-levy? You’re helping the Government break promises.

LEIGH: Well, it is as you say a broken promise Chris, that absolutely hits the nail  on the head. We’ve applied a number of tests to our consideration of measures  that we’ll support and oppose, tests of broken promises, of fairness and of what  they do to get the budget into a reasonable position and we’ve decided on  balance to support this. It’s not a measure that we would have introduced  ourselves. Chris Bowen has made clear that it was a proposal put to him which

he rejected.

HAMMER: So, if it’s a worthwhile measure or good enough for you to support,  then why not make it permanent? All these other measures that are hitting

middle and lower income earners are permanent, should the so called deficit levy  be made permanent?

LEIGH: Chris, if we wanted to permanently raise income taxes at the last  election, we would have been honest with the Australian people and said that we  intended to do that. The Coalition made the opposite pledge: that they wouldn’t  raise income taxes. In fact, Mr Abbott said that there should be no increase in  taxes, no new taxes without an election. Extraordinarily, he’s then turned around  and put a bevy of new taxes onto Australians. I think that a breach of faith with  the Australian people is showing in the leadership murmurings that are going on  within the Coalition party-room and the deep concern in the community which  Andrew would have had reflected back to him in his street-corner meetings as I  have.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, are there leadership murmurings?

LAMING: Look of course not. And even in the community Chris, it’s very  important to say that those who are most white hot and indignant about these  budget changes are mostly people that are not affected at all. When you go and  talk to pensioners most of them have lived through tough times, they have seen  budgets like this before and they understand that everyone tightening their belts  tightly is our only way out of this. It is interesting to see Labor rushing like honey  badgers to support the two per cent levy on high income earners, all the people  that didn’t get the $900 cheques of course. It’s a very inelegant solution. They  simply pick out the people that didn’t vote for them and approve the tax hikes  for them. But look we have a big picture for all of Australia, we need to have the  economy back on track with budget balanced by 2016-17. These are [inaudible]  budget surplus and never doing it, this is us mapping it out from day one. I think  that people, after the shock subsides, are appreciating this is really the only way  out of the mess that has been created.

HAMMER: You say the budget will be back into surplus by 2016-17 that you  support in the Budget as a whole, but the reality is many of these measures  [such as] the indexation on pensions, various payments, family benefits et cetera

are due to come in on July 1st, but they’re not pass the Senate by then. What’s  the solution? Do you push out the year the Budget returns to surplus or would  the government be looking at making legislation retrospective?

LAMING: Chris it is a really good question but it’s also imponderable. Our goal is  to get everything through the Senate. We understand in some cases the  indexation that was chosen a decade ago simply isn’t going to work for us

anymore. Its correct also that the high income levy is time limited but let’s hope  that when we get the budget back it surplus that 2017-18 that by that time we  can also be looking at more flexible ways to support a welfare system once it is

affordable. Right now we are dealing with Labor funny money, projections into  the never-never, where they were completely un-funded. They didn’t have the  money to make those promises and we are now wearing and bearing the brunt  of that. Australians, after the shock, are starting to appreciate how tough it is  going to be in 2014 to get us back on track but we are determined to do it.

HAMMER: Andrew Leigh, there will be horse-trading in the Senate? Will Labor  accept any kind of retrospectivity in legislation going through the Senate? The  government has put forward its budget, it has nominated July 1st for many of  these measures. Even if it takes longer for the legislation to get through, should  July 1st still be the kick-off day?

LEIGH: Chris, my preference always in tax legislation or changes in payments is  not to do things retrospectively. I think you need a very good reason to do that  and ‘we didn’t want to deal with minor parties’ doesn’t come down as a good  reason in my book.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, should the Speaker be able to have party political  fundraisers in the Speaker’s office?

LAMING: Well under the Australian system the Speaker is a member typically of  the Government and of course any government member and any opposition  member can run a function in their suite. I confess and raise my hands that I  have done the same thing in my suite. There are no rules about this. Of course  Labor will say that they want an in independent speaker but it’s something that  they couldn’t managed while in government either. Look, in reality you either  ban it or you don’t and at the moment it is completely allowed to host supporters  in Parliament House, so there is no fuss here except for the fact they are looking  for a post budget headline.

HAMMER: But so much of the Westminster system is about conventions rather  than black and white rules and laws. If no other Speaker has done this in the  past, isn’t this setting a dangerous new precedent?

LAMING: Well everyone else has done it except the Speaker. I can’t speak for  previous speakers, there is a long list of them. I’d be very surprised if they have  never hosted any of their supporters in their suite. That would surprise me  enormously. I don’t have the evidence with me, but I can tell you everyone else  is doing just that.

HAMMER: Well, Andrew Leigh, isn’t that a fair point? If every other politician  can have a fundraiser in their office or office suite, then why not the Speaker?

LEIGH: Because the Speaker is the referee Chris. This would be like suddenly,  half-way through a tennis match, the umpire steps down and starts coaching one  of the players. This is a $2,500-a-plate fundraising dinner for the Liberal Party  run apparently in an unprecedented fashion by this Speaker. Now we’re just  dealing with reports at the moment, I’m looking forward to the Speaker  dispelling these reports, saying that this dinner didn’t happen. But if that’s not  the case, if it actually happened, then we’d move from a position where the  Coalition said that the Speaker wouldn’t sit in the Liberal party room to holding  Liberal parties in the Speaker’s suite. Fundraising on the back of a Budget which  is balancing off the backs of the poorest Australians for the Liberal Party, I think  that would just make the Speaker’s position untenable.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming makes the point that there are no hard and fast rules  when it comes to this. Does this kind of conduct need to become codified so  everyone knows where they stand?

LEIGH: Many of these things as you put in your question to Andrew, Chris, are  matters of convention. I think that if the Speaker has indeed not only broken the  party’s pledge to not sit in the party room but has actually conducted fundraisers  in the Speaker’s suite, then the Speaker’s position as an independent umpire in  the Parliament isn’t possible and she would then need to step down.

HAMMER: Labor’s got all sorts of issues with Bronwyn Bishop, is it time for her  to step aside?

LEIGH: It is, I think if this is shown to be true. If these rumours are dispelled  then the Speaker would be in a different place.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, I must let you react to that.

LAMING: Well, obviously Bronwyn Bishop never said that she would not be  sitting in the party room. Other people may of, but Bronwyn didn’t and secondly  if you are so concerned about impartiality of the speaker then obviously hosting  some people like everyone does in your suite is no added insult. She does her  job exceptionally well and the opposition don’t like it. But hosting supporters is  something we all do on budget night on both sides of the political fence. Every  year there’s been a budget.

HAMMER: Andrew Laming, just finally, reports in the Fairfax Press on the state  of mental health of asylum seekers on Manus Island and Nauru are considerably  worse than that of asylum seekers on Christmas Island and mainland Australia.  Should we be sending or contemplating sending asylum seekers with these kinds  of mental health issues to places like Cambodia for resettlement?

LAMING: Andrew and I will both share great concerns about mental health of  anyone who is in the care of Australian authorities or nearby nations. Obviously  Manus is run completely by PNG. Nonetheless every Australian would wish for  speedy processing to identify genuine refugees and who adhere to the

convention to see that they are resettled safely that can be Australia or  anywhere else. But look, let’s be frank, they have come from appalling  circumstances at home many of them will have mental health issues even before  they’ve arrived. I have great concern for those people that have seen first-hand  violence but in the end you can only process as quickly as you can and the  fastest resolution is to find third party countries to take them or if they are  genuine refugees and on Christmas Island, Australia is one of the most  welcoming countries in the world for them we simply have to shorten that period  and for economic refugees who don’t comply through the convention. The reality  is that they will have to go home and I am sure that must also cause some grief  and concern and how the world works and that is how the treaty was structured  in the 1950’s.

HAMMER: In seeking third world resettlement countries for genuine refugees,  the Government is surely deliberately trying to make arrangements with  countries that act as a deterrent. But isn’t that terrible for someone suffering  from mental health issues, to try and settle them in a countries like Cambodia or  Papua New Guinea which certainly don’t have the services to look after them?

LAMING: Services will be challenging but the people themselves and their  democratically elected governments are places that I would have no problems  with staying in large periods of time. I have spent long periods of my life in  Afghanistan and also in East Timor so if you are fleeing life threatening violence I  see no problem with Cambodia or any other of near Asian neighbours as a safe  alternative.

HAMMER: Andrew Leigh, Labor has supported the PNG solution, in fact, it was  your solution. What of this issue of resettling people with mental health issues in  countries which don’t have the kind of health infrastructure to deal with them?

LEIGH: Well Chris, alongside a big increase in the refugee intake, we put in  place the refugee resettlement arrangement as a way of preventing drowning’s  at sea, a humanitarian goal. It is a harsh approach and it relied on refugees  being resettled, something that hasn’t happened since the Coalition came to  office. It’s a strategy which did see a significant drop, a 90 per cent drop in  asylum seeker boat arrivals before the election and probably after the election,  although the information is much more patchy. It’s harsh if implemented well,  and as events in Manus have shown, it has not been implemented well by this  Government.

HAMMER: Andrew Leigh, Andrew Laming thanks so much for your time today.

LEIGH: Thanks Chris.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TONI HASSAN 0426 207 726

