Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison MP

Refugee and humanitarian programme, Nauru, national security

Wednesday, 05 November 2014

Interview with Patrick Condren, 4BC Mornings Programme

Patrick Condren: Minister Morrison, good morning. Thank you for your time this  morning.

Minister Morrison: G'day Patrick good to be with you.

Condren: Do you have a long term refugee policy?

Minister Morrison: We take 13,750 people from around the world from some of the  most distressing situations imaginable and we have and this has been the case,  under frankly both sides of politics, the best refugee resettlement services in the  world as recognised by all the various international organisations including the UN.  Australia does its bit. We have taken hundreds of thousands of refugees from around  the world. We will continue to take people from around the world in accordance with  our capacity to do that and I note the recommendations that have been made and I  acknowledge the good will of people engaged in these suggestions and all the rest of  it. But right now you can't count your chickens. We are still stopping the boats, we  are still stopping the deaths at sea and I know people are quite keen to move on  from that but frankly my focus is making sure that we don't give up the hard won  gains and Patrick they have been hard won gains. Stopping these boats has not  been easy and many people have criticised us for the way we have done that and  are quick to try and move on and move off from that topic but the fact is it still  remains an issue we must address and we will continue to address that.

Condren: The report also recommends the lifting of the humanitarian, the annual  humanitarian intake from 13,750 to 25,000. Is that something the government would  ever consider?

Minister Morrison: Well that will cost billions and it will cost the equivalent to  building about three children's hospitals in Queensland.

Condren: Have you got plans to build three children's hospitals in Queensland?

Minister Morrison: My point is that it costs billions and that would cost roughly more  than $3 billion over the budget and the forward estimates. At a time when we are  trying to reduce debt and reduce deficits whether Australians think that that is where  we should put more than $3 billion as opposed to other priorities well they are the  judgements that are made in a budgetary context. The other issue is this and that is  when we decide to take people from various parts of the world we have a  responsibility then to make sure they become integrated good citizens of Australia.  We have a very good history on that front particularly for those who have been taken

through the proper process and they have gone on to be successful Australians.  That hasn't happened by accident it has happened because of a very well resourced,  very professional resettlement programme and the work of service providers who  deliver that on the ground. It is not just about letting people just pour in. If they come  then you have to ensure that they integrate well into society and into community, and  get jobs and get educated and help their kids to adapt to a new life in a new country.  You don't do that lightly.

Condren: Do you have any examples of ethnic groups who aren't assimilating?

Minister Morrison: That is not what I suggested, what I was suggested was that  when you take people into Australia, whether you take them through your refugee  programme or any other programme, the key focus has to be integration. Integration  particularly economically because when people get jobs and participate in the  economy that is the best way for them to become part of Australian society and to  make the contribution that we know they make.

Condren: Sorry I wasn't trying to be clever. I don't think anyone who listens to the  programme would ever accuse me of being clever. Having said that let me say this  are you aware of any groups of people who come to Australia legitimately who  indicate by their actions, by their deeds, by their words that they don't want to  assimilate, that they want to continue with the culture that they came from rather  than adopting an Australian culture?

Minister Morrison: Let me tell you where the risk of that is greatest. The risk of that  is greatest where people come and have very low English language skills, have very  few economic skills and don't become part of an economic programme or a skills  programme into Australia. The evidence and the research is, whether it is here or  overseas, is that where people come in that way and aren't able to participate  economically in particular then the risk of exclusion, the risk of separation is much,  much greater. That is why in Europe for example and in the UK there are statistics  amongst their immigrant communities which have higher rates of unemployment,  lower rates of educational attainment for second generation kids. Now in Australia it  is the reverse of all that because we have been quite effective in immigration. I  think integration is the policy we must continue to adopt and stand up for when it  comes to settling migrant communities in Australia. It is about being part of Australia  not separate from Australia and that is the overwhelming experience of immigrants to  Australia and we can't just think that that happens by itself. We must remain vigilant  on it whether it is on our refugee intake or any other intake. When you get  immigration right, which I believe substantively we have, then it is an enormous boon  not only to our economy but for our society and social cohesion as well.

Condren: If someone wants to come to this country as a legitimate immigrant, what  processes do they have to go through?

Minister Morrison: Well there are numerous ways of doing it. There's of course the  economic programme, which is the skilled programme and people can come  temporarily on a skilled visa and then seek to translate to a permanent one later.  They can come on student visas and seek to translate to permanent skilled visas  later. They can even come as work and holiday makers and do that on particular

occasions. They can come under the family programme which is obvious, they've got  to be either a spouse or a dependent child of a primary visa applicant, and then of  course there's the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme which provides for people  to come from very serious circumstances and one of the things we're most pleased  about is because we have been able to stop the boats to date, our Special  Humanitarian Programme which fell to just 500 places under the last year of the  previous government, this year is 5000 places, and that's because all of those visas  in between 5000 and 500 were going to people who had come illegally by boat. Now  what we're doing is we've made sure that that offshore programme is quarantined to  those people who come the right way. The temporary visas which will come into  place if this bill passes the parliament, which the Palmer United Party are supporting,  that will enable temporary visas to be given to those who are found to be refugees  who came illegally by boat. They will never be permanently resettled in Australia.  That is the nature of the policy we have and that policy has been very successful in  stopping the boats.

Condren: Do you see Australia as having an obligation in any way, shape or form, to  provide a home to people less fortunate than ourselves?

Minister Morrison: Well we have ever since we started as a country -

Condren: But no more than the 13,750 that you've indicated that Australia is  annually taking at the moment?

Minister Morrison: Well we have no plans to lift that, but I think the point that your  previous guest was making, Professor Douglas was saying, I agree with him on this  point - the debate about the size of our intake has nothing to do with stopping the  boats. The suggestion that somehow by lifting the intake then the boats would stop;  I've always thought that is complete nonsense. The debate about the size of our  intake should be about our capacity to resettle people properly in Australia, ensure  that they integrate into society well and it's actually a function of a budget  consideration.

Condren: The differentiation is that one method of coming to Australia is legitimate,  and the other is not.

Minister Morrison: We're never going to have enough places to ensure that people  then choose not to come illegitimately because of the number of places in your  programme. That is just a complete and utter myth. If we are going to have a larger  intake, then that should be a debate about the budgetary impacts of that and our  capacity to deliver services to those who we take under that programme. Now that's  a fair dinkum legitimate debate, and I'm happy to engage in that debate. At present  we believe the right setting is 13,750 and to clear the backlog of 30,000 people who  turned up illegally by boat under Labor, we will be providing temporary visas over  and above that allocation. Now what Labor was doing, they had increased it to  20,000 but they were still going to hand out within that 20,000, visas to people who  had come illegally by boat. So it was a slight of hand trick, there was no real change.

Condren: Can I ask you just from a general perspective, has there been any update  on the female Serco worker in Brisbane who became pregnant to an asylum seeker  at this stage?

Minister Morrison: Well we've got a report going on into that as we speak, and I'm  expecting more on that later in the week, but there's been some initial reporting back  to me and my department is dealing with that quite forcefully.

Condren: And what are those initial reportings?

Minister Morrison: When I have a further report then I'll be making further  statements on that.

Condren: The government is also looking at setting up a Department of Homeland  Security in Australia which would have the Federal - or is the government looking at  setting up a Department of Homeland Security in Australia which would have the  Federal Police as its lead agency?

Minister Morrison: Well I note the speculation about that, but look, those decisions  are matters for the Prime Minister, he's the one who sets the framework of what  departments are and what organisations go into which departments and they are  entirely matters for the Prime Minister. As the reports indicate, he has initiated a  review on those matters, and he's the one who will set that agenda. The Prime  Minister is ultimately the person who drives our national security agenda and I'm  sure Australians would agree he's been doing a very good job on that under very  difficult circumstances.

Condren: Do you think a Department of Homeland Security is a good idea?

Minister Morrison: Look, I'll do the job the Prime Minister asks me to do as will the  departments that report ultimately to him and he's the one who will make those calls.

Condren: You've answered my next question before I've even asked it! I was going  to ask if you were supportive of the Department of Homeland Security, would you  like to head it up, but you've already answered that.

Minister Morrison: Well these are matters for the Prime Minister, as they should be.

Condren: Have you made any representations to him on your own behalf that the  Department of Homeland Security would be a good fit with Scott Morrison?

Minister Morrison: What I think is important is that people know that our agencies -  whether they are the Federal Police, Customs and Border Protection, Immigration  and Border Protection - they are all firmly focused on the tasks they have before  them and I think what we've been able to achieve with Operation Sovereign Borders  over more than the past year, which people said couldn't be done, and I've got to  note, a lot of those people who turned up to that roundtable said turn backs wouldn't  work and have been very open critics of the government's policies, said it could  never happen, and were quite outspoken in their attacks on the government on this,  are now acknowledging that those policies actually work. Now that's what I'm

focused on, doing things that work. What I've done to date in this area has worked  and I'm focusing on ensuring that we continue to maintain the tension in the cord  when it comes to protecting our borders, because once you let that slip, I can tell you  there are customers waiting to get on boats out of Indonesia tomorrow if they believe  the government has gone soft on this, and the Abbott government will never go soft  on this.

Condren: Mr Morrison, thank you very much for your time this morning.

Minister Morrison: Thanks, Patrick.









