

THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW   SKY AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 18 MARCH 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Arthur Sinodinos; Nielsen poll; Asylum seekers.

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda, thanks for your company. With me now,  the Shadow Employment Minister Brendan O’Connor. Mr O’Connor thanks for  your time.

Kelvin Thomson has called on the Assistant Treasurer to stand aside in the face  of the opening of the Independent Commission Against Corruption. Do you agree  with him on that, or is it too early?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: I think it’s up to the Prime Minister as to what  Ministers might do when there are allegations. But it’s incumbent upon the  Assistant Treasurer, Senator Sinodinos, to cooperate with ICAC. I mean these  are serious allegations. The money we are talking about would run into the  millions.

GILBERT: There’s no claim of wrongdoing though, is there?

O’CONNOR: No, no, but the fact that there’s been issues that his role was to  open up the doors to the Liberal Party, and the fact that the Liberal Party has  returned a donation -

GILBERT: He’s not the first person that’s been engaged to lobby, is he?

O’CONNOR: The fact that the Liberal Party returned a donation, and the fact  that Sydney Water wasn’t even aware of the donation going to the Liberal Party.

The fact that of course he was party to the body that was looking to reap  millions I think it’s incumbent upon the Assistant Treasurer to cooperate with  ICAC.

Whether in fact he stays in his position should be up to the Prime Minister who  would know, I imagine, far more than I do on this matter. But yes, it’s a serious  issue and it need to be dealt with by the Government.

GILBERT: So you think Kelvin Thomson’s gone a bit far saying that, calling on  the Minister to stand aside?

O’CONNOR: The Labor Party will always defend the presumption of innocence.  We will not act in the manner in which this Government acted in Opposition  about making prejudicial claims about people where allegations have been made.  We won’t do that, and we won’t do that in this instance.

GILBERT: I want to look at the Nielsen poll in today which is on a couple of  different elements including on the Treasurer’s performance. The majority  thinking he’s doing a good job. This coming despite his warnings of cuts and  spending restraint needed in the budget. That’s an endorsement of that focus,  isn’t it?

O’CONNOR: Well, so far all we’ve heard is hollow words. We’re yet to see any  decisions made, and I think the test for the Government will be when they  release, firstly the Commission of Audit - the 900 pages that refer to the cuts to  the budget and what decisions they make in relation to the upcoming budget. I  think you might want to then consider the standing of the Prime Minister and the  Treasurer and the Government after that happens. And as we’ve made very clear  we are concerned that they won’t release that audit until after the 5th of April

Senate election in Western Australia, because I think most people would have  grave concerns.

In terms of the survey itself, Kieran, the Opposition didn’t need a survey to know  that most people in this country want the Government to create and enable the  circumstances in which jobs will grow. We have not had this Government deliver  on the jobs they said they would before the election.

GILBERT: It’s very early days though -

O’CONNOR: Six months in.

GILBERT: Six months in and 54 per cent of those surveyed in the Nielsen Poll,  as reported by Mark Kenny in the Herald this morning, they place returning to  surplus as a high priority, according to Mark’s report, and that is a very, very  significant number isn’t it?



O’CONNOR: Yeah, I think -

GILBERT: The Government’s on the right track isn’t it?

O’CONNOR: Well, we’d all -

GILBERT: Surely both things fit together?

O’CONNOR: Well of course, but you should have a return to surplus strategy.  Any government should have that. But what this again confirms is that jobs and  job security, and indeed job conditions and wages, matter to Australians.

We now have, of course, the Terms of Reference for Fair Work Australia that go  to all sorts of things which I think will concern the Australian people. We have  the Commission of Audit report which we’ve yet to see.

There are a number of things I think the Government should be providing to the  Australian people but of course, to date, we’ve not seen that. We would suggest  that’s because we have an upcoming election in Western Australia.

GILBERT: But also they haven’t got the final report yet, they’ve only got the  interim report.

O’CONNOR: The penultimate report - 900 pages not a bad sort of penultimate  or interim report. But the fact is the budget is not far away now, we need to see  something from this Government. They’ve been addicted to secrecy -

GILBERT: Labor wasn’t bad at sitting on reports. The Henry report you sat on  for months and then dropped it with no consultation - the mining tax.

O’CONNOR: There’s no doubt that they’ve refused - in fact they said, for  example, that they would be commencing the review into Fair Work Australia  within six months. Well, that was the seventh of March - 11 days ago.

Of course, it was only because it was leaked that we see the Terms of  Reference, which are very wide and go to minimum rates, go to bargaining,  spread of hours, and penalty rates. Now they would not have disclosed that if it  hadn’t been leaked.

As I say, you can pick a number of areas of public policy where this Government  is not telling the Australian people what’s going on.

GILBERT: One area they’ve been very clear about in terms of the net result,  maybe not the way they’ve gone about it, is Operation Sovereign Borders. Nearly

90 days without a successful people smuggling operation is the way the Minister  puts it. Labor not willing to say that it’s supporting turn backs as we heard with  Bill Shorten in a David Speers interview a week or so ago. Why doesn’t Labor say  - well, if it’s working, we’ll support it?



O’CONNOR: We’ll what we’ve always said is - no look, we of course want to  see the reduction of vessels coming in that manner. It’s dangerous. I said that as  a Minister. We wanted to see a decline. There has been a decline. That is  welcomed if it means fewer people dying at sea. Men, women and children -

GILBERT: So you do support the way they’ve gone about turnbacks?

O’CONNOR: Well, the point is we don’t know the circumstances in which this is  operating. We would not, of course - well, we would be concerned if there were  indeed any breaches to maritime or international law. And you know the  Government just has to explain to the Australian people what is going on.

If indeed there is nothing to hide here, then they should disclose these matters  so that when allegations of a serious nature are made, they can be repudiated  straightaway by the Minister or by the Government -

GILBERT: So if the turn backs are happening in that context though - which is  what the Government is adamant is the case - you would support that then?

O’CONNOR: But I mean there are a number of questions that rise from the  manner in which this happens. I mean, it comes down to does the end justify the  means? Well, in some circumstances it may. But we don’t know the detail.

We don’t know whether there are any potential breaches of law. And I think it’s  important, therefore, that the Government report to the parliament, account for  its actions and explain to us exactly what’s going on so that we can, I guess,  make a more informed judgement about these matters. I mean, we’ve had some  serious allegations -

GILBERT: But with 90 days, no boats. It sounds like to me as a former Minister  you are inclined to see Labor back this approach.

O’CONNOR: Kieran, I do welcome the decline in vessels and indeed the fall off  of these numbers because I was witness to maritime disasters. And they didn’t  just happen under our watch, they happened under the Howard Government as  well.

GILBERT: What about the claims made by the asylum seeker on the ABC last  night - a couple of asylum seekers. The vision. Does that change your view in  any way?



O’CONNOR: No, that is not sufficient for me to draw any conclusions. I mean,  you are going to have very overwrought people in this area. But again if these  allegations are being made, it’s important that the Australian people understand  the facts so that the allegations can be repudiated.



But to date, we have not heard and not been given sufficient information by the  Minister or the Government. And this can’t continue because our reputation as a  nation can be damaged if indeed we’re not open.

We’re an open democracy. You have to explain to the public via the media and  via the parliament what is actually happening. To date, that’s not occurred under  this Government.

GILBERT: Brendan O’Connor, appreciate your time this morning.

O’CONNOR: Thanks Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: GLEN ATWELL 0428 434 709

