Immigration Minister Scott Morrison

14/01/2014, Transcript

LEIGH SALES, PRESENTER: The Abbott Government is set to close four asylum seeker  detention centres on the Australian mainland as it directs its energies to offshore processing.

The last time the Immigration Minister Scott Morrison held a press conference was almost a  month ago. Since then there have been reports of multiple boat tow backs to Indonesia,  something the Australian Government is yet to confirm. There are also unsubstantiated  claims of a hunger strike at Christmas Island and detainees sewing their lips together. That  comes amidst an opinion poll last week showing that 60 per cent of Australians believe the  Government's border protection policies aren't harsh enough. With me now from Canberra is  the Immigration Minister, Scott Morrison. Minister, thanks for your time.

SCOTT MORRISON, MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION: Thanks Leigh, good to be with  you.

LEIGH SALES: Let's start with the closure of the four centres. Where will the asylum  seekers currently housed in those centres now be held?

SCOTT MORRISON: They will be transferred to other parts of the detention network on  mainland Australia.

LEIGH SALES: And how many people does it affect, and are any of those children?

SCOTT MORRISON: There's 285. There's a small number that involve family groups and  they will be put in appropriate family accommodation but it's always our preference with  families to locate them in community detention and there are limits on the number of places  available in community detention but that's my preference and it's my priority.

LEIGH SALES: Broadly speaking, the Government is dealing with what it's termed a 'budget  emergency'. Given that running these centres is so much cheaper than offshore processing,  why not process people here? You could still pursue your policy of permanently resettling  them elsewhere.

SCOTT MORRISON: It doesn't stop the boats Leigh, it's as simple as that. We've always said  that offshore processing is the way to handle those who have arrived illegally by boat and  that's what we're doing. We've had to do a lot of salvaging of what we inherited from the  previous Government with offshore processing. We've had to invest a lot more to make sure  that it is properly resourced and has a proper capacity to deal with the challenges that we  face. Offshore processing is the policy that we've long held the view of. It's what's been  successful in the past and it's proving to be successful again, together with other measures.

LEIGH SALES: On that point, can you give us the exact numbers of how many boats have  arrived in total since Operation Sovereign Borders started and how many people in total have  been resettled on Nauru or Manus Island?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, the numbers are roughly around 1,100 have turned up on just  over 20 boats and about the same number of people have been transferred to Nauru and  Manus Island.

LEIGH SALES: There are reports that Christmas Island currently contains around 2,000  people, that there are severe tensions there. Channel 10 reported tonight that there's a hunger  strike going on and that six people have sewn their lips together. Is that accurate?

SCOTT MORRISON: We don't comment on protest activity. We don't publicise it because  publicisation of that sort of behaviour, if it occurs, is exactly what the perpetrators want and  so it encourages that sort of behaviour so that's in the best interests of everybody - those who  are the allegedly taking those actions and those who are seeking to manage those centres - it's  in all of their best interests not to engage in that game.

LEIGH SALES: But isn't there also something that has to be balanced with that, which is the  public's right to know what goes on in these facilities?

SCOTT MORRISON: Appropriate care is being provided to everybody in all of our centres  to the professional standards that you would expect and that are necessary by professionals  themselves and wherever an individual is that's the sort of care that is being provided. That's  why detention can be a very expensive business.

LEIGH SALES: How many asylum seeker boats have been towed or turned back to  Indonesia during the past month? There have been reports sourced from Indonesia that it's  five.

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, Leigh, as you know, we don't comment one way or the other on  reports of things of that nature that go to maritime operations and there's a very good reason  for that and it's been set out not only by myself but people like the former chief of the  Defence Force Angus Houston, and Lieutenant General Campbell himself, who leads  Operation Sovereign Borders. It's not secrecy for secrecy's sake; it's secrecy with a purpose  and that's to protect the integrity of the operations we undertake, it's to protect those who are  involved and subject to those operations. To do otherwise puts both the operation and the  people at risk and that's my first responsibility and it's not something I intend to compromise  for the sake of satiating media interest.

LEIGH SALES: But how are you deciding what information is operational, because you were  happy a second ago to give me 1,100 people had turned up on 20 boats, but then in regards to  this you're not prepared to give information. So how are you determining what's operational  and what's not?



SCOTT MORRISON: Well, that matter is principally determined by those who run the  Operation Sovereign Borders joint agency task force, which is led by Lieutenant General  Campbell. That's where those decisions are made about what's operational and what can be  disclosed, and before the election I made that very clear. I said communication on these  things would be subject to a protocol established by the leader of that task force and that's  exactly what we've done. See Leigh, what we're doing in government is what we promised to  do in Government. We're acting in accordance with the commitments we made to the  Australian people and we're getting the results, so far, that they would hope we would have  achieved but there's still a long way to go. Arrivals, as you know, are well down. We  discussed that last time I was on the program but there's still a distance to travel.

LEIGH SALES: There's no way though for the Australian public to weigh up in their own  mind are the results worth the cost of what's going on, because they don't know what's  involved in delivering those results. They take your word on it that it's humane and that no  one's injured and so on, but they don't really have any way of knowing that information  themselves.

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, where suggestions were made in relation to one incident several  weeks ago, which was the subject of a report that we made ourselves about an interception  near Melville Island, there were some accusations made against Defence Force personnel  there which have been clearly and flatly rejected by the Chief of the Defence Force as well as  the head of the Customs and Border Protection, as well as myself. Now, where there are  incidents involving people at sea that has put their own lives in jeopardy or there's been  rescue operations of that nature, the General and I have made it clear on every occasion that  we would hold briefings to report on those incidents and we have done that on a number of  occasions and so I think it's safe for the Australian people to assume that where there are no  such briefings reporting incidents of that, they haven't occurred.

LEIGH SALES: Since you've been minister you've had a weekly briefing on these every  Friday; the last one was on December 20. Will that practice of the Friday press conference be  continuing this year?

SCOTT MORRISON: General Campbell and I will hold a briefing tomorrow here in  Canberra. What we said before the Christmas break, and we've been through the first 100  days of Operation Sovereign Borders and we held those weekly operational briefings and we  also released information on the number of arrivals. If you go back some months ago that was  the issue: would we be disclosing what the arrivals were? Now we've continued to do that  every week. We've released that arrival information: the number of people transferred to  facilities, how many people have been taken to the authority of immigration institutions here  in Australia, and we've done that on a weekly basis. Now we will continue to provide that  information on a weekly basis. We will continue to provide briefings -

LEIGH SALES: Sorry to interrupt: in a press conference situation where people have an

opportunity to ask you questions?

SCOTT MORRISON: We will issue a statement on the numbers of arrivals and the transfers  and we will hold operational briefings, like we will tomorrow, when we have something to  say and when we have something to report.

LEIGH SALES: OK, so they won't be weekly, they won't be locked in as a weekly thing?

SCOTT MORRISON: We will do them on an 'as needs' basis to detail operational matters  that are able to be released and we'll respond to questions there and as you know Leigh, I'm  here tonight, I've been here before. I'm available for interviews and I'll be, in the course of my  normal portfolio responsibilities, holding press conferences on other matters and I'm sure  journalists won't be backward in coming forward. They rarely are in my experience.

LEIGH SALES: Last week the Prime Minister drew a parallel between the secrecy  surrounding asylum seeker interceptions to wartime operations. That's an overstatement, isn't  it?

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, it goes to what are operational matters and the discretion needed  when dealing with those things and I could apply a similar scenario in relation to a civil  matter. You don't have the police running around when they're dealing with drug  investigations or other things like that providing a running commentary to the media every  week about the technical and tactical issues they're engaged in to track down criminals.

LEIGH SALES: But this was likened to a war; it's not a war, is it?

SCOTT MORRISON: We are tracking down criminals and we are dealing with threats to our  national sovereignty, of our borders, and we are engaged in quite specific and difficult  operations and to ensure the integrity and safety of those operations it's our duty to do that in  a discreet way and sensitive way which means we can keep doing them and they can keep  stopping the boats because that's the objective.

LEIGH SALES: You mentioned the progress you'd made in the numbers of boat arrivals that  are occurring. A poll published last week in 'The Age' newspaper shows that 60 per cent of  Australians think that Australia's policy on asylum seekers should be harsher. So that would  show even with the progress, most Australians don't think that it's enough progress.

SCOTT MORRISON: Well, whether it's tough enough or not tough enough is not the point.  Whether it's effective is the point. I'm interested in effective measures and our measures are  proving to be very, very effective and I want to maintain that and that's why as the Prime  Minister said last week, if that means we're going to be accused of secrecy and things like  that, I mean I think frankly some people have got to come down off the grassy knoll a bit on  this and the conspiracy theories are getting a bit crazy. I mean, last week I was accused of not  facing the media; I was on leave with my family on the south coast of New South Wales.

There's no conspiracy there. I took annual leave.

LEIGH SALES: Minister, thank you very much for your availability tonight.

SCOTT MORRISON: Thank you very much, Leigh.

