

THE HON MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR

IMMIGRATION

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   FAIRFAX MEDIA BREAKING POLITICS  THURSDAY, 5 JUNE 2014  CANBERRA

SUBJECT / S: Tony Abbott’s visit to Indonesia, Asylum Seekers, Code of  Conduct, G20, Senate Estimates

CHRIS HAMMER: You must be happy that the Australian Indonesian  relationship appears to be back on track?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND IMMIGRATION: Well Labor does want the  relationship with Indonesia back on track, we’ve recently warmly welcomed the  return of the Indonesian Ambassador to Australia and it’s been too long since  relations with one of our closest and most important neighbours have been on  track. Since that time we’ve had no dialogue on security and defence issues,  we’ve had no dialogue on one of the most important issues in our region in  asylum seekers. When relations broke down there was a commitment from both  governments to negotiate a code of conduct to restore the relationship and there  were reports in the Jakarta Post earlier this week that the ball was well and truly  in Australia’s court when it came to finalising this so it’s important that we get  that back on track.

HAMMER: Tony Abbott has said in a press conference in Batam that the issue  of asylum seekers and turning back the boats that that’s pretty much resolved

that issue. Is that a sensible thing to say or a diplomatic thing to say in the  presence of the Indonesian President?

THISTLETHWAITE: I don’t believe it is, I thought it was a little bit disrespectful  given that it’s an issue that he could’ve said at home before he left or after he’d  come back and it’s a sensitive issue for the Indonesian Government. That’s  principally one of the reasons why the relations broke down.

HAMMER: So your point is that he was putting SBY on the spot there?

THISTLETHWAITE: I thought he was a little bit disrespectful in making those  claims in Indonesia. It’s one of the principle sources of the tension between  Australia and Indonesia, that fact that we’ve been conducting these operations in  Indonesian waters without the consultation of the Indonesian government, there  was an invitation from SBY for Tony Abbott to come to Indonesia to meet with  him to re-establish the relationship a couple of weeks ago, that meeting was  postponed at Tony Abbott’s will because of a turn back operation so I thought  that that was a little bit disrespectful to mention it over there.

HAMMER: The other thorn in the relationship is of course the revelations that  Australia was spying on Indonesia and indeed trying to tap the phones of the  President and the President’s wife. Now this code of conduct that’s being  negotiated, the Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa says it’s pretty  simple agreement that they’re proposing and that’s that the two countries should  not phone tap each other, but is that possible, should Australia agree to such a  thing?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well Australia has a number of intelligence and security  gathering agreements with other nations. I haven’t personally heard the details  of this particular code of conduct but I envisage that it will be along a similar line  to some of the other international agreements that we have with other nations  regarding intelligence gathering and given that Indonesia is one of our closest,  most important neighbours, it’s very much the legacy of Paul Keating, that the  importance of the relationship and ensuring that we work together closely on  defence and security issues I think it’s appropriate.

HAMMER: So Labor thinks that Australia should agree that we won’t tap  Indonesian phones?

THISTLETHWAITE: Look I haven’t seen the details and that’s another point in  itself, the ball is well and truly in Australia’s court, the Prime Minister was asked  a question in Parliament the other day about finalising this agreement, he  dodged the question. I think it’s time that the Prime Minister did report to the  Australian people how those negotiations were going, when we can expect a

finalisation of those negotiations, but until we do that we can’t really comment  on what the details are.

HAMMER: The Prime Minister travels from Indonesia through to Europe for D-Day commemorations and then on to Canada and the US, he’ll be meeting  President Obama. Should Australia accept climate change as an issue on the  agenda of the G20 being hosted by Australia later this year?

THISTLETHWAITE: Of course we should, this is the biggest economic and  social challenge facing the world and we’ve got the largest international  economic forum occurring right here in Australia and we are saying to the rest of  the world you can’t raise this big economic challenge at this international forum,  that is ludicrous, it’s absolutely ridiculous for Australia to be taking this approach,  it’s a backward step and I think it sends very much the wrong message to our  region. Australia is seen by Europe, by the US as the leading economy in the  Asian region and what are we saying to the likes of China, to Vietnam, to  Singapore, to Taiwan, and to Japan that climate change doesn’t matter  anymore? It’s the wrong approach to be taking.

HAMMER: But the Prime Minister before leaving was saying that look the G20 is  for economic issues, climate change can be discussed in the UN, doesn’t he have  a point there that we want the focus of the G20 to be focused?

THISTLETHWAITE: This perfectly highlights Chris how this Government  doesn’t get it when it comes to climate change. Climate change is very much an  economic issue, the future development of economies will be around the  commercialisation of renewable energy, that’s where the economic opportunities  in terms of investment, in commercialisation of new technology and jobs growth,  research and development will be in the future and the economies that can make  that transition will be the strongest in the future and if Australia doesn’t take that  opportunity we start to move backwards, we’re going to miss out in terms of  economic growth.

HAMMER: Now just finally it’s been revealed in Senate Estimates that part of  the aid budget is going to be diverted to Cambodia to help with the resettlement  of refugees from Nauru and Manus Island. Labor did something similar with PNG  so you’d have no problem with this would you?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well the difference with Labor’s approach was that we  disclosed it. We were up front and we admitted that there had been that  occurrence with the budget but this Government have sought to hide it and  yesterday in Senate Estimates we saw that George Brandis the Attorney General  refused to answer the question, he took it on notice, and what we’ve seen since  then is no revelation about what’s actually occurring and this is part of this

Government’s approach to this whole issue of keeping everything from the  Australian public when it comes to asylum seekers and that’s not appropriate.

HAMMER: Matt Thistlethwaite thanks for your time this morning.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK MONCRIEFF-HILL 0408 687 497

