Minister or Immigration and Border Protection Scott Morrison

Richard Alston, Operation Sovereign Borders, conclusion of  professional conduct inquiries relating to inadvertent incursions  into Indonesian waters

Saturday, 28 June 2014

Doorstop Interview, Melbourne

Minister Morrison: Good morning everyone. It is great to be here in Melbourne in  the world's most liveable city representing the world's most liveable Shire, in Sydney  - the Sutherland Shire and it is great to be sharing that title with the city of  Melbourne. Can I also congratulate Richard Alston on his election as Federal  President of the Liberal Party. He has been a tremendous servant of this country, as  a Minister, as a Senator, as a High Commissioner and he has been a tremendous  servant of the Liberal Party. It is a great honour for him I am sure and it is a great  honour for the Liberal Party to have someone of his stature elected to that position  continuing a fine tradition of Federal Presidents.

Question: Minister is there a boat in trouble off Christmas Island?

Minister Morrison: It is our standard practice as you know under Operation  Sovereign Borders to report on any significant events regarding maritime operations  at sea particularly where there are safety of life at sea issues associated and I am  advised I have no such reports to provide.

Question: Is there a boat?

Minister Morrison: Well I have answered the question.

Question: But in terms, I guess the question is…

Minister Morrison: You are very well aware of what the Operation Sovereign  Borders practice is regarding commentary on maritime operations and I do not intend  to depart from the policies that we have been pursuing now since we have come to  government. I remind you that these policies have been extremely successful and I  am not about to depart from a successful approach.

Question: Is there the possibility that boats will be coming from India now as a new  frontier and is that something you have to work with like you have with Indonesia and  other governments in the area?

Minister Morrison: We are always ready to deal with any possible threat that  presents on our borders and that is what Operation Sovereign Borders does and it  does it very successfully. Our people are always at the ready.

Question: Just a week or so ago the government said that boats were no longer  leaving, is that still the case?

Minister Morrison: I said at that press conference that we are always ready for the  possibility of boats coming and we are and the same people who have been out  there for the last nine months are the same people out there today and they will be  out there tomorrow as well. That is the practice of Operation Sovereign Borders and  it has been very successful to date and I know it will continue to be successful into  the future.

Question: The Prime Minister said at that press conference when he was asked if  boats are leaving anymore he said yes that is the case. So are you saying boats are  not leaving?

Minister Morrison: I will say exactly what I said on that day in the context of the  Prime Minister's comment - we are always ready for boats that may arrive and we  always anticipate that they may seek to come and we are always ready. We are  ready today, we were ready yesterday and we will be ready tomorrow and the  government's policies will continue to prevail.

Question: So if a boat is there you are saying there is no risk to their life at the  moment?

Minister Morrison: What I said in response to your question is that it is the  Operation Sovereign Borders practice to report on any significant events at sea  particularly where it involves safety of life at sea. Now I have no such reports to  provide to you today.

Question: But there are public reports, there were media reports of a boat today so  is that something that you then…

Minister Morrison: Well you know Mark I don't comment on speculation in the  media, you can, others can. What I comment on is in relation to the policies of  Operation Sovereign Borders and my comments are always governed by those  polices as set out by the Joint Agency Task Force Commander.

Question: And there is no risk to safety as far as you are aware?

Minister Morrison: I think I have covered that off on at least three occasions now.

Question: Have you ever held talks with the Indian Government about what to do in  situations where a boat might come from India?

Minister Morrison: Well I am not going to speculate on hypotheticals…

Question: No it is a question about what you may have done in the past. Have you  ever envisioned the possibility of a boat coming from India?

Minister Morrison: It is Operation Sovereign Borders practice to engage with any  such countries we may need to engage with in relation to our operations.

Question: Have you done that with India?

Minister Morrison: I don't comment on the specifics of those things, I simply don't  do it.

Question: Mr Morrison is this boat being towed back to India?

Minister Morrison: I have covered that issue, my response to that issue has been  provided.

Question: So mister Morrison you are not even going to confirm there is a boat, you  are not going to say what is happening, if people are in the water? Their boat is  leaking, we are being told - leaking oil - and you are not going to say anything about  that situation?

Minister Morrison: What I have said is that it is our practice to report on significant  events at sea, particularly where they involve safety of life at sea. Now there is no  such report for me to provide to you today. If there was a significant event happening  then I would be reporting on it.

Question: So what does that mean?

Minister Morrison: You are a bright journalist I am sure you can work it out.

Question: No we are asking you sir, you are the Minister.

Minister Morrison: And I have given you my response.

Question: Yeah why are you having a press conference if you are not here to  reveal…

Minister Morrison: I am on my way in to the Federal Council and I was happy to  provide a doorstop because I understood journalists had questions today.

Question: So could you clarify sir for us at what point does an event become a  significant event involving a boat on the water?

Minister Morrison: When you see me here standing and reporting on it.

Question: And you are standing here reporting.

Minister Morrison: I am not. I am saying there is no such report for me to provide to  you today. There is therefore no significant event for me to report at sea.

Question: Are you saying that it could be a hoax that people are saying they are in  trouble?

Minister Morrison: I am not saying anything of that at all. I am not confirming any of  these matters. This should come as no surprise to you. This has been our practice  now for the entire period of this operation. This is another day at the office for  Operation Sovereign Borders. It is the same as yesterday, it is the same as  tomorrow. We deal with threats as they present and we are always mindful of the  issues of safety of life at sea. I remind you that since we engaged particularly with

turn back operations there has not been the loss of a single loss of life at sea since  these operations were put in place and we have not had a single successful venture  to Australia. These policies are working and they will keep working.

Question: Hypothetically if there is a boat what will happen to the people? Will they  be sent back to India or will they be going to Manus or Nauru?

Minister Morrison: I don't respond to hypotheticals.

Question: [inaudible]

Minister Morrison: You can seek to read into this all you like. I think I have made  the position very, very clear. People will speculate, people will make reports. That  has happened before in this area but the government's position is always very clear.  If there are significant events that occur at sea then we provide briefings and reports  on those. That is not taking place today so I think it is fairly obvious the conclusion  you can draw from that in terms of any safety of life at sea issues.

Question: What is the threshold for you in determining that it is a significant event  that you would comment on?

Minister Morrison: That is something defined by each and every separate incident.

Question: [inaudible]

Minister Morrison: Well it is a case by case basis depending on the incident itself.  But today there is no such incident to report.

Question: Isn't it significant that just a week or so after you were saying now boats  aren't leaving, you haven't had a boat in six months successfully arrive, that we are  getting now reports that a boat has come very close to arriving, is in distress. Isn't  that a significant shift in what you have been reporting over the past few months?

Minister Morrison: No.

Question: It seems to be, there is a boat arriving and…

Minister Morrison: Well a boat hasn't arrived, let's be clear about that and  secondly…

Question: Can we just decode this, are you saying there is no evidence of there  being a boat...

Minister Morrison: I am simply following the same practice Mark that I have  followed for the last nine months since being in this job. Now I don't know why  anyone would think the government would be departing from our policies and  practices in this area. That should come as no surprise to you. The government is  doing what we said we would do. The policies are being employed as we said they  would be employed and the results we are getting are the results that we said we  would get. Now there are many, I suspect even some with me here today who  thought that that would not be possible, that it could not be done. But it has been

done to date and it will continue to be done to date and going forward and we will  continue to apply the policies as we have. That is the government's position. The  people smugglers know it, the Australian people know it and that is why they trust us  to protect the borders.

Question: Minister you just said a boat hasn't arrived, that means Australian waters  does it?

Minister Morrison: I said what I said. So you can take it as I said it.

Question: Well could you just clarify what you meant by that comment?

Minister Morrison: No you can read back the transcript. It is fairly clear.

Question: I can remember what you said.

Minister Morrison: Well there you go you don't need that clarified any further. We  are not going to get into semantic games going round and round and round. This is  just another day at the office for Operation Sovereign Borders. If people seek to  come the policies are very clear. I have always said we stand at the ready for any  attempt that may be made and we are ready and our people do what they do every  single day. I know that there are some, particularly advocates and I am sure the  Greens and the Labor party, who will be getting themselves all worked up into a  lather but the professionals will be at work today, the will be doing the job at sea  today as they did yesterday and as they will do tomorrow. That is why our borders  are secure. That's why we are getting the results particularly in terms of protecting  the safety of life of people. These are the results we are achieving with our policies  and we will continue to achieve them.

Question: Minister there was an update form the government yesterday that a crew  member in fact on one of the vessels had actually raised concern that maybe the  mapping of where Indonesia's border was wasn't accurate at the time but it was not  passed up the chain. Are you concerned that it took until now for this to be  discovered?

Minister Morrison: This is a process that has been followed now for some month  and this is the outworking of that process which we commenced at the time when we  announced the incursions had taken place. That was a significant event and you will  know that I reported on that when it was brought to my attention. This is the  outworking of those processes. Both the Customs and Border Protection Service and  Australian Defence Force have very clear procedures to follow in relation to these  disciplinary matters and that is what they are doing. Thanks for your time.





