

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY  THURSDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Police Raids; Iraq; Asylum Seekers.

FRAN KELLY, PRESENTER: The Shadow Foreign Minister and Labor Deputy Leader,  Tanya Plibersek, is our guest. Tanya Plibersek, welcome back to Breakfast.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER: Thanks, Fran.

KELLY: First of all, have you been briefed on these police raids that are under way in  Sydney and Brisbane?

PLIBERSEK: No, Fran. I can’t add any information other than what’s publicly available  at the moment which is that they’re very large scale raids.

KELLY: Is it fair to conclude that these raids are linked to the fact that we’ve increased  the terror alert level in this country to high?

PLIBERSEK: I don’t want to speculate, I mean I think it’s- there have been a number of  arrests in Queensland recently and of course yesterday a money transfer business  came to the attention of the authorities. But I can’t speculate whether this is related.

KELLY: Let’s get to the military matters then. Labor supports Australia’s military  contribution in Iraq. It’s been lockstep with the Government pretty much so far but I  understand you’re now starting to refine this position. What conditions is Labor placing  on ongoing support for this military commitment?



PLIBERSEK: We’ve always supported a humanitarian response to the genocidal  campaign of IS in northern Iraq. So we’ve said that as part of that humanitarian  response of course our military personnel and equipment, when we’re for example  rearming the Peshmerga or preventing imminent threats to civilians on the ground,  that’s fair enough. I guess we’re also wanting to explain that this is not an open ended  commitment, or a blank cheque I guess.  We’ve said that we should be there only as  long as it takes the Iraqi Government to regain control of its own security and to be able  to protect its own people. We’ve said that our support of course is conditional on the  Iraqi government continuing to be a democratic and inclusive government that rejects  sectarianism. And we’ve said that if our involvement lasts any more than a few weeks  then we should have the Prime Minister update the Parliament and through the  Parliament, the Australian people, at least quarterly.

KELLY: Let’s take some of those, for a start, let’s take that last one. The demand that  the Prime Minister update the Parliament quarterly if it lasts more than a few weeks. It  will obviously take more than a few weeks to degrade and destroy ISIS, which is the  broad parameters of this mission, isn’t it?

PLIBERSEK: And that’s why I think it’s important that the Prime Minister in this return to  Parliament in the next two weeks makes very clear what specific role Australia has in  this operation, how will we measure our success, and when we’re measuring our  success, how will we say our work is concluded now - when we have achieved this  objective, our work is concluded?  I think it’s very important that the Australian people  see an end to this, see what Australia’s role specifically is and see when our role will be  ended, and when will we consider that our objectives are effectively met.

KELLY: It sounds like you’re starting to get concerned about mission creep, which is  what the Greens leader was concerned about all the time, which is what your colleague  Melissa Parke is warning against. Sounds like a little late in this, Labor’s position is ‘let’s  guard against mission creep’.

PLIBERSEK: No, we’ve always said we’ve supported a humanitarian mission in  northern Iraq to protect civilians from IS, an organisation which doesn’t hesitate to kill  people who are of a different race or a different religion or the same religion but don’t  agree with their tactics. That’s always been our objective here. When we hear  discussions about broader objectives and that includes going into Syria next door to  chase ISIS back into Syria, or chase IS back into Syria, then of course we say that the  Government have to be very clear with the Australian people whether that is what  they’re intending. They’ve said that this is a humanitarian mission, that Australians are  there largely in an advisory capacity, that we will use our military equipment to prevent  this genocidal campaign. We certainly didn’t hear the Government from the beginning  saying that we’re going to enter into a land war with IS and we would be concerned if  that is something that might happen in the future.

KELLY: But it is confusing, and there are mixed messages and I would suggest even  mixed messages from Labor along the way. Because yes, the humanitarian campaign  true, but alongside that the ultimate goal was, to keep using this phrase, degrade and  deface ISIS. Now, that’s not a humanitarian campaign in itself-

PLIBERSEK: It is if ISIS are surrounding communities and waiting to descend on those  communities to kill everybody in them.

KELLY: It is in certain circumstances as it was the case in Erbil and on the Mount, but  it’s not the case ultimately if the aim is to destroy them. And every analyst that you  would speak to, I’d suggest, and you would’ve spoken to a lot more than I have, would  have told you that you cannot degrade and destroy ISIS without being prepared to hunt  them over the border in Syria.

PLIBERSEK: And the reason that we don’t believe that Australia should engage  militarily in Syria is because it is, first of all, not clear who we would engage with, which  forces on the ground on Syria we could fight in support of. This has been described as a  four-way civil war. It is a fiendishly complex conflict in Syria. It’s not clear that there is  international agreement on a military strategy or indeed international authorisation. In  Iraq, you have a democratically elected government that has asked for the help of the  world community to fight off a terrorist threat on its soil. You don’t have that same  authority in Syria. And I-

KELLY: But you will not win the war against ISIS in Iraq.

PLIBERSEK: Fran, I guess what I’m saying is that we haven’t assumed that the  Australian role is to go to Iraq and Syria and win the war against IS. We have been  asked to support a humanitarian mission in northern Iraq and we do support preventing  people from being slaughtered. Syria is a very different and more complex situation and  what we say should happen in Syria is a substantial increase in Australia’s humanitarian  assistance. We have given in this last year - the United Nations have asked for $6  billon for reconstruction and rebuilding humanitarian assistance in Syria, we have given  $31 million under this government. We gave $100 million before when Labor was in  government, we’ve give about $31 million now. That is not our fair share and we could  take more refugees as well. This government cut the humanitarian intake from 20 000 to  13 750. They’ve now said 4400 people would come from Syria and Iraq that’s barely  more than we were taking in the past. At the very least that 4400 should be in addition  to the 13 750 we now take as part of our standard intake it shouldn’t be as part of 13  750 because that’s not much more than we were taking from the region anyway.

KELLY: Our guest is the Shadow Foreign Minister Tanya Plibersek. I want to move on  because there is more to go through in terms of Labor’s lines but just on Syria if I could  be clear Labor is not supporting and will not necessarily support Australian troops or  airstrikes inside Syria even if that’s what this Government decides in coalition with  others.

PLIBERSEK: Well we are not supporting that at this time because there is no clear  description of what Australia could do that would improve the humanitarian situation on  the ground in Syria. There’s no international agreement on military action, there’s no  international authority for such a thing. It is very unclear which forces in Syria you could  support on the ground. In Iraq we’ve got a democratically elected government that’s  asked for our help. If the Assad Government asks for help, is that really a regime that  we want to be helping?

KELLY: There’s no clear description all round as you’ve basically been implying. David  Kilcullen and others are warning today that the SAS doesn’t mean - don’t think they’ll be  standing at a white board in a battalion HQ away from the frontline. In fact they are  going to war he says and if the SAS are directing airstrikes what we know is that often  means they’ll need to be behind enemy lines. In the briefings you’ve had is that what  you’re being told the SAS will be doing? Because it seems to be very unclear at what  level of involvement in combat our SAS forces will be.

PLIBERSEK: Well I can tell you what is on the public record and that is that they are  there as advisors but the Prime Minister has said yesterday if they’re shot at they can  shoot back and defend themselves. I haven’t had a detailed briefing on the likely role.  I’ve got the same information you have Fran that they are there as advisors.

KELLY: And just back to one of the other red lines that Labor’s putting around this when  it comes to the Iraqi Government engaging actions which are unacceptable. Do you  mean on the battlefield or in terms of their democracy?

PLIBERSEK: Well it depends - either of those potentially. We’ve had a government that  has in recent times been quite sectarian and we’ve now got new leadership with Nouri  al-Maliki being replaced with Haider al-Abadi. We hope that that means that the hyper  sectarianism is behind the government. That is a consideration for us and also there  have been reports that Shiite militia have been unrestricted in their attacks on Sunni  communities. So we would need to be confident that the Iraqi Government continues to  engage militarily in a way that we can support.

KELLY: And just before I leave the discussion on Iraq, warnings too from David  Kilcullen that anyone betting on a low casualty rate is extraordinarily optimistic. What  are the defence specialists telling you, the military specialists telling you to expect  casualties?

PLIBERSEK: Well I don’t have any briefing on that Fran but I can tell you that there are  thousands of people in northern Iraq who have lost their lives to IS already, many, many  thousands and the United Nations Human Rights Committee has sent an investigative  team in because they want to know who to prosecute for these war crimes when they’re  over - these war crimes against humanity when they’re over.

KELLY: So Australian casualties, Australian military casualties may be just part of what  is going on over there is what you are saying?

PLIBERSEK: We also know there are about 1.8 million people displaced in northern  Iraq. Look I don’t take this decision to support Australian deployment to northern Iraq  lightly. It is a very difficult decision to make, thousands of people have lost their lives  and if IS is not stopped many thousands more will lose their lives. One of the greatest  recruitment tools IS have is their seeming success in sweeping all before them. Our  advisors tell us that that seeming success has been a very strong recruitment tool for  them so actually stopping them in northern Iraq it saves lives immediately but it also  prevents more people being drawn to the cause.

KELLY: And Tanya Plibersek if I can just ask you briefly on another couple of issues,  you mentioned the humanitarian intake there the government has now let it be known  that it has turned back 12 boats in its time in government. Presumably that allows more  room in the refugee program, do you welcome the fact the government has success in  stopping the boats as we now know?

PLIBERSEK: Well I’m surprised that something that was an on-water matter just a few  weeks ago is now on the front page of a newspaper and the other thing I’d say is one of  the most important features in reducing the number of people making the dangerous  journey to Australia by boat is offshore processing. Why Scott Morrison and the Liberals  couldn’t agree to that with Malaysia where people would have had work rights, their  children could have gone to school, they would have had access to a good medical  system, is beyond me. I think the question today for Scott Morrison is why he never  supported Malaysia.

KELLY: Tanya Plibersek thanks very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thanks Fran.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

