

MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  The Hon Andrew Robb AO MP   8 July 2014  SKY NEWS AGENDA

INTERVIEW WITH KIERAN GILBERT

Subjects: Japan Australia Economic Partnership Agreement   KIERAN GILBERT:   This was concluded during the Prime Minister’s visit to Tokyo but not all the detail released  yet. The Opposition says it wants to see the details first.  ANDREW ROBB:   Well, it will be put on the table, I think on the 15th July, for all to see. This is consistent with  past practice whether you’re talking about Labor Governments or Coalition Governments,  this is what we’ve always done. The Parliament then goes to the Treaties Committee where  it debates and makes its determination - the parliament has its opportunity. There is nothing  different to what’s happened before under Labor so I’m not sure really what their point is.  KIERAN GILBERT:   In terms of a free trade deal a number of farm groups wanted you to go further, they’re not  happy with it, is that inevitable with any sort of deal done between two countries?  ANDREW ROBB:   Well, look, this is by far the most ambitious trade deal Japan has ever done. On top of that  we have struck a deal ahead of all of our competitors. Now that hasn’t happened too often in  the past I’ve got to say. So, we have a big advantage on two counts.  If we waited to get the 100 per cent deal we would be waiting many more years. We’ve got  an outstanding deal on a whole range of agricultural products. Some others, we could have  done better but we’ve got the TPP coming up and we expect to do better in other areas, but  on balance, this is, as I said, by far the best agreement Japan has ever struck with any  country, and it’s going to add literally ten and tens of billions to Australian in revenue and  thousands of jobs in the years ahead.  KIERAN GILBERT:   You mention the TPP, the Trans Pacific Partnership, that includes 11 countries including the  United States. So under that arrangement, if that is struck, and Japan agrees to greater  concessions in agriculture will they automatically kick in for us too?  ANDREW ROBB:   Yes, well, it’s not automatic. The clauses are not there for automatic but we have been  negotiating with them in good faith, all of these things build trust and my sense of the  negotiations we’ve been having with Japan in the context of the Trans Pacific Partnership  mean that we will get the greater benefits that might accrue to others.  KIERAN GILBERT:   On the investment side of this, how significant is that, because of course Japanese  investment has been a big part of the Australian economy for a number of decades, but does  this open up, even more, with this FTA that is going to be signed today?  ANDREW ROBB:

All of these things, it just gives us a broader relationship for the Japanese into Australia and  for Australia into Japan. Services open up, the opportunity for Australian companies to set up  under Japanese law, all of these issues free up the relationship which will mean more  investment because more trade inevitably brings more investment - history tells us that. And  with the increase in thresholds from $248 million to over a billion before deals have to go to  the Foreign Investment Review Board that will be a further stimulus to investment between  the two countries.  KIERAN GILBERT:   There is also going to be a defence technology transfer agreement, what is the significance  of that? How much are we talking in terms of dollars in that space?   ANDREW ROBB:   That is not an agreement that I have been dealing with, I would rather wait and see the final  discussions between the two Prime Ministers today, but clearly it will advance our trade  between the two countries again. The whole thing is too, all of these things, the more  agreements you strike, the more trust you build, the more linkages you develop. This trust  issue is very important and all these business people coming with Prime Minister Abe, they  are people who are making the decisions about future investment. Japan is growing again  and this deal has comes at a very sweet time in that regard, because it will help us secure  the significant part of that growth out of Japan.   KIERAN GILBERT:   You talk about trust and I guess that is a fair assessment between Australia and Japan, but  inevitably when you’re talking about enhanced cooperation and particularly defence  cooperation with Tokyo, Beijing is going to have concerns. Are you worried about the  implications there, particularly when you are in the final stages of trying to secure a free trade  agreement with China?   ANDREW ROBB:   No, I’m not. Look, the fact is that Australia is now so economically tied to all three countries  in the region - South Korea, Japan and China - that it’s in our interests; it dictates that we  have to have strong security relationships with all three. And in fact if you look at it, that’s  what’s been occurring, we have been enhancing our security relationships and involvement  with all three countries.   KIERAN GILBERT:   Have you heard what Hillary Clinton had to say on this recently? In relation to our economic  ties with China, that we might have to back away from China as part of our relationship with  the United States. Do you give that any credence?   ANDREW ROBB:   I disagree. I mean I disagree with that. It’s in our interests to have peace in the region. And  we’re so tied to all three countries - 51 per cent of all our exports now go to either Korea,  Japan or China. We have to have strong relationships with all three. And the best way to get  peace in the region is to have strong security arrangements with all three countries.   KIERAN GILBERT:   Finally, on another issue, it is out of your portfolio, but I just want to get your thoughts on this  as a Cabinet Minister. The High Court injunction on the transfer of asylum seekers - that has  very big implications, doesn’t it, for the Government’s border protection policy?  ANDREW ROBB:   Well, it is before the courts. So let’s see. Look, the bottom line is that, one - we’ve done what  we said we’d do - that is stop the boats; and two - that we can assure every Australian that  everything we’re doing is consistent with international law; and is safe.   And we have stopped people drowning at sea and bear in mind that over the last six years,  under Labor’s policies over a thousand people died at sea. And that was a humanitarian  disgrace and disaster and we have stopped that. We stopped the boats as we said we  would.   KIERAN GILBERT:

Minister, thank you for your time.  ANDREW ROBB:   My pleasure.  ENDS



