

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION   FEDERAL MEMBER FOR FRASER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   WEDNESDAY, 4 JUNE 2014  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

SUBJECT / S: Scott Morrison’s PEFO revelation; ACT Government  budget hit by Federal cuts; ASIC’s corporate surveillance work and the  ATO’s capacity undermined by budget cuts; Indonesia.

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER, ANDREW LEIGH: Good morning  everyone. I'm Andrew Leigh, the Shadow Assistant Treasurer. Yesterday in  Question Time we saw a rare outbreak of truth telling from Scott Morrison, who  made clear what everyone has known since Peter Costello put in place the  Charter of Budget Honesty. The Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Outlook is the  state of the books when a government takes over. It's yardstick against which all  decisions have to be measured. Measured against that it's very clear that this  Budget has increased the deficit; increased it this year, next year and over the  forward estimates. And it's done so because the government has lost tens of  billions of dollars of revenue by aiming to scrap the carbon price and increased  spending by tens of billions of dollars on a parental leave scheme.

Here in the ACT, we've seen the ACT Treasurer bring down a budget yesterday  which is worse off to the tune of $375 million as a result of cuts by the Abbott  Government. Canberra, as a city, has been as hard hit as any other part of  Australia. Tony Abbott broke his pledge to cut no more than 12,000 public  servants. Now 16,500 public service jobs are gone and $375 million ripped out of  schools and hospitals here in the ACT.

Finally, I wanted to make a point about the impact of some of the Abbott  Government cuts on the enforcement of our tax and corporate laws. We've had  Greg Medcraft make clear that ripping millions of dollars out of ASIC is going to  make it harder to catch wrongdoers, more reliant on tip offs and less able to do  investigation. At the tax office, the loss of 3,000 officers is going to mean that  the ATO is unable to crack down on tax cheats. It stands to reason that you take  police officers off the beat, you can expect more crime. Frankly, there hasn't  been a better time to be a corporate fraudster or tax dodger than under the  Abbott Government. I'm happy to take questions.

REPORTER: In regards to Scott Morrison's questions there with PEFO, we've  got Joe Hockey saying there was still a dire situation with that debt level. Isn't it  a sign that Labor could not get rid of the debt in the long term?

LEIGH: Internationally, Australia's debt share of GDP is very low. But if you're  concerned about deficits, then you'd be especially concerned about a budget  that's increased the deficit. The deficit now compared to the Pre-election  Economic and Fiscal Outlook, Scott Morrison's yardstick, is larger in 2013-14,  larger in 2014-15 and larger over the next four years. This is a Government that  has increased the deficit. Essentially that's because they have redistributed  resources from the least well off to the most well off.

REPORTER: If the Budget is so bad, why won't Labor join with Andrew Wilkie…  [inaudible]?

LEIGH: I just talked about the impact on the ACT and I’m certainly not going to  be voting to have the pay of public servants cut off. Labor will fighting hard  against the measures of this government that hit vulnerable Australians. The  broken promises and the cuts to health, education and pensions. But we are not  going to prevent public servants getting paid, they are not going to be pawns in  a political game.

REPORTER: The Lowy Institute said today that a survey shows 71 per cent of  Australians support the turning back of asylum seeker boats. Does that indicate  Tony Abbott… [inaudible]?

LEIGH: We've seen very clearly the drop off of asylum seeker arrivals was due  to the refugee resettlement plan; an approach which was harsh to those asylum  seekers who were taken to Manus and Nauru, but resulted in a 90% drop in  asylum seeker arrivals before the election.

REPORTER: But the concept of the turn back policy itself, Australians don't  mind the idea?

LEIGH: It's very clear that the tow-back policy is a thorn in the side of our  relations with Indonesia. This is a vital relationship for Australia but one which  the Abbot government has been trashing for the cause of political expedience.  This relationship with Indonesia is in a parlous state and striking appropriate  agreements while Mr Abbott is in Jakarta is critical.

REPORTER: Has he shown restraint in not making known concern about…  [inaudible]?

LEIGH: I wish Mr Abbott would not only show restraint but build international  relationships with our most important neighbours. The policies Mr Abbott has  pursued were known before the election to be offensive to Indonesia, and his  government has continued to pursue them, knowing full well the damage they  were doing to one of our most important diplomatic relationships.

Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TONI HASSAN 0426 207 726



