

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY







E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW   INSIDERS, ABC   SUNDAY, 27 JULY 2014

Subject/s: MH17; Middle East, Asylum Seekers, Paid Parental Leave,  Greg Combet, Joe Hockey.

FRAN KELLY, PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, welcome to Insiders.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER: Thank you, Fran.

KELLY: Tanya Plibersek, we've heard this morning from Angus Houston that  this will be a police and civilian operation on the site in Ukraine, not a military  one. It's unlikely, he suggests, that armed Australian soldiers certainly will  accompany the police force to keep them safe. There seems to be some  confusion around this. Have you had a briefing from the Government - can  you clarify it for us. What do you know?

PLIBERSEK: We did have some briefings earlier in the week. Unfortunately  we asked for a briefing on this latest development recently and we weren't  able to get that. I guess what I would say is that Angus Houston is a highly  experienced, very trusted commander, and in a situation like this, I would  accept Angus Houston's advice about whether a police and civilian team is the  best way to go. He is on the ground there. He is absolutely the right person  to make that decision.

KELLY: Have you been able to speak to the ADF about any concerns,  because initially when this was announced by the PM, the first question was,  "Is it safe to send unarmed police into a war zone?"

PLIBERSEK: Earlier in the week I had the opportunity of speaking with the  ADF and at that stage 50 officers had been pre-deployed to London. The ADF  at that stage said that they believed that they had the resources, the training,  the expertise to be involved in a recovery mission, and were comfortable at  that time, that they would - if they were allowed onto the site, that they  would be able to do the job.

KELLY: Are you happy with the level of information you are getting from the  Government on this? You mentioned you had been denied a briefing?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think - we have had a number of briefings along the  way. We haven't had all of our requests for briefings granted, but really at  this stage I'm much more interested in supporting the Government's efforts. I  don't think anybody really wants to be listening to me complaining about  whether I get briefed or not. I think the most important thing is to take the  advice of Angus Houston who is there on the site and make sure that we  support his efforts there, whether it's with police, a civilian team, whether  they need some ADF support for logistics and protection, he is the best  person to make that decision.

KELLY: Tony Abbott has received accolades in foreign media and respect  from foreign leaders for the leadership he has shown on this issue,  particularly in terms of a tough response to Russia and pushing for a UN  resolution. Do you join in that praise of the PM and how he has managed  this?

PLIBERSEK: I think it was very important that Australia put the resolution at  the United Nations Security Council and I certainly think that Australian  leadership, given the number of Australian lives lost, was critical to convincing  Russia to use its influence with the Russian-backed separatists in the area. I  think it shows how important it is that international organisations like the  Security Council have our support and work. It's times like this when those  organisations really come into their own. We have gone out of our way, as a  Labor Opposition, to be supportive of the Government's efforts. We think that  this is a time for national unity. The families of the victims of MH17 want to  know that both the Government, the Opposition and all Australians are 100%  committed to bringing their loved ones home.

KELLY: Tanya Plibersek, can I ask you now as Shadow Foreign Minister  you're also focused on events going on in Gaza of course. On Friday, an  Israeli bomb struck a UN school site. There were deaths reinforcing  comments from UN chief Valerie Amos when she said it was almost  impossible now for Palestinians to shelter from Israeli air strikes in the  densely populated Gaza Strip. In your view, is Israel's response to this, to  missiles going over their border been proportionate?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think with over a thousand deaths and pictures every  day of bodies being carried from rubble, including many, many children, I

think the international community is very concerned with the level of civilian  deaths and particularly the level of children who have been caught up in this  conflict. It is critical that the 12-hour pause in fighting be extended  immediately to a ceasefire and that parties return to the negotiating table to  negotiate a durable peace. We cannot have a situation where every few  months or every few years the rockets start firing from Hamas and Israel  retaliates in this way, causing many, many civilian deaths. It is an  unacceptable situation.

KELLY: The Australian Government supports the need for a two-state  solution. It also supports Israel's right to defend itself and that's Labor's  position too, long-held. This weekend at the NSW ALP Conference, a motion  put up by Bob Carr was passed, which seems to go a little further, suggesting  Labor recognises a Palestinian state if there is no official progress on a two-state solution. That's a distinct tilt, isn't it, towards Australia recognising a  Palestinian state. What would that mean in practice, and is this a change in  Labor's position?

PLIBERSEK: Well, not really. Labor for many decades has supported a two-state solution. That means an Israeli state behind internationally recognised  secure borders, and a Palestinian state which is economically viable, which  has responsibility for its own security. You can't have a two-state solution  without a Palestinian state. The only change that's occurred in recent months  has been a change in the Government's position. Until recently there was  bipartisan agreement that the building of settlements was not in line with  international law and that East Jerusalem - bipartisan agreement that East  Jerusalem is occupied territory. It has seemed, from Julie Bishop's comments  and George Brandis' comments that they have retreated from that position.

KELLY: On another issue, can I ask you about the asylum seekers, the 157  people who have been aboard an Australia Customs vessels now for a month.  Reportedly they will arrive in the Curtin Detention Centre on Australian soil as  early as today. Indian officials, in an agreement struck with the Government,  will then travel to the detention centre to interview these people. Is that  appropriate, in your view, in Labor's view, officials from another country, a  country from where some of these people are fleeing, be invited onto  Australian soil to interview them in this way?

PLIBERSEK: I think the whole handling of this has not been appropriate,  these people floating around on the ocean for three weeks, they could have  been processed on Christmas Island weeks ago and the only thing that  stopped that was Scott Morrison's ego. I can't tell you how these people will  be processed, the Government has not made that clear. We don't have the  details and it is exactly the sort of thing you should ask Scott Morrison if you  can get him to turn up to a press conference and get him to answer some  questions.

KELLY: In your view, is it the job for the Australian Government to talk these  people or the Indian Government?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think if people are on Australian soil, they should be  dealt with by Australian authorities and it should have happened weeks ago.

KELLY: A couple of other domestic matters arising this week, the Productivity  Commission released a draft report into the childcare system. It noted that  funds for Tony Abbott's paid parental leave scheme would be better spent,  perhaps some of them, not all of them, on improved childcare options. You've  been a consistent critic of Tony Abbott's paid parental scheme, you've dubbed  it a Rolls-Royce scheme. But if his is a Rolls-Royce scheme, is the current  Labor scheme more like a Datsun 180B. It’s 18 weeks minimum wage, no  superannuation. It’s out motored, lacks a bit of grunt. Why shouldn’t women  who take time out of the workforce to have a baby get superannuation,  doesn't it need to be upgraded?

PLIBERSEK: That's something that could be considered in the future.

KELLY: Would you support that?

PLIBERSEK: Well it's something you can consider in the future. Tony  Abbott's scheme pays the greatest benefit to people who already earn the  most money. It makes no sense to use taxpayers' dollars to give the biggest  benefit to people who already have the most - that's been my criticism.  Something else to be said about it, at a time when pensioners have been told  the pension is too high, they should wait longer and get less, and when  unemployed people have been told they should live on nothing for six months  of the year, when funding has been cut from education, from health, despite  promises before the election that that wouldn't happen, to introduce a  scheme worth $5 billion a year or more makes absolutely no sense. If we are  in austerity times and pensioners and students and unemployed young people  and families on low incomes all lose money, how can it be that someone on a  million dollars a year would get $50,000 from the taxpayer?

KELLY: On another issue, there has been a fair bit of attention on the  biography of Joe Hockey, but there is a Labor autobiography coming out this  week, Greg Combet, he is revealing in his memoirs that Julia Gillard  suggested, in the dying days of her Prime Ministership, that she could step  down and Greg Combet could put his hand up in a caucus ballot. You are a  strong supporter of Julia Gillard. Did you know about that?

PLIBERSEK: That was obviously a conversation between the two of them,  but what I would say is that Greg is a fine Australian and many people  thought for many years that he could be a future Labor Prime Minister, and I  guess the other thing I would say is what a contrast - here is Greg Combet's  book which is about his battle for asbestos victims, his time as a minister  fighting for policies that would put a cap on pollution and a price on carbon,

and here is Joe Hockey, the longest job application in history, and by the  sounds of the book, a very petulant one.

KELLY: But here’s Greg Combet, you could say, back then at the time really  at the height of Labor's leadership tensions and the Prime Minister at the time  suggesting perhaps another leadership change to somebody that the voters  haven't even thought about. It is completely untenable, wouldn't it have  been?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think from listening to Greg's interview earlier in the  week, that was his conclusion too.

KELLY: What would you have concluded if that had have been put up?

PLIBERSEK: I'm not going to look back at history. What I would say is that  Greg Combet is a great loss to the Parliament. He is a great Australian.

KELLY: Tanya Plibersek, thanks very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:          Dan Doran 0427 464 350

