



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for the Environment



TRANSCRIPT

23 July 2014



ABC 774 MELBOURNE FIGHT CLUB  INTERVIEW WITH RAFAEL EPSTEIN

E&OE….

Topics: Jacqui Lambie, Budget measures, asylum seekers, MH17

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:  Indeed. Welcome to Fight Club with Mark Dreyfus, he is the Shadow Attorney-General, the  Member for Isaacs.  Mark, thank you for coming in again.

MARK DREYFUS:   Very good to be with you.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   And Greg Hunt is with us. He's the Environment Minister, he's also of course the Member for  Flinders.  Greg, good to see you again as well.

GREG HUNT:

G'day Raf, and nice to see you Mark.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Now look I … we have not discussed Jacqui Lambie's interview with Hobart radio, but I  knew that politics had pierced the pop culture bubble when I was scanning through FM radio  this morning and two stations were talking about it at the same time. It's worth discussing  whether or not it actually makes a difference to the fortunes of a party who appear to be on the  rise.

Firstly, as much as it pains me, a little bit of Jacqui Lambie, the Palmer United Senator from  Tasmania, speaking on breakfast radio in Hobart about, effectively, looking for love.

(Excerpt begins)

INTERVIEWER:   Would you like Kim and Dave to find love for you? Like The Bachelorette? We find love for  Jacqui.



JACQUI LAMBIE:   Oh rightio. Let's find love now they must have heaps of cash and they've got to have a  package between their legs, let's be honest.

And I don't need them to speak. They don't even need to speak.

(End of excerpt)

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Now there's a whole lot of discussion around whether or not it was an appropriate or  inappropriate thing to say.

Mark, I leave you to judge her, whether or not she should or shouldn't have said what she  said. Isn't this actually what the Palmer United Party thrives on in a way? In some way that  they have the common touch that perhaps mainstream parties don't have?

MARK DREYFUS:   I think perhaps you could say, and this is me commenting rather than anything else, that  Senator Lambie's made a decision, or her party's made a decision that being a little bit  outrageous might work for them. But she's a new Senator, and I don't think we should be too  quick to judge.

I think, myself, that people get elected to the Australian Parliament because of ideas about  policy, what they want to do for their country. And I think the less we hear about her personal  life, probably the better.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   You're the Environment Minister, so it feels a bit odd talking to you about some rather bizarre  things she said, but it does - it keeps them in the news, you know they were on FM breakfast  radio in Melbourne, two different stations, doing nothing, keeps them in the news, raises their  profile. It's good for them isn't it?

GREG HUNT:

Look I am not one who subscribes to the theory that all publicity is good publicity. There is  bad publicity. And I think, well, people will make their own judgements.

But let's put it this way, I have always been of the view that there's a certain decorum -  nobody wants stuffy, out of touch representatives, but they also want representatives with a  certain decorum. And what makes great tabloid radio may not necessarily be good for the  Parliament, but others will judge that.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Brief thought actually, to both of you - are they here to stay, the Palmer United Party? Mark  Dreyfus, do you think?

MARK DREYFUS:   The three senators who bear the Palmer United Party logo are here with us for another six  years. That's the minimum. And who knows, six years is a very long time in politics. They say  a week's a long time in politics. I'm not going to predict where Australian politics will be in  six year's time.



RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Okay.

MARK DREYFUS:   But we do know that, barring a double dissolution...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Yeah.

MARK DREYFUS:   ...that those three Palmer United Party senators are still going to be with us in 2020.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Greg?

GREG HUNT:

Look it's exactly right, that is what I have said to others when they asked about will they stay,  will they not. And my point is...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   They're here.

GREG HUNT:

...they're all elected for six years, and they've been with us for three weeks, and they've got six  years minus three weeks still to go.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Let me ask you about the Palmer United Party, because they are in many ways - I know the  Government likes to frame it differently because you'd like the Labor Party to back a lot more  of your Budget measures than they are - they are stopping a lot of your Budget going through.

If their current indications stand, how much of the budget's going to pass?

GREG HUNT:

Well look, there are three ways through for any piece of legislation. It could be the Greens,  and we've had one piece of legislation passed with them; it could be the ALP, and I know I've  had very constructive dealings with my opposite number Mark Butler on the Green Army  legislation, which was passed with bipartisan support; or it could be the cross benchers, which  is how we were able to repeal obviously the carbon tax and have the impact on electricity and  gas bills. So there are those three ways through.

In many cases the most likely partner will be the Palmer United Party, and I have had some  engagement with them of recent weeks and what I have learned is that they are willing to  negotiate. And then I found that, as of Monday last week once we struck a final...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Yeah.

GREG HUNT:

...agreement with Mr Palmer, they stuck to it like glue. So I appreciated that. But they are  willing to negotiate, and we recognise that we have to repair the national Budget.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Will you get most of the Budget through? Would you be comfortable to (inaudible) most?

GREG HUNT:

I won't - I won't predict … put a particular figure on it but I do say this: we need to make the  changes, and the reason why is because we're spending more than we are taking in. This year  we're spending about, current financial year just finished we spent almost $410 billion, we  raised about 360.

Those were the figures from the previous government. And that's not a sustainable position  because sooner or later the next generation has to pay for it.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Mark Dreyfus feel free to respond, but I'll make a point you heard a lot: you have actually, in  the Senate, opposed some of the savings you proposed in government.

MARK DREYFUS:   The situation’s quite different now. We're going to oppose these harsh measures, which Tony  Abbott did not tell the Australian people about before he went to the election. He lied about  the policies that he was going to bring forward in this Budget - he said no cuts to health, no  cuts to education, no changes to pensions.

And none of those things was true. He said there was a unity ticket on Gonski. That hasn't  been true. He didn't tell the Australian people anything about the extraordinarily harsh cuts we  are seeing to higher education. And I could go on, but I think the Australian people have  understood very, very clearly just how harsh this Budget is, and just how little they were told  before the election...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Yeah.

MARK DREYFUS:   ...about what Tony Abbott was going to do. So we...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   But if you're going to push that do-what-you-said-you-would-do line, which is totally your  prerogative, wouldn't you add more meat to the bones of that argument if you also did what  you said you would do?

MARK DREYFUS:   On the contrary, whatever was our position before the election when we were in charge of the  Budget and able to set and alter priorities so that the whole of the Budget fits together, it's  now a very different position.

And we say to this Government: your priorities are twisted and wrong. Your priorities in, for  example, proceeding with a paid parental leave scheme that's going to take $22 billion to pay  for, is the wrong priority. And I think many other people agree with us now. So our  proposition is don't proceed with the paid parental leave scheme.

Do proceed with something you've scrapped, we say to the Government, which was  improving the tax take from multinational corporations. There's a whole range of other  measures I could refer to.



RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Now Greg Hunt I'm sure you want to respond, but if you can add in to the mix of your  answer...

GREG HUNT:

I'll be brief.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   ...Joe Hockey is reported by the woman who's just written a book about him saying that he  wanted actually a tougher Budget. He wanted the pension re-indexation to happen sooner and  the deficit levy to come in lower. Did the Treasurer want a tougher Budget?

GREG HUNT:

Look, these would have been discussions in a different place, they would have been within  the Expenditure Review Committee of Cabinet and the Revenue Review Committee. I'm not  part of those, so I'm genuinely not in a position to...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   You'd pick up the vibe, wouldn't you if the Treasurer wanted to go harder?

GREG HUNT:

...to comment on either of those. What I would say is this, that the situation is worse than we  had expected. Now, today's not a day for harshness either of message or of tone, and I don't  think that's where any of us want to be, but in the days after the 2013 Budget we gave  bipartisan support to all of the savings bar one, which the previous Government wanted to  make. After the election, because the vast majority of those had not been introduced, we've  introduced those savings for which there was bipartisan support.

I would hope that they could reflect and say look, this was our position just a year ago, we  said that all of these savings were necessary. To now say the fiscal position is worse than  anybody had understood and we're still going to walk away from our own pre-election  savings, I think is a neat political position but it may not be the responsibility that Australians  would want.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   The Environment Minister is with us, he is of course Greg Hunt, that's who you just heard  speaking. The Shadow Attorney-General is with us, Mark Dreyfus. 1300 222 774 is the phone  number.

The Prime Minister is doing - as I think he has done every day since Friday - he's speaking to  the media in Canberra about the latest that he understands from people like Peter Cosgrove  and Angus Houston about the recovery of bodies and the investigation caused by the shooting  down of MH17. We will get onto that in a moment.

I just want to let Jack have a say, he's called in from Fairfield, I think with a question I believe  about asylum seekers actually. Jack, go for it.

CALLER JACK:   Thank you very much and good evening gentlemen. My question is regarding the asylum  seekers being held in restrictive circumstances on an Australian Customs vessel somewhere in  the Indian Ocean, presumably going round in circles.



Considering that these people have not committed any crime and they are Australian  responsibility, what is the law regarding these people, and would it be a real stretch to  consider that we in fact have kidnapped them?

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   I might - Jack I'll ask them both to respond. My understanding of the court case is the  Government's position at the moment is because of where they were picked up, the  refoulement obligations do not kick in. I think that's an argument that's being made in the  High Court but why don't we start with you, Greg.

GREG HUNT:

Sure. The first thing is that we're committed to abiding by all decisions of the High Court, as  you would expect of a Government. The second thing is that we said we would comply with  their interim orders.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Which means you won't send them back to a - any particular country?

GREG HUNT:

And then the third thing is that, I think most significantly we have a duty of care to ensure that  they are cared for, maintained, and within an Australian Customs vessel they are in a very,  very safe environment and safe situation.

Of course we saw with the Oceanic Viking under the previous government a similar situation,  but there was a loss of control. Now we've made sure that the people are safe, but in the end  ultimately we will be making the decisions and the determinations about their future subject  to the court.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Could you address - I think Jack's most biding point I suppose was he's essentially saying that  could you be construed as having kidnapped these people.

GREG HUNT:

Well no.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Mark Dreyfus?

MARK DREYFUS:   Jack's questions are going to be answered by the High Court, as I understand it on 5 August,  which is when the High Court said it's going to give judgement. And the problem, and the  reason Jack's asking that question, hundreds of thousands of Australians are asking these  questions, is that we've got an extraordinarily secretive Government that is not telling  Australians what actions our Government is taking in our name.

Oceanic Viking - Tampa for that matter - was situations where Australians knew what was  going on. But we don't know what's going on because this Government's certainly not  prepared to share anything with the Australian Government, and...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   The Australian people.



MARK DREYFUS:   ...sorry with the Australian people, thanks Raf, and has had to have dragged out of it by the  High Court the limited facts that we now know. Now that's not an acceptable position. The  Government should stop being secretive and start telling Australians what's happening out  there on the high seas.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Greg Hunt I want to get to some traffic, and hear what the Prime Minister had to say in a  moment, but a brief response?

GREG HUNT:

Look...

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   He's gone.

GREG HUNT:

I think the answer is very simple, that we have a duty of care to these people to make sure that  they are safe. They are far safer on board an Australian customs vessel than bobbing around  on a (inaudible) sea.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   And for the secrecy point?

GREG HUNT:

And we will make sure that the people are taken care of, and what we're doing is ensuring that  the 1200 tragedies that we saw are not repeated.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Okay. We will get back to the discussion, especially around the way the Government and the  world is dealing with the shooting down of MH17. We'll get to that in a moment. First some  traffic with Diana Brumen.

(Intermission)

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   I think we are all actually seeing a different side of the Prime Minister, Tony Abbott.  Disasters like the shooting down and the tragedy of the people who died in MH-17 do often  change both the nature of the conversation in the media and the way our politicians speak as  well.

The Prime Minister is speaking in Canberra at the moment, I know they are investigating,  along with the Foreign Minister, ways of securing the site for a more secure investigation.  Let's have a little listen to what the Prime Minister had to say a short time ago about the  retrieval of bodies.

(Excerpt begins)







TONY ABBOTT:   Once they're in Holland, the task of disaster victim identification will be completed. It may  take quite some time, but our personnel, both Australian and Dutch, are amongst the best and  the most experienced in the world.

(Excerpt ends)

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Look I might actually start, let's start with the Prime Minister's political opponents. My  reading of the Press Gallery is that the vast majority of those covering the way the Prime  Minister and the Foreign Minister have handled this, they're pretty impressed.

Mark Dreyfus, it's a terrible thing for any Government to have to deal with, are they making  the best of a horrible situation, do you think?

MARK DREYFUS:   I think that the Prime Minister has risen to the occasion. I think that the Prime Minister is  doing what an Australian Prime Minister should in these circumstances, which is to voice the  anger of the Australian people about what has happened to our fellow citizens; to voice the  concerns on behalf of the bereaved families in Australia waiting for the bodies of their loved  ones to be returned to us.

Voicing the anger of Australians about the event itself. And Labor is doing everything we  can, such as an Opposition can, to support the Government in the actions that the Government  has taken. And I do think that the Prime Minister has risen to the occasion and I'd add in the  Foreign Minister.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Greg Hunt, can we do anything to either receive some sort of recognition from Russia, or you  know, recognition that they may have had a role?

And is there anything that the Government should be doing, by way of, I don't know, saying  Vladimir Putin shouldn't come to Australia, G20, those sorts of things.

GREG HUNT:

Sure. Look, we can have and we are having a real impact. And let me start by saying this: I  think we are seeing - although Australia is a robust democracy - the best of the Australian  system, where there is bipartisan support and a bipartisan approach, and I do appreciate  Mark's comments and I also appreciate Bill Shorten's role. I think it's important to say that.

What we have done so far is an example of this. A few days ago, it was clear that there was a  lack of co-operation at the site. Now things have been poor at the site, but - have no doubt  about that. But Australia was able, through the work of the Prime Minister and the Foreign  Minister and our officials, to approach the United States, the major European leaders, to speak  bluntly and plainly about Russia's role, and to speak directly with the President as well as  Ministers and - as well as the Trade Minister and the Ambassador here.

So as a consequence, in part, of that, international pressure has increased. There has been an  improvement, the remains of those discovered to date have now been transported to Kharkiv  and will this evening be transported on to the Netherlands.

That is a significant improvement. The site itself remains utterly insecure, that's another  critical priority, but I think this is the best of the Australian system and people being well  beyond any internal considerations, to just a recognition that almost every community is  directly or indirectly affected when you think of the reach from all of these souls that have  been lost.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Sure. But is Russia listening to what Australia says, what the US says?

GREG HUNT:

Well Russia is saying the right things at this point, but we will judge them on their actions.  What has happened is that whereas there was an initial stalemate around the remains of those  that have been lost, at least now they have been freed and transported to Kharkiv, and they  will move to the Netherlands where they'll be received by the Governor-General - farewelled  by Angus Houston - received by the Governor-General in the Netherlands along, obviously,  with the King and Queen of Holland.

That is a significant step towards bringing home the remains of the lost and the loved ones,  but we have a huge amount more work to go. The site is not secure yet, and we've made one  important step. We have I think, as a country, helped bring the rest of the world to a place  where we would want it to be.

We are not solely responsible, but I think we have actually, genuinely played a profoundly  important role. I think we can play a profoundly important role in the next step, of securing  the site and then bringing to justice the criminals who did this.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Maybe I should ask you this question, Mark Dreyfus, because you're in Opposition, perhaps  it's easier for you to answer this one: should Australia already be exploring disinviting the  Russian leader to the G20?

MARK DREYFUS:   I don't think we should get ahead of ourselves. We want co-operation from Russia. The full  investigation, the full international investigation is not yet on the ground, underway, it needs  to be - and I'm with Greg on this one, the rare occasion that we have this bipartisan  agreement, we will judge Russia by their actions.

But the time, right now, is to get that action from Russia. They've clearly got the control  necessary to make sure that there is the full international investigation allowed in, that the site  is properly secured; those things haven't happened yet. It's been almost a week since this  disaster; it needs to happen right now.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   My best guess would be though, that the crash site isn't nearly as important as Russian  pressure on those rebels in Ukraine. You need to be able to speak to them, whoever's  investigating needs to be able to speak to them.

Can you foresee Russia, given what's happened in the last week, helping that sort of  investigation? Because, you don't know from examining the crash site who said what to who,  who pushed buttons. You need that pressure, don't you?



MARK DREYFUS:   Quite right, but it's - compliance with the United Nations Security Council resolution requires  that level of co-operation from Russia; and Australia expects it.

GREG HUNT:

Sorry, I think that the important step here is that we were able to help bring together the  Security Council, bring together a range of nations in a three day period, to have a very  powerful resolution. And both China and Russia stood aside, they didn't oppose, and I think  that that was very, very important; because there was some speculation. But to be thankful,  China was very helpful in the end and I appreciate that and we appreciate that.

And Russia did not oppose the resolution, so they recognise that there is immense  international moral outrage at what has occurred. And let me put it this way. I think this is a  defining moment for Russia as to where they seek to be in the international community.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Can I ask you both; there is some letters … there's a fascinating letter from Tim Colebatch in  The Age, who I didn't know had been in the United States as their correspondent when the US  shot down an Iranian airliner.

And he claimed that America made lots of excuses, never apologised, that the world - he's  effectively implying the world's standards are different now. Are we at all guilty of not  slamming the US then, when an Iranian airliner was shot down? I know it's not familiar  history to all of us, but is there a hint of a double standard there or not?

GREG HUNT:

Look, the USS Vincennes was engaged, and involved, and was responsible. My knowledge of  the history is that there was considerable world criticism at the time, but in no way, shape or  circumstance was there a sense that this was an intentional act.

This - today, we are facing the tragic outcome of what is overwhelmingly likely to be, on all  evidence both intelligence and circumstantial, a deliberate act to shoot down a plane overseas  - overhead, by separatist rebels backed by Russia, with what is in all likelihood Russian-supplied high-tech equipment, which could only have happened with the training.

So, there is a very high degree of culpability here and we want to make sure that actions are  taken now to redress that problem.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   Okay, I'm going to need to leave it there, my apologies, I have to get to the weather. Mark  Dreyfus though, and Greg Hunt…

MARK DREYFUS:   Thanks, Raf.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN:   … thank you both for coming in.

GREG HUNT:

Thanks, Raf.

(ENDS)

