

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection



50 days of failure for people smugglers  Friday, 07 February 2014

The latest Operation Sovereign Borders weekly update reveals that for 50 days  there has not been a single successful people smuggling venture to Australia by  boat, Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, the Hon Scott Morrison said  today.

Operation Sovereign Borders is preventing criminal people smugglers from  fulfilling their promise of passage to Australia.

Not only will people seeking to come illegally by boat not be settled in Australia,  under the Abbott Government's policies they will not get here.

There is still a long way to go but 50 days of failure for the people smugglers  should be welcome news to anyone who wants to stop criminal people smugglers  putting people's lives at risk.

The last people smuggling venture that made it to Australia and had all  passengers handed over to Australian immigration authorities was on December  19 last year.

The government is also continuing to remove illegal arrivals to Australia who are  found not to be in need of Australia's protection.

This week 46 Sri Lankan nationals were removed to Sri Lanka including 37  involuntary removals.

The Abbott Government is not just stopping the boats as we promised we would  do at the last election but we are sending back those arrivals Labor allowed to  illegally enter Australia by boat during their failed years in government.

This is the resolve that is needed to get the job done.

This week, during my second visit to Malaysia as Minister, I announced Australia's  intention to hand over two Bay Class patrol vessels to Malaysia to enhance the  Malaysian Government's maritime enforcement and deterrence capability.

The strong co-operation of the Malaysian Government in efforts to prevent people  smuggling as part of the Coalition Government's regional deterrence framework is  appreciated.

This latest measure strengthens the agreement with Malaysia secured late last  year to further disrupt and prevent people smuggling operations in and through  Malaysia by air, land and sea.



See: Index of Media Releases

URL:http://www.minister.immi.gov.au/media/sm/2014/sm211571.htm   Last update: Friday, 07 February 2014 at 18:18 AEST



