

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS PM AGENDA WITH DAVID SPEERS  THURSDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Anti-Terror Raids; Iraq

DAVID SPEERS, PRESENTER: Joining us now is the Deputy Labor Leader and  Shadow Foreign Minister, Tanya Plibersek from her Sydney office. Thanks for your  time. The prospect of terrorists beheading random members of the public in Australia is  a frightening one. Do you think this does represent a new type of terrorist threat for  Australia?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER:  Well, it is a shocking  proposition that anyone in Australia would consider such an act of violence on another  Australian or on Australian soil and I think it is very important to acknowledge the  excellent work of our security agencies in thwarting this attempted terrorist act or  proposed terrorist act. I mean, I do not think I can answer a question about how this  compares with previous acts that might have been planned, what I would say is it does  show that our security and intelligence agencies are doing first rate work. They’ve in the  past since about 2003 foiled four terrorist plots and it is rewarding to see that they have  been able to do that again.

SPEERS: I guess what is different here is the nature of the style of the attack that was  allegedly being planned, a sword is now apparently being discovered and taken away  by police. You do not need obviously the same sort of training for a beheading as you  would for a bomb plot, is that a difference here that is important, that might frighten a lot  of Australians?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think the purpose of terrorism is to frighten people and to make  them change their behaviour because you frighten them and the question that we have  to ask ourselves is not what can we do to avoid- what can we do to please the terrorists  so they do not come after us. What we have to ask ourselves is what is the right thing to  do, and I think the right thing to do is to ensure that our security and intelligence  agencies have the legal authority and the resources to continue to protect Australians  from such a threat.

SPEERS: And do you think we currently have adequate legal resources and authority  for our intelligence and police agencies to counter this sort of threat?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it is reassuring that this threat has been averted and previous  plots have been stopped - intercepted and stopped. The Government has come to us  with some proposals for updating the powers that are available to our security agencies  and there has been one lot of legislation that our Parliamentary Joint Committee for  Intelligence and Security matters has examined that made some recommendations to  the Government. The Government is redrafting some parts of the legislation to ensure  that rights are protected for people who are not engaged in any harmful behaviour.  When the Government has further legislation, we will examine that on its merits also.

SPEERS: Alright, but at the moment this batch of anti-terror laws that we are talking  about here will come before Parliament next week as I understand it, that will include  things like declaring terrorist no-go zones, strengthening the power to prosecute for  terrorism and promoting terrorism. Is it your inclination if the safeguards are there, to  support these measures?

PLIBERSEK: Well, David, we have not seen the legislation yet. We have been very  cooperative with the first lot of legislation, we have suggested- the joint committee, I am  not saying Labor suggested amendments, the joint committee that’s set up to oversee  this type of legislation suggested amendments in a bipartisan report. The Government is  now re-drafting the legislation to take into account those additional safeguards, for  example for journalists. And because it is the bipartisan recommendation of the inquiry -  of the committee responsible, I have no doubt we'll see bipartisan support for this  legislation. In terms of a second lot of legislation that the Attorney-General’s been  talking about, we have not seen it yet. So it is very difficult to answer questions of detail,  we have been briefed by the Attorney-General on what he intends, but of course the  difficulty with legislation is always unintended consequences. We need to see it in  writing before we can make commentary-

SPEERS: And then you have got to-

PLIBERSEK: I think it’s fair to say though that Labor has been very supportive of the  Government in giving security agencies extra and updated powers but with those need  to come adequate oversights, oversights including an independent monitor of national  security of legislation that will be restored because of our suggestion that it should be.

SPEERS: The third wave of anti-terror laws which will apparently come before the end  of the year will include the mandatory retention of metadata. Now I am told by National  Security sources that the sort of plot we’ve see today, metadata access to that is key, is  critical in cracking this style of terrorist plot. Do you agree with that, does it change your  view at all on the question of mandatory retention of metadata?

PLIBERSEK: Well again, David, it is very hard to answer specific questions about  proposals that we have not seen. We are very keen to cooperate to give our security  agencies the resources and the powers they need to keep Australians safe. Absolutely,  100 percent. But that comes with transparency, it comes with oversight, it comes with  features that ensure that legislation is compatible with the values that Australians hold  dear. So we will wait, we will see the legislation as proposed, if we have got suggestions  for making it better, then we will make those suggestions.

SPEERS: And can I ask does- do today's raids and arrests strengthen the case in your  view for Australian involvement in taking up the fight to Islamic State in Iraq?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it is very important- the reason that terrorists plan and  undertake the sort of activity that we’re hearing about today is in order to frighten,  frighten people and get them to behave in a particular way because they are frightened.  As Australians, we cannot base our behaviour or our decision-making on being  frightened into a particular course by terrorists, we need to decide what is the right thing  for Australia, what are our responsibilities as a global citizen should dictate what we do.  In the case of northern Iraq in particular it is clear that IS were on a genocidal campaign.  Thousands of people dead already, almost two million displaced from their homes,  women and children sold into slavery, sexual abuse as standard practice of IS. This is a  particularly brutal organisation, IS, and we’ve been asked by the government of Iraq to  help fight them off, to help protect civilians. I believe and Labor believes that it is our  responsibility as a good international citizen to help the democratically elected  government of Iraq fight off this immediate threat.

SPEERS: And a big part of that is our special forces involvement. There has been a lot  of discussion around this. Today the Defence Force Chief Mark Binskin said they’ll be  based in battalion headquarters. If that headquarters moves outside the wire, which it  probably will, then our advisors will go with them and continue to advise operations. So  are you comfortable with that, special forces operating outside the wire if you like on the  battlefield in our advisor role.

PLIBERSEK: We’ve said that we support the pre-deployment of Australian aircraft,  support personnel and SAS so that they are ready to help with humanitarian efforts in  Iraq. We’ve requested further briefings on the exact character of the engagement that’s  proposed for Australian resources and Australian personnel. We’ve said today that  there are certain things that we expect of Australian involvement that includes that this  remains a humanitarian mission. That the government of Iraq, the democratically  elected government of Iraq continues to behave in a way that is inclusive and not  sectarian, that our involvement is for as long as it takes for the Iraqis to confidently take

control of their own security, that we don’t support engagement in Syria, that we support  humanitarian relief for Syria, a larger refugee intake, the refugee intake that the  government announced from Iraq and Syria was part of our standard 13 750, we believe  that it should be in addition to our 13 750. We’ve said also that we’d like the Prime  Minister to report regularly to the Parliament including in the upcoming sitting week  about what the specific objectives of Australian engagement in Iraq are, how we'll  measure our success and how will we determine the time when Australian engagement  has been successful enough for us to withdraw from that activity.

SPEERS: The specific question there is are you comfortable with Australian forces  taking an advisory role actually on the battlefield?

PLIBERSEK: Well we’ve been told so far that this is a humanitarian mission and that  Australian SAS personnel will be acting as advisors in that capacity. We don’t have  further information and I’m not going to start speculating about what might or might not  happen.

SPEERS: Well I’m just putting to you what the Chief of Defence said they will be doing.  He’s quite specific. Working in the headquarters, if that moves outside the wire as is  likely, then our advisors would go with them and continue those operations.

PLIBERSEK: Well I think you have to be very careful about using terms like outside the  wire, David, because people think they know what it means. It has a lot of -

SPEERS: There are the Chief of Defence’s words.

PLIBERSEK: Well yes I’m not questioning what he said, I’m saying I’m not going to  start throwing around speculation about what our troops may or may not be doing. Our  SAS personnel are highly trained and highly effective. What we’ve been advised is  they’ll be providing an advisory capacity in Iraq. We haven’t been given any suggestion  that they’ll be moving into the battlefield and we would expect more briefing from the  government if that’s the proposal and in any case it’s very important -

SPEERS: Ok I just want to clear this up Tanya Plibersek because this is important,  whether our forces have bipartisan support for what they are doing. The Chief of  Defence has today said they will go outside the wire in an advisory role, does the  Opposition support that or not?

PLIBERSEK: Our forces always have Labor’s support.

SPEERS: Including for what he has described today?

PLIBERSEK: Well I would like a great deal more information to be available from the  Prime Minister to the Australian public about how the Australian forces, SAS personnel  will be engaged. We have been told by the Prime Minister that they will be acting in an  advisory capacity to Iraqi personnel. Certainly we’re not putting artificial restriction on

where in Iraq those personnel will be operating, we’ve said very clearly that we agree  with the Prime Minister that if they come under fire that of course they are able to  defend themselves. If we are talking about a larger number of troops going to Iraq and  engaging in a more traditional battle scenario that’s something that we don’t support.

SPEERS: Alright there will clearly be a fair bit of debate in the coming days when  Parliament returns next week about this. Tanya Plibersek thank you very much for  joining us this afternoon.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

