



THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL WITH WALEED ALY  WEDNESDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Iraq; Ebola; The Abbott Government’s Broken Promises.

WALEED ALY, PRESENTER: Joining us now is Tanya Plibersek, Shadow  Minister for Foreign Affairs. Thank you very much for your time.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY OPPOSITION LEADER: Pleasure.

ALY: I’ll get to the ebola thing in a moment because I think it’s actually very  interesting but let’s start with Iraq. I’ve spoken with you before about this concept  of mission creep and I think last time we spoke it was a narrow mission that we  were contemplating to prevent genocide. Now it seems to have evolved into  something much more than that. Are these the limits or will this continue to  evolve?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think Australia needs to be very clear that our objective is  the humanitarian objective that includes helping the democratically elected  Government of Iraq to fight off the threat that is IS. The Government of Iraq are  able to ask for our help. They’ve not just asked for Australian help they’ve got at  the Paris Conference around 30 nations signed up it seems as though other  nations are also already coming on board including a number of nations in the  region in the Middle East to help the Government fight off IS. I think we’ve been  very clear that’s Australia’s role. Beyond that I don’t think - well we certainly

would have to have a conversation with the Australian people about anything  beyond that, I don’t see a role for Australia beyond that immediate support for  humanitarian intervention which prevents genocide.

ALY: But there is no genocide happening right now, we don’t need to prevent  genocide by supporting the Iraqi military to re-establish control of Iraq do we?

PLIBERSEK: Well there are thousands of people who have lost their lives.  There’s 1.8 million people who have been displaced in Iraq from their homes. I’m not  really sure that you could down play the seriousness of what’s going on there.



ALY: But can we call it a genocide? As I understand it there was the threat of  genocide but then there were Iraqi airstrikes and there was the arming of  particularly Kurdish forces and then there was that famous altercation where ISIS  lost control of the dam and so on and so the genocidal threat seems to have  abated. If that was our aim shouldn’t we have drawn a line under that?

PLIBERSEK: So now we’re only talking about mass atrocity crimes and we  shouldn’t worry, is that the proposition you’re making?

ALY: No this is the question I suppose I’m asking about the strictness of the  definition. If it’s about preventing genocide from happening that seems to have  been achieved is it now about something more than that?

PLIBERSEK: Well I’m not sure you can fairly say that we have prevented the  mass atrocity crimes that IS is determined to commit in Iraq as they have  committed them in Syria. You’ve got thousands of people who have lost their  lives, the United Nations Human Rights Committee has sent investigative forces  to northern Iraq so they can collect information about these mass atrocity crimes  in an effort to hold people to account in the future. IS is determined to kill people  who are of a different religion or ethnicity to them. If they’ve been limited in their  success by the Iraqi forces, including the Peshmerga forces we spoke of last  time, fighting back successfully in part because of the assistance of Australia and  other countries that’s a good thing but I’m not sure that that would lead us to be  complacent and to say we are completely free of the threat of genocide now.

ALY: There are briefings that you will be getting that none of us get with your role  in Opposition of course the Government would be giving you those briefings as  well or at least inviting you in on them. What seems to underlie all of this is that  ISIS represents a serious threat to Australia. Can you give us an indication of  precisely the scope of that threat and the mechanism, can you describe it precise  terms? Because it’s not immediately clear when you consider this is a movement  on the other side of the world that seems to be importing people rather than  exporting them.

PLIBERSEK: Well obviously I can’t talk in detail about the content of security  briefings that we receive but you only need to open the newspapers to know that

there are Australians fighting with IS and the risk, aside from the people they’re  fighting in Iraq and Syria, is that when they come home they would use some of  the particularly nasty skills that they’ve developed overseas against Australians  on home soil. That is the risk that we have to protect against and we are of  course determined to do everything we can to support our security agencies in  keeping Australians safe at home. But there is another issue and we spoke about  it last time that the world community looked on at Rwanda and the 800 000  people who lost their lives there and said it’s terrible someone should do  something, you know make it stop, but took no effective action and 800 000  people lost their lives.

So however cautious we are, rightly cautious we are, about Australian  involvement again in Iraq and what a disaster it was in 2003, we do have a  responsibility to protect and we can debate the parameters that we put around  our involvement there. I think it’s very important that the Prime Minister continues  to update the Parliament on exactly what the Australian mission is, what role we  play, how we will judge when we’ve been successful, what does that mean for  the withdrawal of Australian troops. All of that should be part of our public  discussion through the Parliament to the people of Australia. But I don’t think we  can turn our backs on what is a serious humanitarian disaster.

ALY: Is it really a choice though between military involvement and turning our  backs? Is that really a fair binary?

PLIBERSEK: Well I’m not sure whether you’re suggesting that people should  have a good hard talking to IS and maybe they won’t kill people. We would  always prefer diplomatic means to deal with a situation like this if there was a  sensible leadership with a grievance that you could discuss it would be one thing  but that’s not what we’re talking about with this organisation. I think that it is at  the invitation of the Government of Iraq we have provided humanitarian  assistance which includes some military assistance. You’ve got to remember this  is not the invasion of 2003, we’re talking about several dozen countries involved  not the four that were involved in 2003. This is something that has the backing of  the United Nations -

ALY: Oh we seem to have lost Tanya Plibersek. We might see if we can get her  back because the other aspect of this story that I wanted to talk to her about was  the Ebola response the Ebola crisis which is a real crisis I mean not to say that  the ISIS one isn’t but this is something that Obama administration has said that  they’re sending 3000 troops to deal with this. So we’ll see if we can explore that  with Tanya Plibersek who I understand is with us now. Thank you very much for  being back with us, sorry if we let you go there it wasn’t anything you said.

PLIBERSEK: I don’t know what happened.

ALY: No, don’t take it personally. We should move on to the ebola thing,  although -



PLIBERSEK: I just want to make one final point on the humanitarian mission. Of  course our military contribution is not the beginning and end of what Australia  should be doing, our humanitarian support including for the UN agencies who are  trying to get aid to desperate people in Syria should be much greater than it is.  We should, as Bill Shorten said, be taking more refugees from the area. There  are other ways of helping that we should engage as well.

ALY: So let’s talk about the ebola outbreak. The Obama administration has  announced today that sending 3000 troops to help stem the outbreak. He says  that this is a potential threat to global security. Have we been as a world,  particularly the western world of developed nations, have we been a bit slow  moving on this?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah I think you could very easily say that we’ve been a bit slow  moving on this. You’ve seen about 5000 cases now and about 1 in 2 of the  people who contract ebola are dying from it. One of the reasons of course is that  the traditional practices of washing the body after death mean that more people  come into contact with blood and bodily fluids and that of course is the main  source of infection. So we could very usefully be working more closely with  African health authorities on the basic sort of precautions that you take with that  type of disease that [inaudible].

ALY: I think we’re starting to struggle with that line. I might chance my arm with  one more question. Hopefully we can get there. The Prime Minister has spoken  today about Australia making a contribution, $7 million, an extra $7 million. Is that  enough, is money what we should be doing or is it other things that we should be  doing?

PLIBERSEK: Look of course the money is welcome but it’s in the context that we  cut $118 million from aid to Africa in this Government’s first budget, and we also  cut $2.8 million from the World Health Organisation, which of course is one of the  agencies that is leading the response to ebola. I think it’s clear from what  Medecins Sans Frontieres have said of course money is welcome but they’re  also asking for expertise and people on the ground and we have some excellent  researchers here, clinicians, health professionals that are terrifically good at  working on communicable diseases if there is some way that we can support our  people as well as sending dollars I think that would be ideal.

ALY: Tony Abbott has spoken today about doing an annual performance review  of his ministry. He was asked about that today this is what he said: [Recording  of Tony Abbott]: Some are getting A’s some are getting A+’s but the fact is this  is a competent and trustworthy government which promised that we would stop  the boats, that we would scrap the carbon tax, that we would build the roads, that  we would get the Budget back under control and that’s precisely what we’re  doing.

ALY: Tanya Plibersek your counterpart Julie Bishop would she be in the A or the  A+ category.

PLIBERSEK: Well she’s done a number of things that I agree with and support  and a number of things I don’t agree with and don’t support, including cutting  $7.6 billion from Australia’s aid budget so that at times like this when we’re trying  to help in Iraq and in Syria and in a number of African countries with the outbreak  of ebola we're in very difficult times when it comes to our aid budget. I’d like to  ask if he’s marking people on keeping promises what he’d give himself because  he promised no cuts to health, no cuts to education, no change to pensions, no  cuts to the ABC or SBS, no new taxes and he’s broken every one of those  promises. Does he get an F for that?

ALY: Well I think you just give yourself an overall mark and it’s either an A or an  A+ and just go with that. Actually one question I do want to ask you and it’s one I  had in mind as we were talking and I lost the connection with you. It’s a difficult  question for us to think about but I think we have to given how military  intervention has gone for us in the past and that is by doing this we are almost  certainly going to be killing civilians, is there a point at which the loss of civilian  lives that we inflict directly means that the mission is not worth it. So is there a  number that you might be able to identify or ball park so that we can say ‘this is  when it’s gone wrong’?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think one of the reasons that I’m so dead certain that 2003  was so bad was because of the incredible number of civilians that lost their lives  in that conflict. At this stage our involvement is 600 people, we expect that  Australian involvement will be mostly in an advisory role. We’re not talking about  sending platoons of soldiers off to fight on the ground in Iraq so it is a different  scenario again to 2003.

ALY: But we are contributing to airstrikes which will kill people including civilians.

PLIBERSEK: And it is very important that we get the targeting as right as  possible and that’s why our soldiers, very specialised soldiers, are involved as  they are. But civilians -

ALY: Do you think our history is great though?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think that civilian deaths are never acceptable but right now  we have thousands of civilians being killed by IS because of their race or their  religion or because they're the same religion and they don’t agree with IS tactics.  We’ve got women and children being sold into slavery, we’ve got forced  conversions, we’ve got particularly brutal ways of killing people including aid  workers who of course only ever enter conflict zones to help the people who are  affected by these terrible conflicts. So yes civilian deaths have to be in the  calculations of any military action and are a terrible burden in the decision

making during a military action, I mean a moral and ethical burden to think  through as you’ve identified. But we are right now preventing the loss of life.

ALY: Tanya Plibersek thank you very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you Waleed.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

