

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS LUNCHTIME AGENDA INTERVIEW WITH LAURA JAYES  TUESDAY, 8 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/S: Sri Lankan asylum seekers.

LAURA JAYES: One of the problems here is that the Government won’t reveal if the  transfer has already taken place, the Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles says  there are many unknowns in this case, information is very limited, I spoke to him a little  earlier and started by asking him if this injunction might be too late for the 153 still at  sea.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well we don’t know, one of the real issues here from the outset has  been the fog of secrecy, which has been applied to this whole set of circumstances for  more than ten days, we’ve seen the Minister run from the media because it’s been  inconvenient.  He didn’t come out of hiding until a front page of a newspaper called him  from hiding and then he’s quite happy to go into detail.  But we do not know the fate of  the 150 odd people on board, we don’t know where the ship is and we don’t know  exactly what stage of the process it’s at.  So I think one of the important points to make  here is that in light of the decision of the High Court last night, we absolutely expect this  Government to act in accordance with the law, we absolutely expect this Government to  do nothing that would place any Australian personnel outside of the law, that is the  principle obligation upon the Government today.

JAYES: We will know in a couple of hours’ time but isn’t there a problem here that this  could actually be outside of the High Court’s jurisdiction, what‘s your advice on that?

MARLES: Well I’m not a legal expert in relation to this matter, and we’ll see how the  High Court ultimately pans out, what we know is that at this moment, there is an  injunction in place until the hearing this afternoon and we do expect this Minister to  abide by the law and for this Government to abide by the law that’s what’s most  important.

JAYES: The Government has maintained all along that it is acting within the confines of  international law, at what stage are you suggesting that they may have breached that  law?

MARLES: Well we are watching a Government here tie itself in knots in order to protect  its political scoreboard that’s what everyone needs to understand.  Everything that has  occurred in the context of the statement that was made by the Government in relation to  the first boat which has been sent back to Sri Lanka could have happened either on  Christmas Island or on Manus.

JAYES: But from what you know, the Government hasn’t breached any international  law?

MARLES: Well we have grave concerns about that question Laura because to be  processing people at sea via video link to be giving people a proper individual  assessment of their case, I mean you’ll have people on board who’ll have different  stories, different circumstances and that will give different strength to their argument.

JAYES: So by this truncated advanced screening process, that could actually breach  international law is that what you’re saying?

MARLES: My point is simply this: how can everyone’s case be assessed individually  when all the while this boat, these people collectively, are steaming towards Sri Lanka,  that’s the issue here.

JAYES: But you can see that advanced screening does technically comply with  international law, that has tried to be challenged in the past and it has been thrown out  of court in Australia.

MARLES: The enhanced screening process is something which was undertaken by the  former Labor Government, that’s not our issue, but when we engaged in enhanced  screening we did so with much greater degree of transparency, much greater degree of  thoroughness than it being done by video link, a much better ability for people to have  their cases assessed individually, this is the issue which we see now and I come back  to this point, all of this could be happening on Christmas Island or it could be happening  on Manus, and those people who are found to not be genuine could be returned to Sri  Lanka and those people who are

JAYES: So you’re saying that the Government here are playing a political game with  these people’s lives by not taking them to Christmas Island because they don’t want to  break their six month record?

MARLES: And that’s exactly the point, the only reason why these people have not been  taken back to Christmas Island is to keep the political scoreboard intact.  It could have  been done more thoroughly, more efficiently and in a way that wouldn’t have trashed  Australia’s reputation, but what we’re seeing here is this Government walk down the  path of trashing Australia’s reputation in order to save Scott Morrison’s reputation and  that’s not good enough.

JAYES: The Government would argue that perhaps transferring them at sea is the most  efficient way, but Labor did send back more than 1000 asylum seekers back to Sri  Lanka, you claim they were economic migrants, so what’s the difference in this case  now, is it just the fact that they’re being transferred at sea?

MARLES: There’s no issue about going through a process which is what we did, and if  people are found to be economic migrants, not genuine refugees, then working with the  Sri Lankan Government to facilitate their transfer back to Sri Lanka, that’s what we did  and we have no problem with this Government doing the same thing, but all of this  could have happened with precisely the same outcome at either Christmas Island or at  Manus with a much greater degree of efficiency and thoroughness in a way which would  not have trashed our reputation internationally, if this Government had done that rather  than sought to protect its political scoreboard and that’s the issue here, this is all about  politics.

JAYES: But Richard Marles, aren’t you cherry picking here when you talk about  international reputation, the UN has also slammed the transfer of asylum seekers to  PNG and Nauru, are you choosing for when you wish for things to be humane and when  you don’t you seem to be happy to let things slide under the radar sometimes.

MARLES: I don’t accept that at all Laura.  What we have seen with Manus and Nauru,  under the Labor Government, was Australia still meeting its obligations to provide  people with safe refuge.



JAYES: There’s a very fine line here isn’t Richard?

MARLES: Well I think it’s important to get the lines right though, and we have provided  people with safe refuge who are fleeing from persecution, that’s what we’ve done.  Now  what we’ve seen with the Manus facility of course has distressed us under this  Government, Manus plays an important role in taking Australia off the table, it shouldn’t  be a hell hole and it needs to be providing safe refuge which obviously for Reza Barati it  did not, but what we are seeing in this case is something completely different, because  if the processing procedures are not robust enough, are not credible enough, and if  there is anybody who is returned to the country from which they are fleeing, when they

could reasonably be seen to be a genuine refugee, then we are breaking our  international obligations.

JAYES: But Labor did it, and you called them economic migrants.

MARLES: No that’s not the same, we never engaged in refrailment, the fundamental  obligation under the refugee convention is non refoulement, not to send people back to  the place from which they are fleeing potential harm, we cannot be certain with this  truncated process which is happening on board a ship, as far as we’re being told, that  people’s claims are being assessed in a proper way, in an individual way, such that  people are not being sent back into harm’s way.  And if one person is sent back into  harm’s way, then we have breached the most fundamental obligation we have as a  country under the UN Refugee Convention, that is something that Labor in Government  never did.

JAYES: Of the 41 that have already been sent back to Sri Lanka, do you hold fears for  their safety, for the future for them living in Sri Lanka and do you fear that they might be  persecuted?

MARLES: We’ve seen reports come out of Sri Lanka about what’s happened in relation  to those 41, I think it is now incumbent upon the Minister to make clear to the Australian  people what awaits those 41 people back in Sri Lanka.  He has an obligation in relation  to this.

JAYES: But we have heard reports that yes a court system in Sri Lanka will punish the  people smugglers, the people that organised the boat, but others will get away with a  fine, and children will be kept separate, that’s acceptable isn’t it?

MARLES: Well it is a matter for the Minister to give confidence to the Australian people  about what awaits those 41 people who returned back to Sri Lanka, but what we need  to know is that there is a proper pro cess of assessment which has been undertaken,  the enhanced screening process we absolutely support

JAYES: Is 19 questions acceptable?

MARLES: What’s acceptable is to get a sense and to get a clear understanding about  whether

JAYES: So 19 is acceptable but four isn’t?

MARLES: Well it’s not about a question of numbers it’s about being able to ascertain  whether someone is an economic refugee or not, and if there is any sense at all that  there is a case which needs to be investigated more thoroughly, then that is what  happens.  Under the enhanced screening process which Labor set up, that is the way it

worked, the question we ask is when all people are aboard a boat which is steaming  back towards Sri Lanka, how do they get an individual assessment, how does an

individual with a different set of circumstances and a different story in that situation get  their case thoroughly assessed?  That’s the question that has not been answered by the  Government and that’s the very grave concern that we have about what’s occurring on  the high seas at the moment.

JAYES: Richard Marles thank you.

MARLES: Thanks Laura.

ENDS

MEDIA ENQUIRIES: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

