

SENATOR THE HON ATTORNEY-GENERAL QC

ATTORNEY-GENERAL  MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

4 July 2014

TRANSCRIPT - Interview with Chris Uhlmann, AM Program, ABC

Subjects: National Security; Racial Discrimination Act; Asylum Seekers

CHRIS UHLMANN: Middle Eastern wars have acted as a magnet to an alarming  number of young Australian men drawn to bitter sectarian fights. Security agencies are  warning that some will come home radicalised, highly trained and determined to continue the  battle here. That's added urgency to a push to increase the national security powers of police  and the domestic and international spy agencies. They want more surveillance powers at  home and abroad and to ensure that people who've committed crimes overseas can be  punished here. The man who has the job of making the case to change the law is George  Brandis, the Attorney-General. Welcome to AM.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Good morning, Chris.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  George Brandis, what do you want to do and why?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  What we want to do is make sure that the laws are written in  such a way as to give the maximum protection to Australians so as to prevent the possibility  of a terrorist act on Australian soil.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  And you believe that is more urgent now than it has been in the  past?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, it's something that has been a problem for Australia for a  long time. After 9/11, the Howard Government introduced very extensive changes to the  Commonwealth Criminal Code so a lot of the policy architecture, or the legislative  architecture is already in place.

But, that said, the problems created for Australia by returning jihadists from the Middle East  ensure, make it necessary for us to ensure that the laws are as thorough as they can be. Now,  in the last Parliament, the relevant Parliamentary committee, the Joint Committee on  Intelligence and Security, produced a bipartisan report which recommended a number of  changes, in particular, to the powers of the national security agencies and the Government

will be introducing legislation in the week after next to give effect to those bipartisan  recommendations.

CHRIS UHLMANN : As you say, it was bipartisan, these recommendations were  unanimous and you were on that Committee, so will the Government follow the normal  process and issue its response to the report before you move to change any laws.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, the Government's response to this bipartisan report will  be the legislation I introduce into the Senate.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Well, that legislation is usually preceded by a response from  Government which says which parts of the report it agrees to and which part it disagrees  with.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Chris, the report was, in fact, tabled during the life of the  previous government. It wasn't responded to by it but it will be responded to by this  Government by giving effect to the recommendations by legislation.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  Now, will you then have an exposure draft for public  consultation?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I will be introducing the bill in the week after next and it will  be subject to the ordinary processes of parliamentary debate.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  It was said, and you were talking about that particular  Parliamentary report, there were a number of safeguards that were put in place to get  unanimous recommendations and one was the National Security Legislation Monitor should  look at this legislation. That can't happen now, can it, because you've abolished that position?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, in fact the National Security Legislation Monitor, in his  most recent report, made recommendations,  a number of recommendations, which included  recommendations to the effect of what the Government is now moving on. So, in a sense, Mr  Walker, the National Security Legislation Monitor, has already considered this matter and  given it his support.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  But, as I say, you were part of this Committee and the  Committee said that there should be exposure drafts of all legislation because there are  complex areas of law and until we see the detail we can't know how they might work and that  does require some level of consultation, doesn't it?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Chris, I don't know what more consultation we could have.  They're giving effect to a bipartisan report, they're giving effect to proposals that have been  looked at by the National Security Legislation Monitor and have been supported by him. We  are subjecting the legislation to the ordinary processes of Parliamentary debate.

CHRIS UHLMANN: But there were caveats in that report on the way that they should  proceed, weren't there?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: All…

CHRIS UHLMANN:  …because you were party - you were actually party to signing  off on them.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Indeed I was, and all of the caveats in that report have, in  substance, been met. How more thorough can the Government's response to a bipartisan  report be than to brief the opposition on the legislation, to introduce it and to subject it to the  ordinary processes of parliamentary debate?

CHRIS UHLMANN:  So what powers are you going to be looking at introducing?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  There's a range of powers. There's some 20 recommendations  in chapter four of the report but let me give you an example of an important one. That is in  relation to access to computers. The ASIO Act, in fact, predates the internet and the  surveillance powers that are given to ASIO under the legislation apply, for example, to an  individual computer but not to a network of computers so if computers were networked,  ASIO would, as the legislation is currently written, have to seek a separate surveillance  warrant in relation to each.

Now plainly that is an obsolete law. It reflects the state of technology in 1979 not 2014. So  we propose to change the law to enable ASIO, when it seeks a computer access warrant, to  access networked computers. We're also introducing reforms that would enable the various  national security agencies, ASIO and ASIS for example, to operate more cooperatively  together rather than in separate silos as has been the case up to now.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  One of the reasons that people were concerned, of course, about  the powers, that looking at the networks that you're talking about, is how it affects third  parties and that's why they wanted to see the law and how it would operate.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:    They'll see the law when I introduce it into the Senate  and it will, as I've said to you several times now, be the subject of the ordinary processes of  Parliamentary debate.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  Alright. When are you going to introduce changes to section  18C of the Racial Discrimination Act?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  We put out an exposure draft, as you know, at the beginning of  April and we received about 5500 submissions from members of the community. Those  submissions reflected a diversity of views which exists in the community and at the moment  I'm making my way through those 5500 submissions.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  And when might you make a decision on it?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I will be returning to Cabinet, having reflected upon those  submissions, later in the year.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  And, finally, look, the Government won't say what it's doing  with a group of Tamil asylum seekers that it's holding aboard a border security ship in the  Indian Ocean but can you assure Australians that whatever you're doing complies with  domestic and international laws and international treaties?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Chris, as I understand it, the Minister, Mr Morrison, has not  even confirmed the existence of the events of which you speak but I can tell you that all the  acts of the Australian Government are compliant with domestic and international law.

CHRIS UHLMANN:  Attorney-General, thank you.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Thank you, Chris.

CHRIS UHLMANN: And that was George Brandis, the Attorney-General.

[Ends]

