

THE HON AMANDA RISHWORTH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR HIGHER  EDUCATION

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ONLINE INTERVIEW  BREAKING POLITICS  FRIDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2014

SUBJECT/S: Christopher Pyne’s lies on university fees; Cambodia;  National security laws

CHRIS HAMMER: We’re joined now by Labor’s Member for Kingston in South  Australia Amanda Rishworth who is also the Shadow Assistant Minister for  Education. Amanda, good morning.

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR  EDUCATION AND SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR HIGHER  EDUCATION: Good morning Chris.

HAMMER: Now when the Government announced in the Budget its plans to  deregulate the higher education sector, one of the things that wasn’t clear was  how much it would actually cost students to do a university degree because it’s  been left to the universities to decide. We’re starting to get some information  come through now, and what’s it indicating?

RISHWORTH: First of all its indicating that Christopher Pyne’s claim that  students will only foot 50 per cent of the cost of their course is absolutely not  true. Indeed the figures coming through from the University of Western Australia  have suggested someone doing a commerce degree will actually have to foot 90  per cent of their bill. I think the other thing that it does show from these figures

coming through is that Christopher Pyne has consistently said that Labor is  making things up when we are claiming that degrees will cost $100,000. Well the  information from the University of Western Australia has shown that a law  degree will cost around $95,000, and medicine will be in excess of $100,000.

HAMMER: But isn’t Christopher Pyne talking about the cost of producing a  degree. So it’s the cost that the university bears to produce a degree, not the  price that it charges the student. And that’s the difference; it’s up to the  university to decide the price.

RISHWORTH: Well Christopher Pyne made the claim over and over again that  students would be only footing 50 per cent of the costs. Of course what we are  seeing is that just isn’t true, it just isn’t true. Universities because of this  deregulation are going to be able to charge whatever they want. Now he said  that would result in students only covering 50 per cent of their costs, but as  we’ve seen today that isn’t true. But of course we’ve also got the interest rates,  the compounding interest rates up to 6 per cent which is equivalent to the  Government bond rate, that will see not only the initial fees increase but the  debt of students actually increase significantly over time.

HAMMER: Now I except you’ve been talking to Senate crossbenchers about  this. Do you see any room for movement say on that issue of the interest rate on  HECS? Whether it can be adjusted from that bond rate?

RISHWORTH: I’m not in the Government so I’m not actually able to say what  the crossbenchers are negotiating with the Government. But my understanding is  that there are a number of crossbenchers that really believe that this package is  completely unfair, not just the indexation but the deregulation, the increase in  fees. And importantly, what impact this will have on rural and regional  universities. I know that even within the Government there are concerns about  that, let alone those in the crossbench that represent rural and regional areas  and places that will do not so well out of these reforms. There’s been some quite  public statements from Senator Jacqui Lambie and from Clive Palmer and indeed  from other crossbench members that are not in Palmer United, that have said  they are very, very concerned about these changes. We will continue to  prosecute the case, but what we don’t think is right is to just tinker around the  edges. To get rid of one bit isn’t going to make the package a whole lot better.  This is changing the way we fund our universities, the way we pay for our  degrees, and really it’s making the assumption that public education is only a  private benefit and we reject that.

HAMMER: Now moving on, the Government has shown the ability to strike a  deal with Palmer United, this week striking a deal for the reintroduction of  Temporary Protection Visas and this new class of Safe Haven Visas. Scott

Morrison is in Cambodia today, doing a deal there to resettle asylum-seekers and  refugees from Nauru, who are presently on Nauru. What do you make of this  deal with Cambodia?

RISHWORTH: Firstly I think it’s extremely concerning that the Australian people  and the Opposition find out about this deal from the Cambodian press in the first  instance, and actually not from the Australian Immigration Minister. I think that  shows a real incredible lack of transparency, and the inability to actually be  upfront and open. Then the other question that Scott Morrison has really got to  explain is while he was in Opposition he railed against Labor’s Malaysian Transfer  Agreement. He said it wasn’t right and we shouldn’t allow it to happen. He needs  to explain why the Cambodia arrangement is better than the Malaysian  Agreement.

HAMMER: Because Cambodia is a signatory to the International Refugee  Convention.

RISHWORTH: Well I think he’s got to go a bit further than that and actually  prove on the ground about exactly all his claims he made about Malaysia, which  were significant. And there were significant criticisms at the time in which he had  a stunt where he went over to Malaysia. I think he’s a lot less transparent now;  he doesn’t take the cameras over to watch him sign the agreement with  Cambodia. I think he’s got to actually explain exactly why he thinks this is a  significantly better arrangement and I think that we’ll find that in Opposition he  was purely just playing politics.

HAMMER: Finally moving on, the Government’s introduced or indeed passed the  first tranche of three tranches of increased anti-terror legislation and Labor has  backed that. Now there have been concerns raised, the head of ASIO or the  Deputy can issue a warrant for taping into computer networks. The definition of  network is so wide it could include the entire internet. Why didn’t Labor try and  restrict that because it has been suggested that that could be open to abuse? I  mean ASIO issuing its own warrants for example.

RISHWORTH: What I would say is this legislation that was passed by the  Senate last night hasn’t just been decided in a rushed fashion. It actually went to  the Joint Committee who did look at it very thoroughly and made 17  recommendations. They were all adopted by the Government. There were a  number of important recommendations and those recommendations have been  put into the legislation. We made a commitment to work with the Government  when it comes to national security, but that’s not to say there can’t be  amendments made and that was the process that we went through. Through the  Intelligence Committee of the Parliament in which changes were made.

HAMMER: Now in recent times the Australian media has reported that ASIO  spied on the President of Indonesia and his wife, tapped their phones. Is it fitting  that an Australian journalist who reported that would now be facing 10 years jail  for reporting on a special intelligence operation?

RISHWORTH: As I said we worked constructively with the Government on this,  we tried to work with them through the Committee to fine tune this piece of  legislation. In terms of the calibre of our intelligence officers, I think we have a  high calibre and a very professional work force when it comes to our intelligence  agencies. But with this legislation we’ve worked with the Government, we’ve  made some recommendations through the Committee that have been adopted.

HAMMER: There have been revelations from WikiLeaks about Australian  classified documents. But has there anything there that would really warrant a  10 year jail sentence, has anything that’s been revealed endangered people’s  lives or really compromised national security, beyond being simply embarrassing?

RISHWORTH: Obviously anytime people that are undercover are exposed, then  it does put them in danger. I’m not aware of any specific incident, but I don’t  expect to be aware. But we don’t know what might happen in the future, and  certainly I wouldn’t want to be in the situation where we are putting anyone’s life  at risk as a result of releasing information about their identity. What I would say  though is there’s been a number of changes and recommendations that were  made to ensure these laws were more workable but also had protections put in  place and I think we’ve struck the right balance.

HAMMER: OK Amanda Rishworth in Adelaide, thanks so much for your time  today.

RISHWORTH: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TRISTAN RUST 0400 099 204

