

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS PM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 19 JUNE 2014

SUBJECT/S: Immigration policy.

DAVID SPEERS: Richard Marles thank you for your time. Six months and no  successful boat journey to Australia, who deserves the credit for that?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Well, firstly David if we have seen the end of the loss  of life at sea and we hope that we have that is an unquestionably a great thing  and unlike the Government who comes to this issue from a very political position,  we are driven by compassion and it’s from that point of view that seeing an end  to the loss of life at sea is an unquestionably a good thing. But the most  important step that this Government has taken has been to continue to  prosecute the agreement that Labor reached with the Government of Papua New  Guinea last year, which was a game changer in terms of taking Australia off the  table that far and away has been the biggest step which has contributed to  seeing an end, we hope, to the loss of life at sea.

But can I also make this point David, we heard the Prime Minister say in the  press conference this morning that his government could never be accused of  self-congratulation, that is a comment which beggars belief. On more than 60  occasions this year we’ve seen Scott Morrison sight a score board and in the  process pat himself on the back, it is the most -

SPEERS: Hang on there you talk about self-congratulation you have just said  that the main reason we’ve seen this outcome is because of the deal that Labor  put in place with PNG?

MARLES: And that is right but I might say we are driven from a position of  compassion to see an end to the loss of life at sea and what we did was get  about doing the business the hard yards of resolving this issue. I mean if you for  example -

SPEERS: Sure, sure but there is an element of self-congratulation there because  you are ignoring the [inaudible] Government’s policy which is turning back boats.

MARLES: Well the issue in relation to that remains its impact on the relationship  with Indonesia and that frankly is something that remains unresolved, this is  clearly -

SPEERS: Well, well does it? I mean the Indonesian Ambassador is back in  Canberra now the Prime Minister has met on friendly terms personally with the  Indonesian President.

MARLES: Well no-one is for a moment suggesting that there’s the degree of  cooperation that existed with Indonesia around this issue of managing asylum  seekers when Labor was in power and indeed when this government entered  power that cooperation doesn’t exist at the moment -

SPEERS: Well perhaps, but we don’t, whether it does or doesn’t we don’t have  people coming and under Labor -

MARLES: That remains -

SPEERS: You may have had co-operation but there were a lot of people coming.

MARLES: That remains in a state of suspension David and it is plain common  sense that if we are going to have a long term resolution to this issue we need to  be acting in cooperation with Indonesia, and to have a sense of the extent to  which this policy erodes the relationship with Indonesia you only need to look at  the fact that a Prime Ministerial visit to Indonesia was cancelled by virtue of this  policy being in place. But I do want to make this point David -

SPEERS: Just on that though, if you are weighing this up are you really saying  that you would not have turned back boats and risked the period in the  relationship we’ve been through against turning back the boats and actually  seeing this outcome which has seen none arrive for six months?

MARLES: Well the principle factor in the outcome that is being talked about  today is the arrangement that we entered into with PNG and that was  fundamentally an act of co-operation. As was the act of co-operation that we had  with Indonesia which saw an end to visas on arrival for Iranians coming into  Indonesia, as was our agreement that we entered into with Nauru. We have  always acted on the basis of co-operating with our neighbours because we don’t  think that you are going to have a long term resolution to this issue unless you  are working with your neighbours.

SPEERS: So does that mean you will not support as any point turning back  boats?

MARLES: I’ve got an open mind about anything which helps resolve this issue  but I retain this concern, so long as we have a situation where this is a policy  which erodes our relationship with Indonesia, so long as we have a situation  where Indonesia completely opposes this, well then there is an unresolved issue  associated with this. And there remains the question about when the relationship  regularises with Indonesia how will this policy work at that point and its only  then that you can have a proper judgement about a policy of turning back the  boats.

I really want to make this point David, we have seen this Government beat its  chest, day in day out about this issue. We have the Prime Minister saying he’s  not a Government of self-congratulation and yet we have in Scott Morrison the  most self-congratulatory Minister that we have ever seen. Here is a number  David that you will not hear Scott Morrison talk about, yesterday was a thousand  days since Scott Morrison and Tony Abbott teamed up with the Greens on  Malaysia to keep the boats coming. There was an opportunity three years ago to  work with Labor in the House of Representatives in the Parliament to bring an  end to this issue and since that time we’ve seen more than 680 people lose their  lives at sea. Now that was unquestionably an overt political act by the Coalition.

SPEERS: Fair point, but it is a hypothetical you do not know whether that would  have stopped the boats -

MARLES: Well let’s explore the hypothetical David, let’s explore the hypothetical  -



SPEERS: Well let’s move on if we can -

MARLES: We have, well no I just want to make this point, we have Scott  Morrison citing turn arounds being the critical issue. Now we don’t know exactly  how many people have been turned around but if you base it on the figures that  were being quoted before the 19th December when there were those weekly

reports, it can’t be more than three to four hundred. The Malaysian arrangement  provided for an effective turnaround of 800 people, now by Scott Morrison’s own  logic this is a policy which three years ago would have resolved this issue and he  blocked it and he blocked it for political reasons. There is no-one in this country  that thinks he did it for any other reason than politics.

SPEERS: I don’t want to dwell too much on history here but the difference here  was your Malaysia policy did have a limit of 800 asylum seekers, people  smugglers plying this trade knew that with the boat turn backs there’s no limit to  how many boats they can turn back.

MARLES: But he is saying that his turn around policy, which cannot have turned  around more than 300 or 400 people -

SPEERS: But the potential to turn around all of them -

MARLES: Is what’s made the difference, well who knows what the potential  would have been if we had have walked down this path -

SPEERS: Well you told us it was 800 -

MARLES: Well we could not even have got past the point of putting in place the  first day 800 in turning them around -

SPEERS: You’re rewriting the policy to suggest -

MARLES: Scott Morrison -

SPEERS: That wasn’t unlimited, it was limited at 800.

MARLES: No, no it was limited in terms of 800 but if you want to talk about  hypotheticals, there was the ability to begin a relationship with Malaysia to  continue to deal with this issue, but who got in the way? The answer to that was  Scott Morrison teaming up with the Greens in an overtly political act, an act  which he has never explained in the context of the way he’s acting now and this  could’ve been resolved three years ago.

SPEERS: Let me finally ask you, yes, asylum seekers may have stopped coming  for now, the problem that remains with this policy and the corner stone of it as  you have described it, the PNG solution, is that the time being spent in detention  by those asylum seekers to have their claims processed and the questions about  where and how they are resettled in PNG, what is your solution to this?

MARLES: Well again that highlights one of the failures that we’ve seen from  Minister Morrison and for all the chest beating he is incredibly silent when things  go wrong. This is a Minister who from the time he was sworn in did not have a  meeting with his counterpart in PNG for eight months about the question of  resettlement until after the tragic events in February and the loss of Reza Berati’s  life, that more than anything else is the reason why we saw the events play out  as they did in February. What we need to see is processing and resettlement  happen with urgency in PNG that requires the active engagement of the  government now to be fair the fact there are now ministerial meetings  happening on a monthly basis is a good thing, but none of that started David  until after the events in February and they should have started on the very day  that Scott Morrison was sworn in.

SPEERS: Richard Marles, Shadow Immigration Minister, we’ll have to leave it  there, thank you.

MARLES: Thanks David.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

