Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

Scott Morrison

National Border Targeting Centre launch, Nauru, Carbon Tax repeal  bill, Christmas Island, Manus Island

Monday, 14 July 2014

Press conference, Canberra

Minister Morrison: Well thank you for joining us earlier for the opening of the  National Border Targeting Centre. This is the border brain and nerve centre of the  Australian Customs and Border Protection Service that will become the Australian  Border Force on the 1st of July. Clever borders, smart borders has been an integral  part of what the government has been putting in place. This is part of a $250 million  investment more broadly as part of that $700 million I was mentioning before. The  actual bricks and mortar if you like ultimately which will be established elsewhere is a  $30 million commitment but that $30 million only becomes useful when you have the  broader investment in the intelligence capabilities and training and other things that  are part of the package we took through the Budget. So this is a very integrated and  connected plan and it's strengthening what we are doing right across the board. I  often talk about hay stacks and needles, you have got to be able to find the right  haystack and then find the needle in that haystack and intelligence is critical to that  but then how intelligence is shared between agencies, is analysed together to form  the picture that is what actually gives you the answers and that is why today it is  such a significant day in our journey to stronger border protection. Questions?

Question: Minister the President of Nauru has reportedly invited Angelina Jolie to  visit his island nation. Are you comfortable with the Hollywood star visiting the  immigration detention centre and would you consider lifting the media ban on the  centre?

Minister Morrison: Well those are matters for the Nauruan Government, they  decide who comes to their country and you should direct those questions to them.

Question: Mr Morrison what is your message to Clive Palmer regarding the Carbon  Tax repeal bill?

Minister Morrison: Well the Australian people voted to have the carbon tax  removed and Labor senators were elected on the basis that they said they were  going to remove the carbon tax. Liberal and Coalition senators were elected on that  basis. PUP senators were elected on that basis so the time has come to get rid of  the carbon tax. That is what the Australian people want to see happen and that is  what we would like to see happen and I think that is their absolute expectation that  that is how the parliament will respond and I look forward to that being done.

Question: Minister are you at all concerned that a visit by Angelina Jolie to the  immigration detention centre will a shine light on your government's lack of empathy  towards asylum seekers?

Minister Morrison: Well I don't propose to respond to any of the assertions you  have just made. As I have said who visits Nauru is a matter for the Nauruan  Government so I will leave that to my colleagues in Nauru.

Question: Are there going to be any transfers of families from Christmas Island to  Nauru…[inaudible]?

Minister Morrison: No there is not I should stress. Those reports are misplaced,  there are still issues with the airstrip at Christmas Island which are being attended to  but planned movements will continue in due course and those planned movements I  should stress are always done based on medical clearances as well which has been  the practice of governments now for as long as this has been done but there are no  scheduled movements today.

Question: How many families do you think will be moved in the next few weeks?

Minister Morrison: When people are moved and why they are moved and that is all  subject to the clearances that are necessary and in particular the medical clearances  and when that process is followed through and complied with then it is the  government's policy that people who arrived after 19 July if they arrived illegally by  boat then they would be transferred for offshore processing in either Nauru or Manus  Island but in terms of families that is to Nauru only. It has always been this  government's policy that families only get transferred to Nauru where we put the  facilities in place that were sadly lacking under the preparations of the previous  government. We put the facilities in place on Nauru and that is why we are able to  conduct those transfers but at this stage the issues at CI logistically prevent that for  the short term.

Question: How many asylum seekers are on Christmas Island at the moment?

Minister Morrison: There is around about 1 200 or thereabouts, those figures are in  the regular detention statistics that are reported, and I should stress that the number  of people on Christmas Island has been more than halved in the time we have been  in government. In nine months halved the number of people on Christmas Island and  that obviously reduces the pressure and stress on those facilities. We are closing  two of the compounds, Aqua and Lilac. Overall right across the country and in our  offshore processing centres the number of children in held detention has fallen by  more than thirty per cent. It is our policy to do that and particularly on the mainland  the reduction has been even greater than that. So under this government there are  fewer people in detention than there were nine months ago. There were less children  in detention than there were nine months ago and most importantly there hasn't been  any successful people smuggling ventures coming to Australia now in almost seven  months. And when you have strong border protection policies then you are able to  achieve those outcomes of getting children out of detention.

Question: When do you plan … [inaudible]?

Minister Morrison: Well as you know those matters are currently before the High  Court and I don't intend to expand on any of the statements or information that has  been provided to the High Court and that is where I intend to leave the matter today.

Question: [inaudible]

Minister Morrison: Well I will just refer you to my previous answer. Again  assumptions being made about things which based on the information that is there I  don't think those assumptions can be drawn at this point. The High Court will be  following its process, we are following that process as well, complying fully. We have  given the undertakings that we have in relation to any possible movements whether  it was to Sri Lanka or Nauru or Manus Island and we will honour those commitments.

Question: What is the latest information that you have on the PNG police  investigation into Reza Barati's death? In June … [inaudible] … deputy police  commissioner Simon Kauba and assistant police commissioner Thomas Eluh stood  aside and there were suggestions that has delayed the investigation.

Minister Morrison: Well I have no further information to provide you on that than  what is currently publicly available and as I have provided previously.

Question: [inaudible] … security on Manus Island as part of a four month contract  and it was going to be completed. But recently the Manus Island Inquiry found  security fencing and lighting still hasn't been completed. I was just wondering if you  can give any update on the…

Minister Morrison: Well the timetable for that was for it to be completed by August  and that is what I understand to still be the case. I haven't been given any  subsequent brief to say that that timetable has been changed. The works were  obviously interrupted by the dreadful and terrible events that took place in February.  The process of putting in place security fencing, CCTV, and lighting and other things  like that is not a matter of just whipping up a cyclone fence around the perimeter of  the facility. It is quite a significant undertaking, and designs were approved,  procurement was put in place, the resources were secured by myself last year and  that process was being worked through methodically and properly and continues at  this time.

Question: But with the four month project when did the four months start?

Minister Morrison: Well the whole project was interrupted and the construction  phase really began again from roughly that period of time once we were able to get  the centre back under normal operations and then proceed again with the works that  were undertaken. There are significant works being undertaken on Manus Island not  just at the Lombrum facility but also at the East Lorengau facility which plays a key  role in the transitioning of persons who are ultimately being resettled in PNG and  there has been a lot of work done there. There has been work done on the relocating  of the logistics hub of the establishment of the staff accommodation to take over from  the floating accommodation arrangements we have had there for some time. The  creation of new and expanded medical facilities at Manus Island which we are  undertaking and of course interview rooms and things of that nature. So these were  all the things that simply weren't done by the previous government. They announced  a policy of offshore processing but didn't fund it. They didn't put the facilities in place,  they didn't put the medical facilities ultimately in place that were needed, they didn't  put the family facilities in place in Nauru but they made a press announcement, they  didn't actually do the work.

Question: How far away are the PNG police from making an arrest?

Minister Morrison: Well I will refer you to my previous answer. I have nothing  further to update you on that.

Question: Mr Morrison at what point does the parliament become unworkable and  an early election is necessary?

Minister Morrison: Well I completely reject any of the assertions that you have just  made in your question. The government is getting on with the job of delivering on our  commitments to the Australian people. We said we would stop the boats and that is  exactly what is occurring. We said that we get rid of the carbon tax and that is  exactly what we are doing. We said that we would build the roads of the 21st  Century and that is what we are doing and we said we would fix Labor's budget  mess and that is what we are doing. Now we will work with the Senate and we will  work with the Parliament. It is not uncommon to have Senates which are not under  the control of the government and we will work through this process like all good  governments have out of respect for those who sit in the Senate and to pursue the  mandate that we have from the Australian people. We respect their election to the  Senate and we obviously ask them to respect the mandate that we have from the  Australian people to fix the mess that we were left by Labor. Thanks very much.



