

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY PM AGENDA INTERVIEW With DAVID SPEERS  WEDNESDAY, 9 JULY 2014

SUBJECT/ S: Government’s statement on self-harm claims possibly untrue.

DAVID SPEERS: With us now is the Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles  thanks for your time. From what you’ve just heard, does that satisfy you that the  concerns earlier in the day are misplaced?



RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well if this is correct that the reported events on Christmas Island  were not in fact true, then the question that I now have in my mind is what on earth  was the Prime Minister doing this morning on national TV talking about blackmail?

SPEERS: He was asked about it and he said he hadn’t seen the reports he was  asked about it though.

MARLES: But he didn’t hesitate David, to walk down a very negative path here,  start talking about blackmail - it even seems to be in the statement which you’ve  referred to of Scott Morrison. If these events did not happen, then they did not  happen. To try and take this debate down a path of blackmail is I think absolutely  irresponsible in and of itself.  Of course Australian policy ought not be determined by  these matters, but we ought to be making sure that our facilities are providing safe,  dignified, humane accommodation to people who are within them. You never hear  the Government use that phrase and I don’t understand why that is not a reasonable  standard to hold these facilities to, and why the Government wouldn’t just focus on  that.  But instead they walked down a very negative path based on something which  doesn’t seem to have happened.

SPEERS: There were acts of self-harm and threats of self- harm under Labor’s  watch at Christmas Island and elsewhere, and similarly the Labor Government didn’t  bow to those threats either did it?

MARLES: Of course not, it’s not a matter of changing policy, but you also didn’t  hear Labor using the kind of language that we heard our Prime Minister use this  morning and try and take this debate down that very negative road again, and that’s  what concerns me. And it now appears that he walked down that road without there  being any basis in fact in the reports to which he referred.

SPEERS: Now what do you think and I ask should happen to children at Christmas  Island who are orphaned. Now the Government’s obviously denying there have been  incidents of self-harm along the lines being reported, even if there was, what should  happen to a child in that situation?

MARLES: That’s a difficult situation if that occurs, what I absolutely think we need  to hear from the Government is what its answer to that question is and what its view  is in relation to those children who were born in Australia and those children that  would be in that circumstance.  But what we consistently hear from the Government  is nothing, we just hear a shroud of secrecy about their policies in relation to the  way in which they’re handling asylum seekers in facilities and indeed matters that  occur on water, it’s a very good question and it’s one that Scott Morrison ought to  answer.

SPEERS: Well I’m just wondering about Labor’s position though and indeed the  position in relation to babies who are born in immigration detention, what is their  status, should they be treated as illegal arrivals or not?

MARLES: Well ultimately that is a matter that is going to be determined through  the court system, and I’m going to let that system play out. What’s important is that  we keep our eyes on the policy here, what is important is that the essential principle  of Australia being taken off the table back in July of last year is maintained. That is  an important principle because it more than anything else as a result has seen a  reduction in the flow of asylum seeker vessels and it more than anything else as a  result has seen a reduction in the loss of life at sea.  That principle needs to be  adhered to, the specifics in relation to your question, let’s see how the courts deal  with that and that’s where that ought to lie.

SPEERS: Sure but this whole thing today has brought focus to the plight of families  in this situation does Labor not have a view on what should happen to children with  or without parents when they are at Christmas Island?

MARLES: What is absolutely clear is that the facilities that Australia runs ought to  be run in a way which provides people with safe, dignified and humane  accommodation, that is absolutely clear. We retain concerns about whether that is  occurring at Christmas Island or indeed Nauru and Manus and it’s important that  they are run in that way. It’s also important that those people who arrived in  Australia before the 19th of July last year are processed as quickly as possible and

that the principle of Australia being off the table after that date is maintained  because that more than anything else has seen a reduction in loss of life at sea.

SPEERS: What’s the go for children though? What should happen with children?

MARLES: Most children who are in detention first of all are there with their parents.  In relation to unaccompanied minors who are on Nauru, the typical question around  them is that if you create an exception there, you are asking people smugglers to  put boats together of unaccompanied minors, and have them coming to Australia  and in fact it puts those lives first and foremost at risk in terms of making that  difficult journey. I think the principle of Australia being off the table is the important  principle here and we absolutely adhere to that, but come back to this question  David, at the end of the day we are not the Government and it is for the  Government to answer these questions and right now I’m here answering them for  you in relation to Labor’s view. All the while what we have is the Minster who has  slunk out of the country avoiding all the difficult questions, very happy to come out  when a front page of a newspaper comes calling, but when there are difficult  questions to answer, this is a Minister who goes into hiding.

SPEERS: Let me ask you about the High Court considering the fate of those 153  asylum seeker on a customs vessel, they were picked up outside Australia’s  migration zone, it could take some weeks now for the courts to decide what to do  here, what do you think should happen to these people in the interim?

MARLES: Well again a very good question for the Government, and again the  Government needs to answer, what is going to happen in relation to those 153  people aboard this customs vessel over the next three weeks.

SPEERS: What would you do as Minister?

MARLES: Well there are a number of options available, we should never forget that  all that has been attempted at sea could have occurred on either Christmas Island or  at Manus in terms of the enhanced screening process in a way which would have  been more transparent, more efficient, more thorough, but it wouldn’t have been  done in a way which has trashed Australia’s reputation and it would have been for

precisely the same outcome.

SPEERS: So you would, to be clear, bring them to Christmas Island or Manus Island  now?

MARLES: Well I think they are both options available, and the only reason why it’s  hard to be more definitive than that is that I don’t know where this boat is and none  of us do, and we ought to hear from the Government about exactly where this  customs vessel is, what state those on board are in, I mean after about a month at  sea, conditions on this boat would not be flash, so exactly what happens now really  is dependant a bit upon where this vessel actually is. But I would make the point  that none of this needed to happen, this was a vessel that was intercepted in  Australia’s contiguous zone, that means it was not that far from Christmas Island,  and all of this could have played out at either Christmas or Manus for precisely the

same effect. The only reason it didn’t happen was to protect a political scoreboard,  Australia’s reputation has been trashed in order to protect Scott Morrison’s ego and  that’s what’s happened here.

SPEERS: Shadow Immigration Minister Richard Marles thanks for joining us.

MARLES: Thanks David.

ENDS

