









THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  WEDNESDAY 15 JANUARY 2014  MELBOURNE

SUBJECT/S: Tony Abbott’s Commission of Cuts; Abbott Government’s  border protection secrecy;

LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION, BILL SHORTEN: Joe Hockey does not have  the courage to make his own decisions. He’s paying special interests thousands  of dollars to do the job that Joe Hockey should be prepared to do. Todays a big  test for the Abbott Government, what promises will they break, what cuts will  Australian families feel as a result of this hard-line Government?

This morning Joe Hockey said and I quote “I’d expect the Government will adopt  a vast number of the recommendations”. Well the Government should front up.  Surely if Mr Hockey says that he will implement a vast number of the  recommendations, he must know what those recommendations are, otherwise  why would he say he’d accept a vast number of recommendations sight unseen?  So the Abbott Government know the cuts that are coming to Australians, they’ve  contracted out their day job of government to the Business Council of Australia.

They now need to explain to Australians who is going to feel the cuts, what will  the pain be, what will the jobs that will be lost, the cuts to health and education.  Today the Abbott Government must come clean on whether or not they’ve  broken their promises and where the cuts are going to be.

Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: This hearing is actually with members of the Commission  though. So what do you actually expect to achieve from the hearing?



SHORTEN: Well, the Treasurer Joe Hockey says he expects to accept a vast  number of their recommendations. Everyone knows that their report is probably  been drafted and concluded, the Government’s just trying to work on the first  report timing to not damage their chances in the Griffith by-election. The  Treasurer has belled the cat, he has said that he expects to accept a vast  number of the recommendations.

Our concern is that if the Treasurer knows what promises are to be broken, what  cuts are to be made, what family services, healthcare, jobs are going to be lost -  be straight with the Australian people. If the Government wants to administer  bad news to Australians, they shouldn’t sit on the bad news or cover it up to a  time that suits them and not Australians. That is why this Commission hearing is  so incredibly important. The interim report is due very soon, I think it’s  appropriate the Government come clean and tell Australians what is going on.

JOURNALIST: Joe Hockey also said there would be some recommendations the  Government wouldn’t accept and the Commission hasn’t actually finished its  work yet so is this hearing today, as Joe Hockey puts it, a “show trial”?

SHORTEN: Joe Hockey must be a mind reader or he’s not telling the truth,  because he said that there are some recommendations he won’t accept and a  vast majority he will. Tell Australians what they are. Why is it that the Abbott  Government believes that running Australia is a game of hide and seek? Where  the Abbott Government hides its broken promises and Australians have got to  seek them and find out what is really going on with this government.

JOURNALIST: On asylum seekers, Scott Morrison did a briefing a bit earlier, no  asylum seeker boats have arrived in Australia in four weeks is this a sign that  Operation Sovereign Borders is working?

SHORTEN: The Government has broken its promise in terms of transparency on  such an important issue as people coming here by boat. The fact that there are  fewer boats arriving is credit to the PNG regional solution which was set up by  Labor. What is a broken promise is that the Abbott Government said that they  would - week in week out - keep Australians informed when the news was good,  bad or otherwise. Tony Abbott said, in fact a direct quote before the election -  he said “ I absolutely accept you need to know how we are going. You absolutely  need to know how we are going. If we have a good week, a bad week or an in-between week we will let you know all about it”.

Now what they’ve done is they’ve cancelled briefings. They’ve now decided that  they’ll tell Australians when the Government thinks Australians need to know. It’s  not good to be one thing before the election and another thing after the election.  This is a broken promise. Just like they made a promise before the election not

to cut defence, health or education and now we’ve got the Treasurer boasting  that he’s going to implement a vast number of the recommendations. He just  won’t tell us what’s going on.

JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison also says that he won’t be in a position to judge  the success of Operation Sovereign Borders until the monsoon season is over in  March. Will that be enough time to evaluate the success of the program?

SHORTEN: Scott Morrison started off.. In Opposition, you couldn’t open a  newspaper or turn on a TV channel without seeing Scott Morrison talking about  boats. Now they’re in Government, he’s developed an addiction to secrecy. They  moved to weekly briefings, now they’re saying they’re going to brief people,  Australian citizens, as the government thinks they need to know. And now  they’re saying they don’t know if the operations’ been a success. I think what’s  required here is the Government should honour their election promises - be the  same people after the election that they were before the election and implement  what Tony Abbott said before the election. Which is: when the Government has  a good week, a bad week or an in-between week, they just tell people what’s  going on.

JOURNALIST: What sort of indifferences in language from Mr Abbott and Mr  Morrison about towing back and turning back boats, what do you read is the  actual position [inaudible]?

SHORTEN: The Abbott Government’s fairly cynical addiction to secrecy where  they only tell people what they think people want to hear or what the  Government thinks people can sustain hearing is highlighted by the fact that Mr  Abbott and Mr Morrison have got different explanations for what’s going on with  tow-backs or turn backs. The best thing that the Government could do is just be  transparent with what’s happening with their boats policy.

They said that they were going to stop the boats, then they said they were going  to buy the boats, and now they’re just hiding the facts. What we need to see  here is the Abbott Government just needs to keep its word. They need to be the  same people after the election that they were before the election. It could  include being transparent on boats, it could include standing up for Australian  jobs or it could include actually keeping their promise about not cutting and  hacking into the health, defence and education systems.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

SHORTEN: Everybody knows that there’s a by-election in Griffith, there’s no  doubt the government is staging its releasing of bad news until after the by-election so that they can try and shark as many votes as they can in the by-election.

It’s clear the Government wants to smother any bad news within the budget; my  view is that Australians are grown up people who deserve to be treated as adults  by the Government. If the Government’s got bad news, why wait four months to  give it to Australians? Australians have got a right to get on with their lives; they  need to know if their health system is going to be something that will look after  their kids and grandparents. They need to know if they’ll have jobs in the next  week. It is cruel of the Government if they’ve made decisions about bad news  and if they’re going to accept a vast majority of recommendations, it is cruel and  unusual of the Abbott Government to time the bad news to suit their shabby,  cynical political needs rather than the needs of Australia and Australians.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADERS OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053





_______

