Transcript of interview, PVO Newshour - SKY News

TOPICS:  Don Randall, Operation Sovereign Borders, Border Force legislation, health  costs

Wednesday, 22 July 2015

JOURNALIST:  We started with me asking the Minister for his reaction to the death of  Don Randall.

PETER DUTTON:  Of course Peter, at 62 - just a shocking reminder to all of us to key  an eye on your health and make sure that you visit the doctor regularly. All of those  messages come home to lots of families around the country now.

I remember doing a walk with Don Randall in his electorate raising money for juvenile  diabetes with him and his daughter Tess. He was a great family man, he enjoyed very  much the company of his children and it’s a sad day for the Parliament because lots of  people believe we should have more characters in Parliament and he was truly one of  those characters.

He was a hard working local member and we really mourn his loss and send our  sympathy to his wife and to his broader family.

JOURNALIST: In your portfolio of Immigration there’s been a lot of discussion about this  boat arrival in the north-west of Australia - the Prime Minister and others refusing to  confirm the detail - it’s a bit silly isn’t it, given that we do have helicopter footage of the

said boat?

PETER DUTTON: Peter, I think people need to understand that these are quasi-military  operations that are underway and particularly when you’re at sea it’s very, very difficult  scenario.

We have previous examples where sailors and border protection staff have gone into the  water.

It is a very, very precarious situation and we have defence and naval assets, we have  Border Force assets to try to make sure that everybody is safe in relation to particular  ventures and keeping a cloak over that is important for a period of time until we know  what is going on and we understand the threats that might be posed to the Border Force  staff as well as to people on boats.

Once we work through all of that detail and matters are finalised then we talk about the  detail of the operations, but there are very good reasons for not broadcasting these.

JOURNALIST: I can understand not providing operational details now, but surely just  acknowledging ‘there’s been a boat, it’s been spotted, there are now operational  approaches to deal with it and we will give those further details in due course’ - that’s  not unreasonable surely?

PETER DUTTON: No and that’s exactly what we’ve said. We said we don’t comment in  relation to operational matters and we’ve been very consistent about that and it is part of  the reason we’ve been able to stop the boats.

The other part of this, of course, that people don’t see day-to-day, is the sophistication of  the people smuggling networks.

They are monitoring every word that I say, every word the Government says, in relation  to the boats.

They, for example, try to twist my words when I say that we’ve reduced the number of  children in detention from 2000 down to less than 100 that somehow that is a message  to people to bring your kids and jump on a rickety boat and come to Australia.

So we need to be careful about the way in which we use our language and the way in  which that can be twisted and contorted for people smugglers’ advantage and I think  people really need to comprehend the sophistication of the criminal network that is  behind these ventures.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you though, is it the case that the number of boats that are  actually coming to Australia have been stopped or substantially reduced or is it more just  a case of because of a line of sight we don’t know about the details, because of the  operational matters that keep it out of view?

PETER DUTTON: Well there were no boats that arrived for a period of time and when  John Howard lost Government in 2007 there were four people in detention. So the  Howard Government had it right.

We’ve cleaned up Labor’s mess now and I think the fact that when Kevin Rudd came to  Government there were only four people in detention and then you end up with 2000  kids in detention shows that the boats are there.

JOURNALIST: Now I’d agree that the Government in terms of the outcomes has  achieved its goal in this policy space, but I guess what I’m wondering about is whether or  not there’s actually been a reduction in the number of people that are leaving to come  here by boat, or it’s just a case that we don’t know the details about how many are being  turned back and it’s that turn-back that is obviously resulting in the reduced numbers in  terms of outcomes?

PETER DUTTON: Well a couple of points. The reason that I say they started off a low  base and had 50,000 arrive on 821 boats is that there was no end in sight.

It’s not as if that number had plateaued, the number was increasing, that was all of the  advice that we had and you see this now in the Mediterranean.

There are millions of people who are potential customers for these people smugglers,  there is no end in sight and the fact that we do do turn-backs, we do have disruption  activities, there is a lot of work behind the scenes that people don’t see in relation to  Operation Sovereign Borders that has resulted in us being able to stop the boats.

My very strong belief, backed up by the best advice we have available to us, is that if  you undo some of that, if you turn back the turn-back policy, it will be a disaster and the  boats will start again and the deaths at sea will recommence.

JOURNALIST: Now I’ve seen some reports about a man on Nauru - an asylum seeker  or an illegal as you call it - who has got health complications, he needs treatment on the  mainland.

We’re literally talking about something that could be a life or death decision, what can  you tell us about what’s going on in that case?

PETER DUTTON: We have hundreds of people that we bring from Nauru to the  mainland for medical assistance each year.

We have a decision that’s made by the medical staff in individual cases about whether  people can receive the treatment in Nauru or indeed in Manus or if they need to come to  Australia or indeed to another country within the region that has the appropriate facilities.

That’s an operational decision that the medical staff will make and we take that advice,  but we provide a significant amount of taxpayers’ funding to have a humane response to  the health needs of people.

My very firm intent is, firstly, that we don’t backfill the places within detention that we’ve  been able to empty and now we’ve closed 13 of 17 detention centres that Labor opened,  but in addition to that I want to make sure that we have a humane environment in which  people are kept until they can be returned to their country of origin.

We’ve been very firm and consistent about that and I don’t want to see people  assaulted, I don’t want to see people hurt, I want to see medical advice provided to  people and medical assistance given to those people who are in need, but at the same  time we are not going to allow the boats to recommence.

JOURNALIST: What do you say to the doctors and nurses who feel that because of  changes to the Border Force legislation there are issues or things that they see that they  really feel it is their duty, their fiduciary duty to go public on?

PETER DUTTON: Well, I’ve seen lots of the scare campaign around this, frankly some  people are using this issue for their own political ends, the Greens have really  exaggerated the true scenario in relation to this picture and the true scenario is that  whistleblower legislation and protection has been and always will be there and if people  see the wrong thing they can report that.

But the intention of our legislation is to say that we do receive sensitive intelligence  reports and information from trusted agencies including intelligence agencies here, but  abroad as well, and if people release that information or if they are dealing with sensitive  information in a way that is not professional then people face consequences.

It doesn’t matter whether they’re medical staff or whether they’re guards at the detention  centres here on the mainland, people have a responsibility to keep that information in  confidence; that’s the way in which it’s been provided to us and the condition on which  it’s been provided to us, but if people see actions within the workplace, those people

have the same rights under the legislation that anybody else in a workplace would have  to report that information without fear or retribution that’s the way in which the legislation  operates.

JOURNALIST: In terms of the citizenship laws that you have carriage of, debate will  start up again in earnest obviously at the end of the winter recess in this respect; now of  course there is this committee that Philip Ruddock is presiding over, that will be factored  in to what ultimately happens and to who is or isn’t caught up in this legislation what can  you tell us about that?

PETER DUTTON: It’s a good and a necessary process because we do face a bigger  threat from terrorism than we’ve ever faced before.

We know that since September of last year 23 Australians have been charged with  terrorism related offences and we know that that’s the same number that have been  charged between 2001 and 2014 so the threat really has ramped up.

We need to recognise that.

The United Kingdom has since 2006 under its citizenship law changes taken citizenship  away from 27 people, so it’s been used sparingly, as it will be here, but if people are  going to pose a threat to the Australian public we will act against them.

We don’t want to render people stateless and it also has to mean something when  people swear allegiance to our country that if you’re swearing allegiance on day one and  going out trying to blow people up on the second day then there needs to be a  consequence for that.

So Philip Ruddock’s process is having a look at what citizenship means in our country,  the values, what it might mean in terms of language requirements, whether we should be  looking, as a Government, at suspending some citizenship privileges for people that  would conduct themselves in support of terrorism or conduct a terrorist act themselves if  they’re an Australian citizen.

So there are a number of angles that they’re looking at and they will come back to us  and we can make an announcement from there.

JOURNALIST: Just finally if I can in the area of health, your former portfolio before this  one, there’s a lot of discussion about that at the moment publicly, yesterday we saw  NSW Liberal Premier Mike Baird talk about upping the GST to 15 per cent as a way of  covering spending in areas like health for example, Anastasia Palaszczuk - the  Queensland, your home state, Labor Premier - she says she prefers the Medicare levy  go up what’s your view on this whole debate?

PETER DUTTON: Look, I think Sussan Ley is doing a great job in the health portfolio so  it’s not for me to comment on it.

I think in terms of a broader question about government expenditure, I think all people,  all Australians, who work hard and pay their taxes want to see an efficient expenditure of  their tax dollars and if you’re looking to a country like New Zealand, for example, they

have comparable health outcomes to Australia, but they don’t have the sorts of  increases that we do here.

The Prime Minister’s effort in relation to the Federation White Paper I think is important  here because, particularly in the areas of health and education, people don’t want to see  duplicity from states who are trying to dud the Commonwealth and vice-versa, people  don’t want to see duplication of effort and waste of taxpayer’s money.

JOURNALIST: Do you get the impression though Peter Dutton, in this debate the  quantum of the spend is what becomes the point of the discussion rather than the quality  of that said spend?

PETER DUTTON: The focus can never be on the quantum it needs to be on the  outcome and if it costs a dollar to get the right outcome so be it.



If it’s going to cost 90 cents in five years’ time because of technological changes to get  the outcome that you want well that’s is great, but it doesn’t need to be a dollar twenty in  five years’ time to get the same outcome.

We need to look at the outcomes that we are trying to provide and this applies across all  of our portfolios and all of us in Government, in the Cabinet, have the responsibility to  make sure that it is not a discussion about the quantum, it is about the health outcome or  the education outcome or it’s about the outcome in relation to immigration; that needs to  be the focus not just a cash grab to try to keep union mates happy.

I think most Australians who are working hard today, paying their dollars to the taxman  they want to know that it is going to be spent responsibly to get the proper outcome in  the most efficient way possible.

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton thanks very much for joining us on Newsday.

PETER DUTTON: Thanks Peter.



See: Index of Speeches

URL:http://www.minister.border.gov.au/peterdutton/2015/Pages/operation-sovereign-borders-health-costs.aspx   Last update:

