



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 20 MAY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Rohingya asylum seekers

WEDNESDAY, 20 MAY 2015

FRAN KELLY: South East Asian countries are going to meet today to discuss the  humanitarian disaster unfolding in the Andaman Sea. Around 5,000 refugees mainly  Rohingya Muslims from Myanmar are stranded on boats with dwindling supplies of food  and water. This follows Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia all turning them away from  their territorial waters, pushing them on. The International Organisation for Migration  has described the situation as maritime ping pong with human lives. Shadow  Immigrations Minister Richard Marles happens to be in Myanmar at the moment, he has  been meeting with Government officials and members of the persecuted Rohingya  minority. Richard Marles has spoken with our political editor Alison Carabine.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  In recent weeks we have seen the Thai authorities disrupt people  smuggling activities and as a result what you’ve then seen is people smugglers  effectively abandon their victims, literally crews abandoning boats and victims left to  their own devices on these boats in the Andaman Sea. Obviously there is a looming  humanitarian disaster here and we need to be supporting the Governments of the  region to do all they can and to find the political space to overt that humanitarian  disaster.

ALISON CARABINE: You have had talks with the UNHCR and the International  Organisation for Migration, now we understand that there are thousands of people who  are stranded in the Andaman Sea but does either agency have a clear fix on just how  many people are washing about out there on the water, one estimate puts that beyond  5,000, is that right?

MARLES: It’s very difficult to answer that question, what we know is that it’s certainly  measured in thousands of people exactly how many is hard to know. Australia needs to  do all it can to support the Governments of the region to find the political space  necessary so that a humanitarian effort can be undertaken here.

CARABINE: The problem is that no country in the region will take these people in, there  does seem to be frustration that Myanmar is unwilling to engage in talks, is that the  sense that you’ve got from being in Yangon that the regime is washing its hands of this  crisis.

MARLES: I think there is in Myanmar an understanding of what’s happening, I think  actually that ultimately this needs shared responsibility of all the countries in the region  and ultimately there needs to be some form of effort put in place to rescue these people  other than apportioning blame in what is a very complex environment I actually think we  need to be supporting the countries of the region to work with each other so that that  humanitarian effort can be undertaken.

CARABINE: That must the first priority to rescue these people but today there will be  talks involving Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and the UNHCR. The search is on for a  third country to settle the Rohingyas, what role should Australia be playing here, does  Labor want to see Australia settle some of these people?

MARLES: Well the question of settlement ultimately it is a long way down the track, and  there is a lot of complexity associated with that. I have met with members of the  Rohingya community here in Myanmar and there are actually different views around  that community on the question of settlement, the immediate issue has to be averting  the humanitarian crisis here and now that is what we need to do.

CARABINE: Should Australia be rescuing these people?

MARLES: Well let me tell you what Australia should not be doing and what we should  not be hearing from our Prime Minister right now. The sort of lecturing that we have  heard from Tony Abbott yesterday and over the weekend I think actually is deeply  unhelpful for the region we’ve seen the Prime Minister in two different theatres around  the world, in the Mediterranean and now here in the Andaman Sea, really try and make  a pretty cheap domestic point by peddling his three word slogan in very different  environments to the journey that people were undertaking between Java and Christmas  Island. Its probably fair to say that the European Governments and those dealing with  the issues of the Mediterranean kind of regarded him as the global village idiot, but as a  country which is a significant country within the region I think his comments around the

question of turn backs denies political space in this region and is deeply irresponsible.

CARABINE: And I take it that’s a reference to what the Prime Minister had to say on the  weekend when he said ‘border security does need to be humane and decent but the  boats have to be stopped and if that means more vigorous action on the high seas well  so be it’ that’s the quote have those comments been noted in the region?

MARLES: The Prime Minister comments have been noted in the region, Australia is a  regional player and when you have the Prime Minister peddling a line in relation to  turning back boats as if every circumstance were the same, it’s silly, it’s clearly ignorant.

CARABINE: Richard Marles the turn backs by Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand are  different from the turn backs Australia has initiated but could it be that these countries  have taken some inspiration maybe even some heart from Australia’s policy of tow  backs?

MARLES: Look, the policies that you’ve seen play out in Thailand, Malaysia and  Indonesia in fact have occurred over many years and pre date many of the policies that  have been adopted by Australia. But I’ll tell you what has been noted and that is the  comments of the Prime Minister in recent days.

CARABINE: But Richard Marles Australia’s approach to border security including turn  backs and indeed offshore processing, and it was Labor which reopened Manus Island  and Nauru, do you accept part of the blame for maybe undermining some of the  international norms when it comes to accepting and processing refugees? Which we are  now seeing played out throughout South East Asia in regard to the Rohingyas.



MARLES: The issue which we ought to judge actions by in this context is how we  provide greater safety at sea.

CARABINE: But have these countries looked to Australia for a template of how to deal  with asylum seekers?

MARLES: I don’t think that’s right and the point is I think there is enough sophistication  around the world in dealing with the issue of people movement to understand that whilst  there are some commonalities there are enormous differences in the circumstances,

differences relating to whether or not people are coming from transit countries or source  countries and differences in terms of the tactics that are adopted by people smugglers.  Now frankly I don’t think that anyone equates the circumstance between Java and  Christmas Island with the particular route from the top of the Bay of Bengal into South  East Asia, it is a different circumstance, but it’s actually why we need to be helping  these Governments and supporting them rather than pretending that a particular policy  can be a panacea for every situation.

KELLY: That’s Richard Marles Shadow Minister for Immigration and Border Protection,

he is actually in Myanmar at the moment. He was speaking there with our political editor  Alison Carabine..

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI, 0427051563

