

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER    E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY AM AGENDA  MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2015

SUBJECT/S: Syrian refugee crisis; China Free Trade Agreement.

KIERAN GILBERT: Andrew Leigh, a lot to get across. First off on the issue of refugees  and the Syrian intake particularly: what's your view on this? Should there be an extra  contingent that the government takes in and what sort of number are you talking about?

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Well Kieran, unless you think  that the needs of other developed countries have gone down, the only way in which you  can provide more assistance, be more generous, is to raise the refugee intake. I've  consistently argued that it was a mean-spirited decision of the Government to cut the  refugee intake from 20,000 to 13,750 when they first won office. Labor would like to see  that go back over time to 27,000; doubling today's intake.

GILBERT: So should there be a one-off intake as well though, given this current  specific crisis?

LEIGH: Well we believe that the intake should rise, this is not an immediate one-off  crisis as you say, Kieran. I think we should expect the crisis in the Middle East to be  rolling and continuing over a number of years. We've seen tragic scenes in Europe, the  sheer desperation of refugees escaping. But there's no immediate end to the Syrian  crisis in sight and a range of other problems are looming in that region.

GILBERT: Do you accept the Prime Minister's argument that on per capita terms,  Australia already does better than the rest of the world in terms of the refugee intake?

LEIGH: That's only because most developed countries don't work with the UNHCR in  taking refugees. We're one of the few that does, to our credit. But if you include other

countries which operate a sort of ‘knock on your door’ rule to refugees, we're well down  the list. We can afford to take more refugees, we're not so poor of a nation to be unable  to do that. Countries which have been performing much worse in economic terms than  us take more refugees.

GILBERT: Given where this crisis is at, as you say, it is an unfolding, an ongoing  humanitarian crisis. But given where it's at right now, isn't there an argument for a one-off emergency intake as the Greens have prosecuted?

LEIGH: I think it's about how you react over time, Kieran. I'd certainly like to see the  Government reverse the decision they made when they came to office, and go back to  20,000 that would provide more than 6,000 additional refugee places this year. That  would allow us to take in more Syrian refugees without cutting back on the number of  refugees we take from countries like Iraq and Afghanistan which are not in a  substantially better condition than they were a few years ago.    GILBERT: But you don't support a one-off intake beyond the annual humanitarian  intake?

LEIGH: I think we should take more refugees, Kieran. And I think anyone who is  arguing for more Syrian refugees but fewer refugees from other countries isn't operating  in the spirit of generosity that ought to characterise Australia at this moment.

GILBERT: Let's look at the China FTA, and you heard Andrew Robb before the break,  he said there's no difference in the Labor market testing arrangements and foreign  workers coming to Australia under the China FTA than under the Japanese or the  Korean, Labor backed both. Why is this such a big deal?

LEIGH: Well the arrangements are different under this, Kieran. You simply need to look  at the agreement itself.

GILBERT: How are they different? The Minister says there's no difference at all. If  anything, it's more stringent.

LEIGH: That is simply not the ordinary reading when you look at the text of this  agreement. That's why many commentators have raised their concerns about the  impact on trades and technical workers who won't be subject to labour market testing.  We want to make sure, with the unemployment rate the highest in 13 years, that  Australians are getting good jobs out of this. Labor opened the relationship with  mainland China under the Whitlam government and we've overseen the biggest tariff  cuts in Australia in 1973, 1988, 1991. We’re a free trading party. Our concern in this  agreement, Kieran, is what it does on the temporary migration side. Let's get that right.

GILBERT: But the Minister says the framework that the Government is following here,  he was vigilant on it throughout the working of the FTA and negotiation, that it remains

as Labor had put it in place under the former minister, Brendan O'Connor. If there's any  problem, isn't it Labor's wrongdoing?

LEIGH: That's simply not right. Labor would not have signed off on an agreement which  removed labour market testing for trades and technical workers. We're expecting to  hear evidence today from the Master Builders Association suggesting that in their view,  there ought to be appropriate checks and balances on tradespeople working on big  projects. We need more of these infrastructure projects, Kieran. But we also need to  make sure that Australian workers are having a go at jobs.

GILBERT: So you're not worried that this is stepping into xenophobia from the union  campaign here?

LEIGH: I think that's a wacky claim from the Government. This, from the Government  that has wanted to water down racial hatred laws, and which has not criticised one of its  members who went to speak at a Reclaim Australia rally. Let's not have these claims  about xenophobia and racism, let's sit down and sensibly work through the small portion  of this agreement which is the migration part and then let’s -

GILBERT: It's miniscule, isn't it, in terms of the number. Even if what you're saying is  right, the number of 457 workers in Australia is 0.9 per cent - it’s a tiny fraction that  we're talking about here. Surely Labor is not going to stand in the way of hundreds of  millions of dollars in tariff reductions that would kick into place next year? I think it is  $600 million worth of tariff reductions in the first year alone.

LEIGH: Kieran, we should be able to sign an agreement which is good for all  Australians. It's easy to say it's a small share of the economy, that is somewhat harder if  you're a construction worker who has been relying on work in the investment phase of  the mining boom that's now tapering off, looking for work in some of these big projects,  but then worried about how you may be shut out of the opportunities there. Let's get this  right, let's have a sensible and mature conversation as John Howard did.

GILBERT: What, specifically, is it in the agreement - you say it's different but what  component is it that is different?

LEIGH: The removal of labour market testing for trades and technical projects over  $150 million.

GILBERT: But the Minister says that’s for executives, the lack of labour market testing  is for those senior representatives crucial for any project. And other than that, it’s the  same framework.

LEIGH: That's not my read of the primary text.

GILBERT: Ok, Shadow Minister thanks very much for your time.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JENNIFER RAYNER 0428 214 856

