

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS - SKY NEWS  WEDNESDAY, 18 MARCH 2015

SUBJECT/ S: Abbott Government dropping the ball on 457 skilled visa  programme; Asylum seekers.

DAVID SPEERS: Now the 457 visa program for skilled migrant workers has long  been a contentious one between the two sides of politics. The Government today  released a review that it commissioned last year looking at how it could be made  better. The review is titled, and it gives you a bit of idea in the direction of what  it wants to do, ‘Robust New Foundations - A Streamlined, Transparent and  Responsive System for the 457 Program’. Essentially what the review  recommends and what the Government is going to do is introduce penalties for  any business that's actually taking a payment to support a 457 visa worker and  also better checks to make sure the 457 visa workers are getting paid what  they're supposed to be paid not being paid a lot less. Joining me is the Shadow  Immigration Minister Richard Marles. You've no doubt had a look at this review.  What do you make of it?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: We do welcome that part of the response which goes  to providing tighter measures, greater penalties - what you described before. But  I think what this does, David is acknowledge very clearly that there is an issue  here. We've had the Government, the Coalition beforehand for years now, saying  nothing to see here, not an issue. In fact, they were making pretty strong  accusations about the way Labor was raising this issue. This, I think, makes it

completely clear there's an issue out there about the way people coming from  overseas working on 457 are being exploited and we do need to see robust  measures in place to protect them. But in saying that, the report obviously  doesn't go far enough. I mean to have a situation where labour market testing  which is quite central to having a proper 457 regime, labour market testing  remains in limbo as a result of both the independent review and the  Government's response to it. That is clearly unacceptable.

SPEERS: How does it remain in limbo? I thought the Government is pretty  committed to it.

MARLES: No, that is absolutely not right. The review itself recommended  removing labour market testing, it's a recommendation which has been noted by  the Government in its response, that leaves everyone with a completely  uncertainty state about what the future of labour market testing is. The  Government really needs to come out very clearly and say that this will be a  central feature of the 457 regime, because at the end of the day 457 have their  place.

SPEERS: I'll check this, but I'm pretty sure Michaelia Cash said this morning  they said that they remain committed to labour market testing.

MARLES: Well, no, if they are committed to labour market testing then they  could be quite clear in rejecting that recommendation of the review and it is  clearly not what they have done.

SPEERS: You're strongly supporting the labour market testing and you back the  sort of penalties and checks that this review is recommending as well. What  more then would you like to see on top of that, or is that enough?

MARLES: If you look at training for example, so 457s have a place. Their place  is to fill skills gaps within the labour market. What they should not be is a means  by which employers can exploit people coming from overseas to have a cheap  labour source.

SPEERS: Is there evidence of them doing that?

MARLES: Well, there is a lot of anecdotal evidence around that. We have deep  concerns that it is actually a significant issue. We have had the Government, the  Coalition over years now saying don't worry about it, there's nothing going on  here. The response the Government has done today is a clear indication that  there is something going on or they would not have responded in this way. But I  want to make this point - at the heart of it David is the need to grow Australian  skills. And so having a training requirement on the part of employers to train

their own workforce is very central. The review recommended that the 1 per cent  requirement of payroll to be spent on training within companies be removed. It's  ridiculous. To actually be talking about having a smaller requirement on  companies to train their own workforce, when that is at the heart of the issue  here, is obviously silly. But that's the path the Government has gone down.

SPEERS: What about the overall number of 457 visa workers I think the last  financial year is 107,000. Is that about right?

MARLES: I think it's important to have a flexible program and the 457 has been  a flexible program over the years. There are going to be times when it grows  and times when doesn't. A recommendation that we do support in this is the  creation of a tripartite body with government, with unions with employers  looking at the relevant skills list and where there are basically skills gaps within  the labour market and that more than anything else determines what size the  program should be in any given year and having a body of that kind overseeing  things is I think a sensible idea. Again, there's a bit of weasel words here in the  Government's response, we need to get a clear commitment from the Assistant  Minister that unions as well as employers will be involved in this body. But that is  an issue that a body like this can monitor from year to year.

SPEERS: Let me finally ask you about the other aspects of the portfolio, asylum  seeks today I think it is 18-months, the Government is celebrating Operation  Sovereign Borders and the success it has had in stopping boating arrivals.  Eighteen-months on since it was introduced and do you agree it's working and  needs to stay in place?

MARLES: No-one wants to see the journey restarted which saw so many lives  lost at sea and Labor is not about to do anything which walks down that path. I  make this point about -

SPEERS: So you will keep turning back boats?

MARLES: I make this point David about Operation Sovereign Borders. The most  important aspect of Operation Sovereign Borders is that they prosecuted the  decision that Labor made to set up the Regional Resettlement Arrangement  which is the most significant decision that any government has taken in reducing  the flow of asylum seeker vessels.

SPEERS: That has been your view from the start, but you must admit that  turning back boats has been effective as well.

MARLES: The issue with turning back boats, and we've been very clear in  respect of this, what is the impact that that has on our ability to cooperate with

Indonesia over the long-term about the flow of the asylum seeker vessels from  Java to Christmas Island.

SPEERS: Has it really damaged that?

MARLES: Let me put this to you, the President of Indonesia, President Widodo,  in just about the first comment he makes on becoming the president about the  relationship between Indonesia and Australia refers to this issue, refers to  turning back boats.

SPEERS: Sure, he’s got to say that for domestic reasons.

MARLES: Well, you can write it off on that basis, my point is that -

SPEERS: Shouldn't our concern be stopping the boats not what the Indonesian  president might be saying to his domestic audience?

MARLES: Of course our concern is seeing that we end the loss of life at sea. But  our point and my point is that to do that, seeing through the prism of that,  over  the long-term requires cooperation with the country from which the boats are  coming with our nearest neighbour and that cooperation needs to be organic, it  needs to be hand in glove and it has not been that -

SPEERS: Are you going to stop turning back boats should they restart or not -

MARLES: I'm not going to walk down the path of hypotheticals in that sense.

SPEERS: You've got to make a decision.

MARLES: Well, the issue here is this - the Government has not been able to  answer the question about the impact that this is having on the ability of them to  cooperate with Indonesia on this issue and in the long-term, that is going to be  the key to seeing that this end to a flow of asylum seeker vessels is sustainable.

SPEERS: So you want more information?

MARLES: We want more information here, one of the real issues here is that  Operations Sovereign Borders has been conducted under a cloak of secrecy  which I don't think is really an operational requirement, I think it's much more a  media strategy but it treats the Australian people like mugs and so we absolutely  need more information about that. But what we actually need to see is an  answer to the fundamental question if we're talking about-turn backs, what is  this doing to our relationship with - or our cooperation with Indonesia on  precisely this issue.



SPEERS: Okay Richard Marles thank you for joining us this afternoon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

