

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  INTERVIEW with KIERAN GILBERT - SKY NEWS AM AGENDA   WEDNESDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2015

SUBJECT/ S: Remote communities; Automotive Industry; UN Report on  Australia’s treatment of asylum seekers

JOURNALIST - KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda and with me now the  Shadow Immigration Minister, Richard Marles. Mr Marles your thoughts on the  Prime Minister’s comments relating to remote communities and the reaction this  morning from Mick Gooda and others.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Well this is a complex issue, how you deal with  remote communities and it’s been grappled with by governments of all  persuasions at a state and federal level, but one thing that doesn’t help is to  come up with a comment which seeks to deny people’s identity and connection  with their own home, by describing people living where they come from as being  a lifestyle choice. I don’t see how that possibly can help shape this debate or  move this very difficult conversation along when you are describing where  people come from and their decision to stay at home as being a lifestyle choice.   It obviously is fundamental to how we deal with these issues, how you do  balance the provision of services with where people live and their sense of  identity with that place. These comments don’t help.

GILBERT: What’s your reaction to suggestions that this is just common sense  from the Prime Minister when he says things like, ‘if you want to close the gap

you have got to get the kids to school, the adults to work, you’ve got to ensure  the communities are safe’, and in order to get kids to school and adults to work  he’s saying essentially if you want to meet these targets that some of these  choices or locations where people live, it’s not realistic to enable Government to  help them achieve that?

MARLES: Well of course you have to get kids to school and of course you’ve got  to get adults to work that’s really important in closing the gap, but it’s not  common sense to start dictating where people’s home is. We’re are talking about  places, which as Mick Gooda said, that people have been living in for generations  it’s where they come from it is their place of connection it’s at the core of their  identity, so it’s not common sense to be able to say that you can just rule a line  through all of that and somehow on the basis of that come up with a solution  which does answer the question around the provision of schools and the  provision of employment. At the end of the day people are entitled to live where  they do and at the end of the day people’s identity and their connection with  their home is central to any outcome here and actually I think it is the opposite  of plan common sense to deny that.

GILBERT: Let’s look at the automotive industry now and the Government  backtracking on support for an industry which is pretty important in Victoria but  obviously South Australia as well, you’d welcome the additional funds through  that transformation scheme that was obviously something Labor was intending  on doing?

MARLES: Well I was listening to the comments of the Assistant Minister before,  Stuart Robert, where he indicated that the Government was tracking well, I  mean heaven help us Kieran, imagine what they would be like on a bad day if  this is them tracking well.

I mean the only word that Stuart Robert said which made any sense to me was  when he used the word ‘kneejerk’ which I actually think quite rightly describes  the actions that we saw yesterday in the Government’s, whatever they were  trying to do in terms of reinstating funding to the automotive industry, it started  off with $900m at the beginning of the day, a few hours later we were looking at  500 million by the end of the day the Treasurer had weighed in and said well  actually it’s only going to be 100 million, this is less than a month into allegedly  good Government.

Yesterday was an absolute shambles and it treats auto workers with utter  contempt, I mean to have that kind of message play out during the day actually  I think it quite cruel in the context of all that has happened to auto workers over   the last year or so. We all know and I can tell you auto workers in Geelong know  that the only job yesterday announcement was about was Tony Abbott’s.



GILBERT: But isn’t it a Government listening to say well, ok the automotive  supply chain that those suppliers might be in trouble therefore jeopardise the  timetable of the automotive manufacturers winding down. Isn’t it a Government  listening saying ‘ok we’ll ensure those jobs are kept in place till that point’?

MARLES: This is the Prime Minister listening to the votes of 39 of his own party  room that’s the only listening that’s going on here and it was on the basis of that  that there was a kneejerk response yesterday.

I was listening to the Industry Minister talk about how wonderful this decision  was the investment of this money in the car industry. It raises the very obvious  question if this is such a good idea then why did they make the decision to cut  this money in the first place and when they did that the inevitable consequence  was that the car industry would move offshore and that’s what’s occurred.

GILBERT: We’ve only got a minute left but I do want to get your reaction to  this report in The Australian about the UN analysis of Australia’s treatment of  asylum seekers say that they took it on the basis of what activists had told them.

MARLES: This is again the Government shooting the messenger treating an  important process with contempt, a one page response was all this got from our  Government. It’s important to take these processes seriously people being in  detention is a difficult issue -

GILBERT: Even if they’re flawed?

MARLES: We’ve had real concerns about the prolonged detention of people not  just in Nauru and Manus but also in Australia, the slow processing of people in  PNG, remember the former Minister, it took him months to even have a  conversation with his counterpart in PNG around the question of resettlement  only after the tragic events which lead to the death of Reza Berati, all of that I  think affords more than a one page response from our Government in respect to  a UN report and it’s not good enough to just shoot the messenger. If there is a  great story here for the Government to tell you’d think they would have some  pride in going out and telling it instead rather than covering it with a shroud of  secrecy.

GILBERT: Mr Marles where out of time, thanks for your time this morning, a  quick break back in just a moment on AM Agenda stay with us.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA ivanovski 0427 051 563

