

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MEMBER FOR ISAACS



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 17 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Senate inquiry into George Brandis; Citizenship changes;  Government paying people smugglers; Bill Shorten.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Yesterday the Senate  voted, with all eight of the crossbenchers voting for an inquiry into the  Government’s handling of the letter received by the Attorney-General on the 9  October 2014 from Man Haron Monis, the Martin Place gunman.

This is a very significant inquiry and it represents the Senate’s insistence that the  Government should not be allowed to shut down the handling of this letter that  the Attorney-General received from Man Haron Monis on 9 October 2014, a little  under a month from the time that the Government increased the threat level to  the highest level ever, and of course only a matter of some weeks before the  dreadful siege took place.

What of course happened was the Government failed to give this letter to the  joint Commonwealth/New South Wales inquiry, and then covered up the fact that  they had failed to give the letter to the joint Commonwealth/New South Wales  inquiry. Both the Attorney-General and the Foreign Minister managed to mislead  simultaneously both houses of Parliament, and then think they can come into the  Parliament a week later and say ‘Oh, we’ve misled the Parliament,’ thinking that  would shut down the matter.

Well it hasn’t shut down the matter. This is really the Senate’s attempt to  investigate what has become the cover up of a cover up. I’m very pleased to say

that all eight of the crossbenchers supported it, along with the Greens Party and,  of course, the votes of the Labor Party.

The inquiry will be a short inquiry and I hope it will get to the bottom of, first of all,  why the letter wasn’t seen as the red flag that it should have been seen as by the  Attorney-General’s office and the Attorney-General’s Department; why it was that  the letter was not referred to ASIO, and why it was that, despite the fact that it  had been answered, treated as the Attorney-General put it, as a routine matter,  why it was that the letter was never given to the joint Commonwealth/New South  Wales inquiry.

JOURNALIST: Is it encouraging that Malcolm Turnbull appears to be speaking  out against the Abbott Government’s changes to citizenship and (inaudible) dual  nationals, saying it should respect the constitution?

DREYFUS: What you see from the Abbott Government is the true nature of just  what a divided and dysfunctional Government it has become. It’s an  extraordinary thing that we have a Prime Minister who is far more interested in  scoring political points, even out of national security - that’s the really shocking  thing here - we’ve got a Prime Minister that’s interested in scoring political points  out of national security, that’s the only conclusion we can draw from the fact that  the Government first started talking about changes to Australia’s citizenship law  as apparently some measure in relation to national security, as long ago as  January 2014.

It’s now 18 months later, we still haven’t seen a Bill from the Government. We  still haven’t seen the legal advice that the Immigration Minister said he would  share with the Australian people. We’ve seen criticism after criticism expressed  by people on the conservative side of politics, including conservative  constitutional lawyer Greg Craven, former senior Liberal cabinet minister  Amanda Vanstone, and of course now Malcolm Turnbull adding his voice. We  already knew his views because of the extraordinary leaks about national  security that have come out of the Abbott Cabinet, but it’s now the second time in  a week we’ve heard from Malcolm Turnbull expressing his views about the  undesirability about some of the proposals that the Government is putting  forward. It’s about time that the Government produced its Bill. It’s about time that  the Government explain to the Australian people - “What is the legislation it’s  proposing to put forward?” - so that we can have a proper debate about these  important national security questions, and not the endless political point scoring  that the Prime Minister seems to want to engage in.

JOURNALIST: You cite some of these figures that are really uncomfortable with  where ministerial discretion sits, that it’s before any full judicial process. You’ve  given in principle support for this legislation.

DREYFUS: We’ve given in principle support to the idea that there needs to be an  examination of current Australian citizenship law.



JOURNALIST: Where do you sit on Ministerial discretion though?

DREYFUS: It is unthinkable that this should be allowed to be determined by  Ministerial whim. And that’s what’s the Government’s proposing - and I’m going  on leaked talking points. That’s all we’ve got to go on, but the leaked talking  points would suggest that what the Government has in mind is a Ministerial  whim, not a court, and what an outrage that the Government should be running  on talking points that suggests that a conviction, that a legislative scheme that  requires a conviction for a terrorist offence is somehow toothless. That’s not my  word, that’s the Government’s word in its talking points. What have we come to in  Australia where we’ve got the Federal Government of Australia saying that we  don’t need courts? We’ve got the Federal Government of Australia saying we  don’t need criminal courts or judges determining whether or not someone is guilty  of an offence. Apparently from now on under this Government, it’s enough that  it’s going to be on a Ministerial whim; the Minister looking at whether or not  someone’s suspicious.  That’s going to be enough to strip someone of  citizenship. Well, I hope we’ve made very clear that we’re looking for a great deal  more than that. If it hasn’t been made clear before now, I’m making it clear now.  We’re looking for a great deal more than a Ministerial whim and we can’t really  progress this debate further until the Government comes forward with its  legislation. It’s absolutely beyond time, the Government having started to talk  about this in January 2014, that the Government to now produce its legislation. I  think the reason the Government has not produced its legislation is that they  simply can’t agree internally, they’re divided, and they haven’t previously got the  proper legal advice they should have got as to the constitutionality of this  measure, which is why they’re dysfunctional.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it’s unusual then that the Solicitor-General’s advice  has only been seen, as I understand it, by two cabinet ministers and the Prime  Minister, being Peter Dutton and also George Brandis, and the rest of the cabinet  hasn’t seen it at this late stage. Do you find that unusual?

DREYFUS: I think it’s very unusual that this was taken to Cabinet as what’s  called an under the line item, apparently without any papers. This was the  subject of a massive leak about national security that we heard some weeks  back, where six Ministers were named, we got practically a transcript of what  they’d said in Cabinet. That’s our concern, that’s why the leak occurred.  Apparently there were initially no papers. There certainly wasn’t the legal advice,  which you’d ordinarily expect to go before Cabinet. And I say that as a former  Cabinet Secretary and a former Attorney-General. You would expect a full brief  and a full set of papers to be going to Cabinet on a matter as important as this,  certainly including legal advice from the Solicitor-General, because there are  some serious constitutional questions that have been raised, not just by me but  by a range of constitutional academics, and some of the Liberal cabinet minister  themselves. That’s the very sort of matter where you would be getting advice

from the Solicitor-General, where you’d possibly even be getting advice from  other eminent lawyers about it, to make sure that any legislative proposal is in  fact able to comply with the constitution. What’s the point of legislating if it’s going  to be struck down by the High Court? If it is going to be struck down by the High  Court, again it is something that leads you to think that the Prime Minister is  much more concerned with scoring political points than with the national security  of Australia.

JOURNALIST: Mr Dreyfus do you think the Australian taxpayers expect to know  if their money has been paid to people smugglers on water or on land?

DREYFUS: I think Australian taxpayers are entitled to know how their money is  being spent. That’s a general principle of Australian Government, we need to  have accountability and transparency but this matter was opened up by  the  question of payments being made to people smugglers to turn boats around to  smuggle people back into Indonesia, because that’s what the process is here is  the subject of this allegation. This matter was opened up by Cabinet Ministers; it  was opened up by Minister Dutton, it was opened up by the Foreign Minister  Julie Bishop giving their denial and then the back tracking from the Prime  Minister.

The fuss, the extraordinary controversy that has erupted over this is entirely  caused by way in which the government has handled this matter. The  Government have opened it up, it’s for the Government to shut this down  because the present situation we are in is that we have photographs and TV  footage of wads of cash in an Indonesian police station, a current investigation by  the Government of Indonesia people coming forward in Indonesia to speak to  journalists about these allegations that they were paid.

The Prime Minister has declined to rule out that this occurred and has declined  even to rule out that this would occur in the future. What that has done has been  to create an extraordinary pull factor, to use some of the language that has been  used in the past or perhaps putting the sugar on the table to use another dreadful  phrase that has been used in the past by the Prime Minister and Mr Dutton and  Mr Morrison. It’s for the Government to take this off the table, it’s for the  Government to shut this down. This mess is entirely created by the way in which  the Government has behaved.

JOURNALIST: Aren’t you worried though that a cheque could surface virtually  with Julia Gillard’s name?

DREYFUS: I am absolutely able to say categorically that at no point during the  six years of Labor Government was any people smuggler boat paid to smuggle  asylum seekers or people on that boat back into Indonesia.  So no I am not  worried about that.

JOURNALIST: But you are splitting hairs, you are talking about on water versus  on land. You are talking about one small aspect of this and Labor can’t say  whether they did pay people smugglers or not.

DREYFUS: It’s not just a matter on land or on water I’m talking about. The  controversy that has occurred as of now being created by the two Ministers I  mentioned, Dutton and Bishop, being prepared to talk about national security  matters in the way that they did, followed by the Prime Minister’s equivocation.  That’s the way this controversy has come about, that’s why it’s being created.  Just to go back to the activities of Australian Intelligence Officers or the activities  of the Australian Federal Police, I am not going to comment on particular  activities of the Australian Federal Police or Australian Intelligence Officers but I’d  invite all of you to consider Australian Intelligence Officers and Australian Federal  Police certainly need to obtain information, they would certainly be involved in  breaking up people smuggling syndicates working at times with Indonesian  authorities on that very project. All of that is a hugely different activity than what  has occurred here. What is the subject of this allegation, one that has been  blown open by the way in which these hapless Cabinet Ministers have chosen to  talk about this, which is the paying of crew and captains of boats to smuggle  people into Indonesia on those boats.

JOURNALIST: Mark Dreyfus you’d admit that the photographs of the wads of  cash and the Indonesian police saying that if someone has told them that they  were paid, it’s not really proof is it? Given the reputation of Indonesian police in  some of those areas of them being (inaudible).

DREYFUS: It’s something that absolutely warrants an investigation and as I say  the problem is one that is caused by the way in which the Government has  chosen to deal with this matter. This is not something that has been created by  the Indonesian Government; it’s certainly not something that has been created by  Labor. This is a problem of the Governments own making, it’s for the  Government to shut this down and we’d be expecting the Prime Minister to  behave in a different way, stop trying to make political capital out of national  security but deal with an actual national security problem that his Government  and his Ministers have created by the way in which they have spoken about this  matter. That is, to first of all deny, then to have equivocation from the Prime  Minister which leaves on the table this potentially tremendous incentive for  people smuggling boats to not only take cash from the people that they are  promising to transport to some safe haven, New Zealand or Australia, but then to  know that they are going to get paid by the Australian Government to smuggle  those very same people back into Indonesia. The Government needs to shut this  down. It’s a problem of the Governments own making and all of the obfuscation  that we had yesterday from Government Ministers does not alter the appalling  way in which the government has dealt with this national security issue. Thanks  very much.

JOURNALIST: Just one more question Mark, sorry. Was Mark Arbib right to  warn Julia Gillard about Bill Shorten, saying he couldn’t be trusted?

DREYFUS: We saw yesterday a fascinating piece of Australian television and a  fascinating piece of Australian historical television, because that’s what it is, it’s  history. I know that there will be people who are wanting to make this television  program yesterday, and perhaps next week, current affairs. But it’s not current  affairs. It’s a piece of history. And I have to say Bill Shorten has done an  extraordinary job as Opposition Leader to get Labor into and to keep Labor in the  competitive position that we have now been in for almost the whole term of the  Abbott Government, to draw attention to the unfairness of the Abbott  Government, to draw attention to the unfairness of their Budget, and to keep up  the fight, to hold this Government accountable. That’s what Bill Shorten has been  doing and I know that I and my colleagues, with Bill Shorten leading us, will  continue to do just that.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARCUS PRIEST 0402 914 466

