





THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NEWCASTLE  THURSDAY, 30 JULY 2015

SUBJECTS: Foreign aid cuts; Bronwyn Bishop.

PAUL BEVAN, PRESENTER: The Deputy Leader of the Federal Opposition is also  the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Development. She is Tanya  Plibersek and she has been in the Hunter today addressing some public forums- a  public forum at least, on foreign aid and Australia’s global responsibilities. This has  been happening in Lake Macquarie, the Lake Macquarie Hotel in Morisset but she  took a small amount of time out to talk to us about this in advance of the meeting and  here is that conversation.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hello, Paul. How  are you?

BEVAN: I’m very well and thanks for joining us here in the Hunter today. What  brings you here?

PLIBERSEK: I’ve just been down near Gosford and now I’m up on my way to  Morisset to talk to community members really about the massive cuts to the  Australian aid budget. We’re actually doing worse than we’ve ever done as a donor  nation. We’re going to the lowest proportion of our budget spent on aid since records  were kept and the effect of that obviously on poor people in developing nations is  very significant but the effect on our international reputation is significant too.

BEVAN: Do you think foreign aid is a soft target for a government that’s trying to  save money?

PLIBERSEK: Well, it’s a very easy cut to make in one respect because you don’t  need legislation to go through the Parliament. A lot of the other cuts like the

attempted cuts to pensions, the increased costs to university degrees, the cuts to  youth allowance and so on, all of those need legislation to be passed through the  Parliament but the aid budget doesn’t so it’s been cut three times since this  Government came into office.

BEVAN: How, though, do you convince the electorate that seems to believe that we  have to get our own house in order first? The Government’s argument [inaudible] by  the lack of ferocity on the part of the electorate in coming back at the Government, it  seems to be working, that we need to get our own house in order before we help  those around us.

PLIBERSEK: Well, I guess there’s a couple of things to say about that. The first is  that by international standards, Australia’s doing pretty well and countries that are  much worse off than us haven’t cut their aid budget to balance their own domestic  budget. The second thing I’d say is, it’s actually in our national interest to be a donor  country. Look at a country like South Korea. South Korea used to be a recipient of  Australia’s aid, now it’s one of our major trading partners. We do better in Australia  when the countries in our region increase their own prosperity because instead of  staying aid recipient nations they become strong trading partners for us.

BEVAN: Although from what I understand, when the Government was determining  where they would cut the foreign aid, they looked at various issues, amongst them  were that those countries themselves were giving foreign aid to others. So why  would we give foreign aid to countries that are then giving foreign aid to others?

PLIBERSEK: You’re talking about a tiny minority of examples there and a very  modest contribution. I think that that’s a little bit of a furphy really that the  Government have set out there. When you look at the sort of cuts that have been  made, we’ve seen cuts of up to 40% to countries in our region that are pretty poor  countries, countries like Myanmar or Burma, you know, very many millions of dollars  not spent there. It’s a country that’s just emerging out of a period of military rule, it’s  struggling towards democracy, the economy is under a lot of pressure. We in fact get  a lot of refugees leaving Burma or Myanmar, the Rohingya refugees in particular,  you see it’s a country that needs enormous assistance. We’ve actually cut our  assistance there. You also look at countries that are- take the Middle East for  example, Syria has a population about the same size as Australia, 23 million people.  11.5 million Syrians are either displaced internally within Syria or in neighbouring  countries and we’ve cut our aid in that region as well. So, people who are fleeing the  conflict in Syria are getting less help from Australia.

BEVAN: To the other point the Government made is the second thing they looked at  when they were determining where to cut was at the forecast economic growth of  those recipient countries and their capacity to achieve that, if they were in a position  to achieve their forecast economic growth and do they need our foreign aid?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it’s pretty hard to argue that even a country like Indonesia  that’s growing very strongly doesn’t have many millions of people living in abject  poverty. So of course, our hope will always be those countries move to economic  self-sufficiency, that they become donor nations instead of nations that receive aid.  But if we can get in as those countries are developing and assist them with things

like strengthening their electoral systems, encouraging measures that prevent  corruption, then we help them with their economic growth and it goes back to that  original argument as they go from being a recipient of our aid to a trading partner -  we actually have a much wealthier trading partner that can buy more Australian  goods. So I think a lot of these justifications are really after the fact, justifications the  Government has cut $11 billion, more than $11 billion from the aid budget, they’re  now working out what distractions they can work around that to make it look fairer  than it actually is.

BEVAN: So what would Labor do if re-elected next year?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we certainly wouldn’t continue with the aid cuts that are  scheduled by this Government-

BEVAN: Would you go beyond restoring it to where it was?

PLIBERSEK: It would be very difficult to do that in the short term. We doubled the  aid budget when we were in government. We went from $2.9 billion to $5.8 billion  and we almost achieved our target of 0.5% of GDP being spent on aid. So that’s 50  cents of every $100 that we make as a nation going to aid. It’s a lot less than people  think. We hadn’t quite reached that target. We’re down now at around 22 cents in  every $100 and the Government’s taking us down to about 17 cents in every $100.  We would certainly do much better than that. But to get back to where we were, to  that target of 0.5% of our national wealth going on aid, we’d have to find an extra $66  billion over 10 years so of course we can’t get there any time in the short term. In the  longer term we certainly hope to get there.

BEVAN: Is it something you think would be a winning strategy with the electorate,  the way you read the electorate in Australia, do you think campaigning on an issue of  restoring foreign aid would actually go down well?

PLIBERSEK: Actually I don’t think that’s the reason to do it. I think this is not a top of  mind issue for most people in the electorate and I don’t think it’s a vote changer  either way, sadly, I think. It is however absolutely the right thing to do. We’ve got a  responsibility as a good global citizen, but we also have self-interest. Stronger  economies make for better trading partners, stronger health systems in our region  mean we’re less likely to have epidemics or pandemics on our doorstep, countries  that are more peaceful and more prosperous mean that we won’t have to be sending  Australians overseas to help keep the peace as we’ve had to a few times in our  region. There’s a very strong and good reason to do it for our own interests and I  think it’s important for me to continue to explain that case.

BEVAN: Okay. I’m talking to Tanya Plibersek who’s visiting the Hunter and the  Central Coast today. I can’t let you go without asking you the news of the day, I  guess, one aspect of it is Bronwyn Bishop. She’s now apologised, she said sorry and  promised to pay back all of the money for all of the weddings. Is that not good  enough for the ALP?

PLIBERSEK: I’m still gobsmacked by the idea that people think it’s okay to charge  the taxpayer to go to a wedding so I’m still getting over that. Look, this is an apology

that’s been dragged out of Bronwyn Bishop. She’s sorry she was caught. I really  question the ability for someone who’s got such a lax interpretation of the rules when  it comes to her own self, I question her ability to be the person who’s supposed to  enforce the rules on the Parliament. I think-

BEVAN: So the ALP won’t stop until she’s gone?

PLIBERSEK: Well, you make it sound like a personal vendetta and that’s not the  issue here. This is a terrible abuse of taxpayer funds and it’s taken weeks for the  Speaker to admit that. It seems that she’s only admitted it now because the pressure  has increased from her own party and there’s obviously people out there saying that-  from the Liberal Party, that are saying her position is a distraction, it’s unsustainable  and so on. I think it’s a problem that it’s not the action that has prompted this  apology, it’s the fact that she was caught.

BEVAN: Tanya Plibersek, really interesting to talk to you, thank you very much for  giving us some of your afternoon.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you, pleasure to talk to you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

