Transcript of interview, ABC News Breakfast  17 June 2015  Interviewer:  Michael Rowland

MICHAEL ROWLAND: Minister, good morning.

MINISTER MORRISON: Good morning Michael.

ROWLAND: Why did you strike this deal with the Greens and what's in it for Australian  pensioners?

MINISTER MORRISON: Well what it's in it for Australian pensioners is a fairer and more  sustainable pension. 170,000 pensioners will get an increase of $30 per fortnight when  this comes into effect, more than 90 per cent of pensioners will either be in exactly the

same position or be better off as a result of these changes and it will remove the  unfairness where you have people with large amounts of assets, over $1 million in some  cases, plus the family home who will no longer be receiving a part pension. They will all  now continue to get the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card, which is important, but this  is an important reform to the pension to make it fairer and more sustainable. The Greens  have seen this as good policy and they've supported good policy. We have extended a  process into the Tax White Paper to enable some consideration of submissions on  retirement incomes issues and very happy to do that. But what it has also done is really,  I think, stranded Bill Shorten. Bill Shorten went for politics yesterday on pensions not  policy. The Greens took a different approach and as a result the ‘have a go’ Budget is  having a go because it's passing the Senate.

ROWLAND: Labor says 330,000 pensioners will in fact miss out, have their entitlements  cut. Single pensioners, the threshold for them cuts in at $500,000, what impact will that  have?

MINISTER MORRISON: Well that’s right and $500,000 of assets that people hold for  single pensioners, it was currently well above that, about $770,000 odd or thereabouts.  This is all a part of ensuring that those on lower levels of assets - because the pension is  a welfare payment, it's not superannuation; we're not going to tax superannuation like  Labor, that's people's own money that they've saved for. Those on a pension are on it  because they need it and we want to make sure that those who are on the lowest and  modest levels of pension are able to get a pension increase. Labor was going to vote  against a pension increase for those with low assets. Now that's just all politics from Bill  Shorten and I think he has been caught out. He's stranded on an island of reactionary  politics of his own making.

ROWLAND: The Government has agreed, as you say, in return for the Greens agreeing  to supporting this Bill to look at superannuation as part of your Tax White Paper. But the  Government has already ruled out adverse changes to super this term and changes next  term. So you've got a predetermined position on this. It's a pretty good deal for you; you  won't do anything on super?

MINISTER MORRISON: Well our position is very clear. We won't be increasing taxes on  superannuation. We're not coming after - that's Bill Shorten's policy...

ROWLAND: Excuse me for interrupting, why have you put it on the agenda for the White  Paper if you're not going to do anything about it?

MINISTER MORRISON: Because that’s the agreement we came to with the Greens that  they wanted submissions and extension of process to consider those matters and that is  what we've agreed to…



ROWLAND: It's a pretty good deal there for you though, isn't it?

MINISTER MORRISON: The Government has sought to have its measures passed  through the Senate and that’s I think - this is the single largest savings measure in this  year's Budget and together with the small business package, which has already passed  the Senate, the ‘have a go’ Budget is very much going forward very strongly and it's  because it's a good Budget. It's a sensible Budget. It has good policy in it and those who  can see good policy are supporting it.

ROWLAND: Just want to go to our top story; Indonesian police have given our  correspondent George Roberts photos they claim showing US dollars allegedly paid by  Australian officials to people smugglers. What's your reaction to that news coming out of  Indonesia?

MINISTER MORRISON: Well, I'm not surprised that people make allegations but the  Government's Operation Sovereign Borders policy and programme and initiative has  ensured that people have always acted lawfully and that was the case when I was  Minister and I have no doubt that that continues to be the case and this policy, Operation  Sovereign Borders, this entire programme has been extraordinarily successful. Now it  has had its critics from time to time, I dare say a few critics in the ABC from time to time,  but I think the success of the policy has demonstrated its great merits.

ROWLAND: Is paying money to people smugglers lawful?

MINISTER MORRISON: All I've simply said is that we've always done things lawfully.  We've always done things lawfully and we will continue to do that.

ROWLAND: But I'll get back to the question, is paying money to people smugglers either  on water or on land lawful?

MINISTER MORRISON: Well what I'm saying is that, you know, you're asking a  question based on an allegation and I don't feel the need to respond to someone else's  allegation. What I'm giving you an assurance is the Government has always acted  lawfully in relation to Operation Sovereign Borders and that is the key issue.

ROWLAND: And has that involved Australian officials ever paying people smugglers?

MINISTER MORRISON: Well, as you would know, and most in the media would know,  I've never commented on these matters. That was a policy that was put in place by  General Campbell when he was the Commander of Operation Sovereign Borders and  there was clear necessity for those arrangements and the necessity for those  arrangements continue. But once again, I assure the Australian people that we've  always acted lawfully and where there have been issues that we've had to address, the  regrettable incursions in relation to Indonesia, we were very up-front about that and we

addressed that with the Indonesian Government. On other occasions there were quite  ridiculous and outrageous allegations in relation that was aired on the ABC about  people's hands being burnt and that our people were actually torturing people. Now I  remember that very clearly, Michael, and I remember the haste with which that was  reported as well. So I'm not necessarily drawing a link between these at all but what I am  saying is that Australian officers have always operated lawfully on Operation Sovereign  Borders.

ROWLAND: Ok, what do you think personally about the mere suggestion that Australian  officials have paid money to people smugglers?

MINISTER MORRISON: Personal opinions are for journalists, they're not for politicians.  Personal opinions, I'm a Minister of the Government, we run policy, we implement policy  and our policies are getting the results that have stopped the boats and stopped the  deaths at sea and restored integrity to our refugee and humanitarian programme.  Something that was said couldn't be done, particularly on your network.

ROWLAND: Now you could be confused for thinking Australian voters getting mixed  messages because Peter Dutton, the current Immigration Minister, and Julie Bishop  have both initially firmly denied money was paid.

MINISTER MORRISON: As I've said, our officers have always acted lawfully.

ROWLAND: Ok, we'll leave it there. Scott Morrison thank for you very much for your  time this morning.

MINISTER MORRISON: Thanks Michael, good to be with you.

(ENDS)

