



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION  ABC CAPITAL HILL  THURSDAY, 2 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Tony Abbott’s Royal Commission into Trade Unions; Immigration Policy;  Same Sex Marriage.

GREG JENNET: His workplace relations spokesman is Brendan O'Connor who joins us  from Melbourne now and Mr O'Connor, Bill Shorten was eager to give his testimony to the  Royal Commission as quickly as possible, but even once he does that next Wednesday,  there is still a long limbo, isn't there, until the Commission reports? So what's Labor going to  do about riding out a prolonged period of uncertainty, even after next Wednesday?



BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS: Well, Bill is willing to cooperate because he wants to make clear that he has  nothing to hide. But let's be very clear about the intent of this Commission as far as the good  of the public is concerned. So far this Commission has spent $80 million of taxpayers'  money effectively seeking to go after the political opponents of the Government.

Let's look at what they've done to date, if I could. Any independent observer would conclude  to date that this Commission has been biased, it has been prejudicial, it has acted in a  sensational manner about matters that are not proven. It has made findings against people  who have not been called and has not made findings against those where there is damning  evidence already given. So we have a real issue here about the efficacy and integrity of the  Commission, the abuse of power by the Government around the abuse of taxpayers' money.

JENNETT: What's the sensational treatment - evidence that you are referring to? Let's break  down some of your complaints -

O’CONNOR: Well, let's be very clear, for example, information provided to media before  witnesses are called, allegations which are not substantiated yet fed to the media by officers  of the Commission, matters of findings against individuals who have not been called.

JENNETT: Do you have evidence of this, by the way?

O’CONNOR: Of course. This is axiomatic in terms of evidence. There are findings against  people in the interim report and yet those people have not even been called to give  evidence.

There are denials of natural justice. Remember this, this is not a judicial inquiry, this is an  executive inquiry set up by Tony Abbott and therefore $80 million of taxpayers' money has  been spent. A misuse, I would suggest, of the offices of Government, and for that reason,  even though Bill Shorten is quite happy to cooperate, he is now the third Labor leader called  to one of Tony Abbott's Royal Commissions. This is unprecedented since Federation, that a  Prime Minister would use the offices of government and millions of dollars of taxpayers'  money establishing a Commission to go after their political opponents. Three Labor leaders  in a row - Julia Gillard, Kevin Rudd and Bill Shorten.

JENNETT: Yes, he is the third and we do want to look at some other issues, but just on your  complaints about the performance of the Royal Commission, would you include media  reporting of the fact that Mr Shorten's former wife had been approached? Do you think that  as evidence of the malpractice or wrongdoing by the Commission?

O’CONNOR: Well, that was just another example of a politically motivated witch-hunt where  they are calling into question innocent people, and dragging them into this matter. It doesn’t  seem there is any threshold here, any boundaries, when it comes to these matters. They are  casting an entire fishing net in seeking to find evidence against their political opponents.

Now, what we've said from the outset, we believe that if there are any allegations of  improper conduct and particularly, criminal misconduct, that should be investigated by others  - The Australian Crime Commission which do have coercive powers or Federal or State  police or other agencies. But that's not what the Government wants. They want a show trial  and that's why this Commission has been established and that's why there is no procedural  fairness.

You have the Chief Counsel of the Commission leading witnesses who have no integrity, like  Mr Ralph Blewitt, which was found to have no integrity, yet they lead him to give evidence,  knowing that that evidence is false.

JENNETT: It is one thing for you to make pre-emptive complaint as you are here ahead of  Mr Shorten's testimony?

O’CONNOR: I've done this all along.

JENNETT: But what else can you do? Do you accept that the Royal Commission is a law  unto itself? There’s no recourse to the High Court?

O’CONNOR: No, the Commission late last year had concluded it would not continue after  the end of last year, and then we had the intervention by the Attorney-General of this country  to compel that Commission to continue. So you had the Chief Commissioner of the Royal  Commission concluding there was no need to continue further, and then you had the political  intervention by the Government, the highest law officer of the land, the Attorney-General, to  ensure that the matter continued.

Why? The reason why, I would conclude, is this is using taxpayers' money and the powers  of the state to attack the political opponents of the Government. It is unprecedented in its  scale, and the fact that Tony Abbott has only had three opponents as leader, and all three of  them have been summoned to a Royal Commission says everything about the integrity and  intention of the Government.

JENNETT: Alright well no doubt we will be talking a lot more about this in the lead-up to next  Wednesday, but ahead of the ALP National Conference, just changing course a little, argy-bargy over boat turn backs is rife in amongst the Labor Party. The Left faction has a motion  noting that such policies needlessly put both Asylum seekers and seafarers in danger. How  will you vote on that motion?

O’CONNOR: Well, what we'll see what happens at the Conference which is in three weeks'  time. The national Left haven't concluded a position yet. As you say, there are some  motions. The National Left meets, I think, this weekend and let's see what happens there.

But let me be very clear, as the former Immigration Minister and Minister for Home Affairs,  whatever Labor does - we'll always ensure justice and humanity informs of our policy-making  - we have to have a strong deterrent to prevent people embarking on perilous journeys on  unseaworthy vessels.

JENNETT: And turn backs are a strong deterrent, would you say?

O’CONNOR: Well, we need to know, and I think Richard Marles our Shadow Minister for  Immigration’s made clear, we need to know detail of that. We found out just recently, for  example, about matters about payments to crew of vessels.

JENNETT: So if there are protocols around Operation Sovereign Borders could have the veil  taken off them, would that be grounds then to go ahead and support...

O’CONNOR: Look, as I say, there is no point in saying yes to something you don’t know; if X  is the unknown quantity - I can’t say I agree with X. All I can say to you is this: As someone  who has worked in the operational areas of this area as a Minister and indeed the policy  areas, we want to ensure that there are no deaths at sea.

I had to personally arrive on Christmas Island the day of the tragedy on the 10th of  December 2010 where 50 people perished because that vessel foundered on the rocks and  crashed on the cliff face. And I do not want to see that happen again. And I can assure you,  nor do my colleagues.

Whatever we fashion out of the National Conference and whilst we have to ensure we have  a broader arrangement for these matters with our region, we need to have a broader set of  principles, we also have to have a very strong deterrent to prevent deaths at sea.

JENNETT: So that means you are slightly at odds then with Labor for Refugees who are  driving this motion up to the Left faction this weekend?

O’CONNOR: I'm not looking to be at odds with anyone. Look, to me, being humane involves  having policy that deters people endangering their lives. There is no point talking about  humanity if you do not factor in people dying at sea. So I'm open to persuasion on the detail  of this policy, as someone who has spent many years involved in this very difficult area of  public policy, confronting in many cases desperate people. But it must at its centre involve a  strong deterrent to stop people endangering their own lives.



JENNETT: And do you accept that even the appearance of discussion and potential back-sliding by Labor on this opens itself up to vulnerability of Government attack?

O’CONNOR: Look, we are a mature Party. I don't hear anyone talking about the Liberal  Party conference because they don't discuss policy. Everyone loves to talk about the Labor  Party conferences. And we will have some passionate debates, because we are a  passionate party filled with passionate and compassionate people. But in the end we will

come together with, I think, a balanced view about dealing with this issue humanely, but also  ensuring that we do not have anything other than a policy that will deter people endangering  their lives.

Now, that's not an easy thing to do, it is a difficult area, but it must be done, and whatever is  decided at Conference, I believe the party will get behind that and behind the parliamentary  Labor Party so we can win the next election.

JENNETT: Finally, Brendan O'Connor on an issue of the day, which is same-sex marriage.  The Government, as we all know, controls the numbers in the House, and if the numbers just  aren't there in the Coalition it is within rights, isn’t it, to just let the Private Member's Bill slide  down the list, never to be debated like so many others?

O’CONNOR: I heard you asking your colleague about impediments. Really, there’s only one  impediment to this being debated and that's Tony Abbott. If he wants to show some  leadership, of course he can hold his view, he holds it genuinely, I don't disregard that. But I  think it’s also fair to say that there is a growing level of support for this matter to be resolved  and therefore Tony Abbott should not stymie democracy.

The Minister for Employment, Eric Abetz, should not deny that people want to debate this  matter. And if the Prime Minister wants to show some leadership, he can hold to his view,  but why doesn't he let his own government members have a free vote on this important  issue? The time has come. The time has come for this matter to be resolved and the only  thing standing in its way is Tony Abbott.

JENNETT: And sooner rather than later, are you expecting as soon as August when you are  back in Canberra for this to come into the House?

O’CONNOR: Well, we can walk and chew gum at the same time. We've got to deal with  economic challenges. We think the Government is letting us down there. We can work  together on national security. We can deal with marriage equality.

To suggest that this is a distraction is an insult and to suggest that we can't deal with this  matter while dealing with other matters is a lame excuse and it is now time the Prime  Minister gets out of the way and allows for a democratic debate and a democratic resolution  to this matter and that means allowing for the debate to happen in August.

JENNETT: Plenty of ground covered by us today so Brendan O'Connor, thanks for joining  us on Capital Hill.

O’CONNOR: Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

