

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC 24   MONDAY, 15 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Payments to people smugglers.

JOE O’BRIEN: Labor has called for the Auditor-General to investigate  allegations about Australian paying people smugglers to turn around. Labor's  Immigration spokesman Richard Marles joins us from Parliament House in  Canberra. Good morning. What the thrust of this letter you have sent to the  Auditor-General?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: The first thing we want to know is, obviously, whether or not  these payments were actually made so we've asked the Auditor-General to  investigate that question. I think the next point is this: If, in fact, these payments  were made, are they a proper expenditure of government money, of taxpayer  money and, if so, how would the authorisation go in relation to that expenditure  and did that authorisation actually occur? We need to know the answers to those  questions very quickly because, ultimately, we need to get to the bottom of what  happened here. We have discrepancies from both the Immigration and Foreign  Minister at the outset saying this never happened and now we have the Prime  Minister over the last few days refusing to deny that it happened and I think going  further, inviting the Australian people to believe that that's exactly what occurred  so we need to know what's at the bottom of this.

O’BRIEN: Why is the Auditor-General the appropriate authority to investigate  this?

MARLES: Because this goes to a question of the expenditure of Australian  taxpayer money. The Auditor-General is precisely the right person to investigate  the propriety of any government expenditure and whether or not the proper  processes were gone through in respect of any government expenditure. If  Australian taxpayer money has been spent by handing wads of cash over to  people smugglers who have come in contact with an Australian Navy vessel, I  think we need to understand, firstly did it happen, secondly, is that an appropriate  expenditure and thirdly, if it did, what process of authorisation was gone through  by those who made the expenditure such that this was all done appropriately.

O’BRIEN: Are you confident that the Auditor-General would have the appropriate  powers to get to the bottom of this and compel evidence?

MARLES: I think ultimately the ability of the Auditor-General to compel evidence  is a matter for him but certainly the Auditor-General is the right person to engage  in this investigation and we need to be doing whatever we can right now to get to  the bottom of this. We need to understand exactly what has happened here. We  think the Auditor-General has a useful role to play.

O’BRIEN: The Prime Minister says in response to these questions the only thing  to say to this is ‘we’ve stopped the boats’. Why do you believe the Australian  public should know more?

MARLES: Well, I think the Australian public deserve to know how their money is  being spent. That's the first proposition. There should be transparency in the way  that Government is undertaken. We have never accepted this question of  operational matters as being something which was needed in respect of tackling  people smugglers. It has been from the outset nothing more than a media  strategy. What it does is deny the Australian people the ability to properly  scrutinise a matter which is very much in the public interest. But in this  circumstance, Joe, this strategy, this tactic, raises another question and that is  whether or not this is a smart way to go in terms of having an enduring resolution  to seeing an end to the flow of asylum Christmas seeker vessels from Java to  Christmas Island. We have spent a lot of energy in putting people smugglers out  of business. The last thing you'd want to do is create a new business for them.

O’BRIEN: There are some people who obviously feel strongly about this like  yourself. Do you really think if it turned out to be true, would the average  Australian voter would have an issue with it?

MARLES: I think the question of asylum seeker vessels coming from Java to  Christmas Island has rightly been a matter of public interest from day one. I  mean, from a Labor perspective, we very much do not want to see the re-opening of that journey because we don't want to see the deaths at sea that was  a human tragedy which played out on our border over the last few years.

O’BRIEN: What's your credibility like on this subject because obviously the Prime  Minister's argument is he has been able to stop the boats where Labor haven't  been able to?

MARLES: I've been the first to admit in the past there were mistakes made by  the former Labor Government. If we are wanting to attribute the blame of the  past, I would also point to the actions of the Coalition in teaming up with the  Greens and voting against the Malaysian arrangement which I believe would  have brought an end to this a long time before. I'd also make the point if we are  trying to claim credit for the here and now, the most significant step which has  been taken to bring to an end the flow of asylum seeker vessels was the  Regional Resettlement Arrangement that was put in place under the former  Labor Government. But the question now is how we go forward on this and how  we make sure that a situation where there are no vessels coming from Java to  Christmas Island ends up being an enduring solution. The point I make is this: If  you have a situation where you as a people smuggler, interacting with an  Australian Navy vessel, feel there is half a chance you will get taxpayer-funded  wads of cash given to you, that would seem to me to be a pull factor we would  not want to put into the equation. That's why we need to get to the bottom of  exactly what has happened here.

O’BRIEN: Do you believe if it is true it is a contravention of international law?

MARLES: I think that's a very, very live question. I think it is important we get to  the bottom of that, I note that in the last 24 hours we have had Antonio Guterres,  the UN High Commissioner for Refugees making comments in relation to this.  Now we have comments being made at that level, it is clearly having an impact  on our relationship with Indonesia, both in terms of the comments made by the  Indonesian Foreign Minister but equally I think by the comments that have been  made by Australia's Foreign Minister this morning.

O’BRIEN: I just mentioned them before we started this. She said Indonesia  needs to lift its game. It has been described as a blistering response. What do  you make of saying Indonesia has questions to answer here too about the  number of boats continuing the leave Indonesia?

MARLES: I'm not sure of the wisdom of splashing that all over the front pages of  our media but I think what it does do is highlight this: we need to have a  constructive working relationship with Indonesia when it comes to the question of  asylum seeker vessels going from Java to Christmas Island, that is plain  common sense. We are going to have to have that relationship if we are going to  have a resolution for this to endure, not over a year or two, but over the next  decade or two and so our Foreign Minister's comments absolutely point to the  need for a good working relationship with Indonesia and what is clear from the  incidents in the last few days is that this is having an impact on that relationship  and so we need to get to the bottom of this again.



O’BRIEN: Richard Marles, thanks for talking to us this morning from Canberra.

MARLES: Thank you, Joe.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

