

GAI BRODTMANN MP

SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CANBERRA

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW WITH MARK PARTON 2CC   THURSDAY, 22 JANUARY 2015  CANBERRA

SUBJECT/S: Chaos and division in the Abbott Government; Tony  Abbott’s broken promises

MARK PARTON: So many of the journalists who are running out of things to  write about Gai Brodtmann are suggesting that maybe there’s drama in the  Coalition. That there are these anonymous members, they’re not putting their  names to these comments, but they’re extremely concerned about the way  things are being run and there are suggestions maybe there’s pressure on the  leadership of Tony Abbott. What do you make of this Gai, fan the flames for us  will you?

BRODTMANN: Well last year was marked by dysfunction and broken promise  after broken promise. We’re not even a month into the new year and we’re  already seeing the dysfunction and broken promises repeated. We’ve seen  multiple positions on Medicare and we’ve seen those promises broken. We’ve  seen multiple positions on higher education deregulation. Earlier this week the  Treasurer said there were going to be no changes, now the Minister for  Education is negotiating changes. So it’s been an interesting start to the year. A  year that looks like it will continue to be a government that is dysfunctional and  untrustworthy.

PARTON: Zed, you’ve got to admit Gai does make some good points there. On  Medicare, there’s been more positions than you’ll find in the Kamasutra from you  blokes, hasn’t there?



SESELJA: Ah that’s a nice easy line there Mark. Just going back to the earlier  point if I could, I think the Labor party and Gai now perhaps are trying to project  their own former problems onto us. Look that’s not what’s going on, we’re not  like the Labor party were in office were they chopped and changes leaders.  We’re getting on with what is a very difficult job, and that’s primarily fixing the  budget mess that we inherited. That’s a tough job, it’s not an easy job and it’s  not always going to win you a lot of friends at times Mark. But we know it’s  necessary because if you don’t fix it, you know, look at what has happened in  Europe when things get out of control with your budget. Now we’re not there,  and we don’t ever want to be there but the only way you don’t get there is to  make hard decisions by living within your means over a period of time and that’s  what we’re seeking to do.

PARTON: Okay never mind what happens in Europe, you look at what happens  in your party when there’s disquiet, look at what happened to this last mob when  they were in office. Are you trying to tell me that everyone is fine and dandy and  happy as Larry with the way things are being steered at the moment?

SESELJA: Well what I tell you is that we’re getting on with the job. Look, you  talk about anonymous sources, there’s always going to be anonymous sources  within parties and there will always be some people who aren’t happy. There’s  no doubt about that. That doesn’t mean that that’s going to distract the  government from doing the necessary job which is primarily fixing the budget  mess and getting things under control. There’s a range of things we’ve done, I  think very, very well. If you look at the last year in particular, people said things  like ‘oh you won’t be able to stop the boats’ and ‘asylum seekers will keep  arriving on our shores, people will keep drowning’. Well, we have. And that’s a  massive success and has saved a lot of lives. There are a range of other areas  such as free trade agreements, getting on with the job, building the economy.  There are a lot of achievements, there’s a lot more to do there’s no doubt about  it, but you always get anonymous sources and you always get the odd  disgruntled sources within the party.

BRODTMANN: I don’t think it’s odd Mark, it’s not the odd person. I think that  there’s plenty of disgruntled backbenchers particularly, who are very, very  worried about their seats. As Nick Xenophon said yesterday I think it was, the  Abbott Government is in a whole lot of trouble on so many levels. If my  conversations at Christmas are anything to go by, I had a number of Liberal  friends stay with us at the coast and also heard of stories -

SESELJA: Didn’t know you had any liberal friends?

BRODTMANN: I do - I have many Liberal friends.



PARTON: They’re anonymous at this stage.

BRODTMANN: They are anonymous. I think they would prefer if I kept it that  way too. But I heard stories about North Shore conservatives and they’ve  completely tuned out. They are tearing their hair out at the dysfunctionality of  this government. The fact that this government can’t communicate what its  policies are and the fact that this government is essentially trying to introduce  bad policies that cut across Australia’s social fabric.

SESELJA: Can I make one point to put this into context. I recall pretty well after  the first year of the Howard Government when people were making similar  criticisms. I think a number of Ministers were no longer there, had lost their jobs  as a result of a number of things. There were a lot of difficult issues for the  Howard Government to deal with. Many people were making similar sorts of  commentary. What we saw was a very, very good Howard Government that  served the nation for four terms. What I’m hoping and what I expect as our  policies start to be implemented, the difficult job we get on with. Many of this  type of commentary will be left behind and will be a distant memory.

BRODTMANN: Well we’ll see.

PARTON: We will. Thanks Zed, thanks Gai.

BRODTMANN: Thanks Mark, thanks Zed.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CLAIRE WHEATON 0422 370 036



