

SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC

ATTORNEY-GENERAL  MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

11 June 2015

TRANSCRIPT - Interview with Michael Brissenden, ABC AM Program

Topics: Countering Violent Extremism Summit in Sydney, revoking citizenship, Gillian  Triggs.

E&OE………………………………………………………………………………………………….

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Some of the region's most authoritative terrorism  analysts and experts will meet in Sydney today for a summit on countering regional violent  extremism. The two day conference convened by the Australian Government will bring  together a diverse range of participants from Australia and the region, including academics,  NGO's (non-government organisations), law enforcement and intelligence chiefs and  politicians. To discuss the aims of the summit I'm joined by the Attorney-General, George  Brandis, who is in our Sydney studio. Senator Brandis, good morning.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Good morning Michael.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:   Regional extremism, it’s certainly something our  security agencies are very worried about, particularly in Indonesia. How real is the threat?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, it’s a threat that’s not to be underestimated and  there are two dimensions to this summit that I particularly want to emphasise, Michael. First  of all, we want to reinforce our already collaborative partnerships with other regional powers  and regional partners to ensure that we work as well together - and in particular our law  enforcement and intelligence agencies work as well together - to combat this threat. But of  course, this is a threat that not only exists globally but it also exists locally. It exists in our  homelands and what we also want to do is share information, share techniques about how  issues such as online recruitment, the recruitment of foreign fighters by agents of ISIL can be  dealt with. We want to discuss, for example, early intervention strategies, how we can best  partner with civil society and to share the information that we have about the different  techniques we use in our different countries.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:   Because there is a lot of concern here obviously about  the number of Australians who are engaged in the battles over there.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yes.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:   But I would imagine there’s a lot more concern about  an even larger number of Indonesians and others in the region?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, there’s no doubt about that, that the recruitment  by ISIL of foreign fighters to the Iraq and Syrian civil wars is very active in Indonesia, in  Malaysia, in Thailand, in the Philippines and so this is a shared problem. As I said in the  paper this morning, there is no lack of political will here. There is no lack of a spirit of  cooperation among the international community as we saw at the White House Summit  convened by president Obama in February. This is a common problem, not just of the  democracies but really of virtually all the countries in the world - all of whom subscribed to  UN Resolution 2178 last year. And this is Australia’s local response in our own region to  seek to enhance our understanding of the problem and more importantly to enhance our  understanding of strategies to deal with the problem.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  One of the focuses obviously will be countering IS’s  social media strategy and their PR campaign, which is pretty effective, it has to be said. Are  we losing that battle at the moment?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, it’s a battle that has to be fought on a daily basis  and one of the reasons and for that reason one of the important sessions of the summit will be  devoted to online recruitment, the internet and social media. We have senior representatives  of Twitter and Google and Facebook who will be participating in the summit and you’re  absolutely right, Michael, that that is an area where there is a very great level of  sophistication, particularly by ISIL. The recruitment of particularly young people online is  escalating and it’s something that we are very focused on addressing.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  What about citizenship and revoking citizenship? Are  any other countries in the region considering going down the path that we're obviously  considering going down?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, that’s not the focus of the summit. The summit is,  as I’ve said, to enhance cooperation among nations in the region and to share techniques to  deal with and to prevent, where we can, the recruitment of people by ISIL and other terrorist  groups. But as the Prime Minister has said, it is important that Australia has a conversation  about citizenship, what it means, what obligations are attached to citizenship, what are the  consequences of acting in a way that is fundamentally at variance from the loyalty to  Australia that we expect all Australian citizens to have.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Do you support the idea of removing citizenship  because it was reported out of that Cabinet meeting that you did have some reservations?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I’m not going to comment on what may or may  not have been said at a Cabinet meeting.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  I’m asking you outside the Cabinet meeting whether  you support the idea or not?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  But the Prime Minister has announced that we will be  introducing legislation in the next sitting fortnight to deal with the issue of the revocation of  citizenship - of dual citizens in circumstances, therefore, where nobody can be rendered  stateless - where a person has been found to have been engaged in serious terrorist conduct.  And I might point out that is merely an extension of an existing power that’s existed in the  Citizenship Act since 1948, whereby a person who fights in a foreign army against  Australia’s interests can have their citizenship revoked. Now, more than 60 years after the  citizenship laws were passed in the wake of the Second World War, we have a much more  complex understanding of what is involved in fighting for a foreign army. We have non-state  actors, as they are sometimes referred to, who are engaged in all of the, who engage all of the  attributes or apparatus of a state, so that, for example, the ISIL militia that is active in-  militias that are active in Syria and in Northern Iraq have all the appearance of an army...

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Okay, but the question of revoking their citizenship is  the contentious issue though, isn’t it and isn’t it the case of the, not necessarily dual nationals  but sole Australian nationals, which is also, as I understand, under consideration, isn’t the  best thing to do with them just to bring them home, arrest them and put this in jail and put  them through the court process?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  The only decision the Government has made is to  extend the existing provisions of the Citizenship Act which, as I say, have been part of our  laws since 1948 to dual citizens who engage in acts of terrorism.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  But there was a proposal to extend it though, wasn’t  there, to a sole Australian…

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  We have published a discussion paper in which we…

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  And do you support that idea is what I’m trying to get  to?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I’m not going to pre-empt a national conversation.  The whole point of issuing a discussion paper was to engage the community in a national  conversation about what other measures we might take, that might take to protect Australia.  Now no decision has been made beyond the decision that I have explained to you Michael.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Okay, but we are all discussing it in the public arena  because of those Cabinet leaks. Now what does it say about the Cabinet process that you can  have such a sensitive issue proposed and it to be leaked in such detail?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I’m not going to comment on what was said in the  Cabinet and therefore I’m not going to comment on the leaks. Certainly a version of the  meeting was published in one of the Fairfax newspapers. It’s no secret that we had a

discussion about this issue. That’s what the public expect the Cabinet to do. They expect the  Cabinet to deal with issues of importance to the nation…

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  I guess the Cabinet doesn’t expect to see it all reported  the next day, though...

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  …and to have a serious conversation about them.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  …do they?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I think frankly that the public would be very, very  disturbed if they thought that the Cabinet wasn’t having a good discussion about important  national issues, which is what we do all the time.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Okay, can I just turn quickly to Gillian Triggs. Has the  Government been playing the man or in this case the woman?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, the position is, I’m sorry to say, that the  Government has lost confidence in Professor Triggs. I say that with some regret because I  personally like Professor Triggs. And it saddens me to say this but the fact is Michael, as I’ve  said many times, the Human Rights Commission, in my view, is an important national  institution but it has to be like Caesar’s wife, it must both be, and be seen to be, above  partisan politics. And I’m afraid that Professor Triggs’ decision to delay holding an inquiry  into the issue of children in detention - all of whom were put into detention by a Labor  government - until after the Labor Party had left office can only be interpreted, and has been  interpreted by many, many people in Australia, as an act that looked partisan.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Okay, but last week you and Mr Dutton accused her of  linking the issues of boat turn backs to the deaths of Chan and Sukamaran. Do you now  concede that you were wrong on that?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  No, I don't concede that for a moment. The only …

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Well, she says she was simply making the observation  that any solution to the movement of asylum seekers should be diplomatic, and that she didn’t  refer to the execution of the two young Australians.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  But she talked about Australia’s engagement with  Indonesia on the question of the death penalty. And Michael, the main conversation in this  country about the death penalty in Indonesia in recent months as we all know, had to do with  the execution of Chan and Sukamaran. So I don’t regret what Mr Dutton and I said in that  statement at all.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  But as the head of the Human Rights Commission isn’t  she entitled to have an opinion on that?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  But it has to be an opinion informed by facts. Any  public officer is entitled to express views within their area of responsibility but one would

hope that it would be an opinion formed, informed by facts. Now to link Australia’s turn back  policy to our capacity to engage with Indonesia on death penalty issues was plainly wrong.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN:  Okay, Senator Brandis, thank you very much for joining  us.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Thank you Michael.

[ENDS]

