



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  104.1TERRITORY FM  FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: ALP National Conference; Women in Parliament; Bronwyn  Bishop; Northern Territory statehood.

JANE AAGAARD: Joining me on the line now, we have a very special guest, the  Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, Senator Penny Wong, and I believe  she’s got somebody else helping her this morning. Good morning Senator Wong.

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE  SENATE: Good morning. I don’t know if she’s helping me, at the moment she’s  quiet on my shoulder. Hannah is three and a half months old and I’m on duty this  morning. So, if you hear a gurgle, that’s why.

AAGAARD: That sounds fabulous, congratulations for that.

WONG: Thank you.

AAGAARD: So last week we saw the 47th ALP National Conference in  Melbourne. What actually is a National Conference, for listeners?

WONG: That’s a very good question. It’s the supreme decision making body of  the Labor Party and it comprises of hundreds of delegates from all over the  country, from the Territories and States. And we come together to discuss the  National Platform and there’s a lot of work that goes into that beforehand, a lot of  discussion about what should be in there in terms of the economy and jobs,  climate change, trade, all sorts of issues, and we also debate our rules.

There are some really big steps forward, I think we have a really strong economic  platform, we had good progress on women’s representation, we had  announcements on climate change and the importance of the Renewable Energy  Target and of course we also debated marriage equality, and of course refugees.  It was a very robust debate, we’re the only political party that’s prepared to do it  in the glare of the public eye, but I think our party is stronger for it.

AAGAARD: So, this platform then becomes the policies for the next election, is  that right?

WONG: That’s right, it’s the foundation for the policies for the next election.  Obviously the policies you actually take are based on the platform, are more  detailed, so you need for example, costings and how you are going to fund things  and how you are going to implement them. But the broad principles about greater  focus on the jobs of the future, a stronger health system and a stronger  education system, is important not just for opportunity, but also for our economy.  Those are the sorts of things which we made sure were in our platform and which  will absolutely be central to Labor’s campaign for the next election.

AAGAARD: So in relation to women, the quota has increased to 50 per cent, is  that correct?

WONG: That’s right, 50 per cent by 2025, and equally importantly stronger  mechanisms to ensure we actually deliver that. So this isn’t just a chat about 50  per cent, it’s actually let’s put in place stronger mechanisms to ensure the Party  actually gets there. And really stands in stark contrast, I think, to the Liberals,  who seem to really have an aversion to both preselecting women and certainly  putting women into their Cabinet. And we’ve seen Liberal women nationally in  recent days become quite critical of their own party for failing to recognise  they’ve got a problem with it comes to women’s representation.

AAGAARD: There are actually challenges, I think, for women becoming  Members of Parliament. As you may know, I’m a former Member of Parliament  and Speaker myself. There are definitely challenges and it’s, from my  perspective, particularly in the Territory, very male dominated area. What’s been  your experience?

WONG: It certainly is a pretty tough environment. I think it has been of benefit to  me, and I think to many women inside the Party, to have more Labor women  come into the Parliament. We’ve now got over 40 per cent, 43 per cent, almost  double what the Liberals have. And having more women in the room not only  reflects the society that we represent, the community we represent, but also does  help change some of the dynamics which you are referencing.

There’s no doubt there’s a really blokey culture in the Liberal Party and you don’t  need to listen to me, I think you can listen to Sharman Stone and other Liberal

women, who said that we’ve got a problem, we’re simply not preselecting women  and even when we’re preselecting them we’re not promoting them.

AAGAARD: Of course a Liberal woman who is in the media a lot is Speaker  Bronwyn Bishop.

WONG: One Speaker to another.

AAGAARD: That’s right. A fascinating story as an ex-Speaker, I’d have to say.  What are you making of all that?

WONG: I have to say, when the story first broke about the helicopter, like most  Australians I thought it was a dreadful abuse of entitlement. But I was actually  quite shocked that she actually could think that that was an appropriate thing to  do. I’ve driven the Melbourne Geelong road a few times during campaigns and  as a minister and it’s hardly the sort of trip you need a helicopter for.

But I think the issue here is the Prime Minister. We’ve seen senior Liberals walk  away from Mrs Bishop and what we’ve continued to see is the person who made  the captain’s call to make her the Speaker, which is the Prime Minister of  Australia, has continued to back her in, which I think really does say something  about the extent to which he is not in touch with how most people feel.

There have been few issues in recent times which have generated such public  comment and so much response from Australians and it’s perfectly  understandable. People raise it with me all the time as I’m going through airports.  I was back in Adelaide yesterday and I went to the market to get some food for  the family and people were raising it with me in the fishmongers. Tony really  needs to understand Australians are rightly angry about this and I suspect they’re  going to continue to be angry with his failure to take action.

AAGAARD: I think also the political nature of Mrs Bishop, sort of the  commentary she makes. We don’t hear anything, for example, from the President  of the Senate, which is exactly the same position, but in the Senate. He seems to  be a person who is doing his job very well and a Liberal Party member.

WONG: You’ve been a former Speaker, and she certainly takes a very overtly  partisan role to a job where generally people have toned it down. The ideal may  well be that you have a truly independent Speaker, which was one of the things  discussed previously in the House of Representatives, but she takes a very  partisan role both in the House and more generally. And as you said, the Senate  President, he doesn’t. He plays it must more straight. And I think people have  really noted the hyperpartisanship of Mrs Bishop.

AAGAARD: Just finally, statehood is on the agenda here Northern Territory  again and you may be aware that at COAG the Prime Minister, with our Chief

Minister Adam Giles, has said that the Northern Territory will be a State on 1 July  2018. What’s the Labor Party’s position on this?

WONG: My view is, I’d always be guided by my Northern Territory colleagues.  We’ve got very strong representatives both in the Territory itself, but also in the  Federal Parliament representing the Territory, so Warren Snowdon obviously,  Senator Nova Peris, both are doing a great job for the Territory, and of course  Luke Gosling, who is our candidate for Solomon. That’s something I’d be taking  counsel from them. Ultimately, I suppose, it’s a matter for the people of the  Northern Territory if that’s the way they want to go. It certainly, COAG as you  said, had a conversation about that and a discussion about that, but ultimately it’s  a matter for the people of the Territory.

AAGAARD: Look, thank you very much for joining us this morning, Senator  Wong.

WONG: Good to speak with you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ANNIE WILLIAMS 0428 040 522

