

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  UTS, SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2015

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plan to empower young Australians; Australia’s role in  Iraq and Syria; Regional resettlement.

SAM DASTYARI, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECERTARY FOR YOUTH: It is  fantastic to be here this morning at the meeting of the largest youth political  organisation in the country; Young Labor and it was incredible to be here with the  Federal Leader of the Labor Party, Bill Shorten.

Bill today outlined some big ideas and a big policy discussion for the Labor party and  has intrusted me to go out there and carry on that conversation.

So without further ado, Bill Shorten.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Sam.

Today, I have outlined a plan, a national conversation of engaging Australia’s young  people more in politics. I think it is greatly concerning that between 2010 and 2013,  400,000 young people who turned 18 chose not to enrol.

There is a democracy deficit between young people who feel disengaged from the  decisions of the Liberal Government and a sense that nothing can change. I believe  it is important that we tackle the apathy and cynicism of young people towards  politics. After all, young people, including 16 and 17 year olds, pay tax, they can  drive cars, they can serve in the military at age 17 - they should be able to vote. And  Labor is going to have this conversation because we believe in trusting young people  to have their say on the future of climate change, the future on higher education,  TAFE and schools funding.

My message to the Liberal party is, let’s trust our young people because they are the  people that are going to have to deal with the decisions we are making right now.

Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten - critics will say this is an attempt by you to garner young  people to lift your approval rating from 17 per cent. Is this an attempt by Labor to just  win over more young lefties?

SHORTEN: Let’s look at the real issue here. Young people are disengaged from  politics. We expect a lot from Australia’s young people. We expect them to pay more  in their HECs. We expect them to wait longer to even get a house deposit together,  we expect them to train and retrain for the jobs of the future and we ask them of  course to pay taxes from the GST to what they pay at work. What is wrong with  trusting our young people with a say in politics?

I say to the critics, you might not trust young people, they say back to you ‘we don't  trust the current decisions of the Liberal Government on climate change, on higher  education funding, on the equal treatment of women’. A lot of issues that young  people are motivated about.

JOURNALIST: You cited 400,000 people in that younger bracket weren't actually  enrolled to vote. How is lowering the voting age going to encourage those people  actually to come into that call?

SHORTEN: Because what Labor's doing is we are saying to Australia's young  people, 16-year-olds, 17-year-olds, 18, 19, 20, 21-year-olds, we are saying we trust  you - we want you engaged, we want it hear your opinion.

At the moment in the Parliament we are discussing the future of marriage equality. If  more young people enrol to vote, they can fix up the problem of marriage equality.  Because most young people don't know what the fuss is about. At the moment we  are debating the future climate change. Young people are very concerned to make  sure that we have a better environment, that we tackle carbon pollution. Young  people don't want to see this problem put off because they understand that the more  you delay real action on climate change, the more you just stick with the Liberal  policies on climate change, the bigger the problem is going to be in the future.

JOURNALIST: Why are you going for that younger demographic? Why don't you  appeal to the demographic that’s already in the voting pool?

SHORTEN: People from the age of 18 can already vote. What I want to do is extend  that debate to people who are 17 and 16. They are the ones who have no voice in  politics at the moment.

By the way, we have got very good policies for people over 18. We will properly fund  your hospitals, we will properly fund schools, we will take real action on climate  change. We don't see the need to spend $160 million to have an opinion poll on  marriage equality, we will just get on and do it - that’s the day job for members of  Parliament. We have excellent policies for people over 18.

I'm raising a debate which is happening all around the world. Decisions are being  made every day which affect the livelihoods of 17-year-olds. Why shouldn't we invite  them to have a say?

JOURNALIST: Would you expect it to boost Labor's numbers if 16 and 17-year-olds  vote?



SHORTEN: I'm interested in a boost in the number of people enrolled to vote. How  they vote is up to them. I don't think any of us can seriously argue that including  more people in our elections is a bad idea. I'm sure when there was an argument to  give women the right to vote, I am sure there were people who said that you can’t  trust women to vote. I'm sure that when there was an argument for people who didn’t  own Â£1000 in property that they shouldn’t have the vote; you can’t trust these people  to vote. I am sure that when we had the arguments about lowering the voting age  from 21 to 18, there were people who said you can't trust young people.

What I'm saying to the Liberal Party of Australia and to other Australians, is actually,  we ask a lot of our young people, why not trust them to have a say.

JOURNALIST: These people can't drink, though. They aren’t legally allowed to  drink. Should we consider if they are legally allowed to vote, should we consider  changing other laws to make them younger?

SHORTEN: Ursula I'm a politician, I'm not a publican. I'm talking about getting  people to vote. I think that is important. I don't compare the right to vote with some of  the other consumer benefits people have in life. My view isn't just about people being  able to do everything. My view though is young people are frustrated by politics,  that’s true - they are disengaged - no one can argue with that. They are cynical  when the nightly news comes on and they get sick of people just speaking in sound  bites. What they actually want to see is that they can have an impact in their  community, they want more transparent politics. I think it's a good idea to let younger  people vote.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you on the issue of refugees - Kyrgyzstan is the latest  country considered by Australia to take our refugees. Is this policy acceptable to  Labor?

SHORTEN: Like you, we have just seen the reports. In order to make regional  processing work, Labor is committed to that. I think that the Liberals would be well  advised to work with Labor and the Australian people.

We all know that we have had this failed experiment with giving Cambodia $40  million for four people. That's not a good idea. We hear there’s discussions going on  with the Philippines. We are interested in that.

I really regret that when the Liberals were in Opposition they didn't support Labor's  plan to work out an arrangement to send asylum seekers and refugees to Malaysia.

If there’s serious talks going on by this Government and other nations around the  world, I think the Liberals should just come clean, tell the Australian people what's  going on. It's not dissimilar to the debate, in one way, of giving young people the  vote. What the Liberals need to do is trust people. They vote for you, they pay your  wages, I think it's important that the Government starts to trust Australians and not  keep them in the dark.

JOURNALIST: In the Middle East, in Syria, the US have now said they are sending  in special ground troops. Should Australia be doing that or considering that?

SHORTEN: At this stage, no. There have been no discussions with the Labor Party  about it. Labor has a principled position. We think that supporting the defence of Iraq  at the request of the Iraqi Government is legitimate and we are doing a training  function with our troops, where our Air Force is also interdicting and going after the  terrorist groups.

We have accepted that there is no real practical border between parts of Syria and  Iraq so the Air Force has got a role along with other Coalition nations in Iraq to stop  these terrorists coming into Iraq.

When it comes to the broader issues of Syria more generally, Labor has no time for  the current leader of Syria - he is a dictator and has been associated with the mass  murder of his own citizens. Of course the terrorists are equally bad and equally  murderous but I'm deeply sceptical that when Western nations try and significantly  intervene in a country like Syria where there is no unified government, where there’s  lots of atrocities being done by a range of nations, we need to hasten slowly. I don't  believe the case has been made for extending Australia's involvement in Syria.

JOURNALIST: Military experts and even the former Prime Minister Tony Abbott  admitted ground troops are necessary to win in Syria. Are Australia's politicians  getting us into a war we know we can't win without troops on the ground?

SHORTEN: Well, I’d  put the question in reverse, Ursula. I would say that ‘would us  adding troops on the ground mean we would win a war? Who are we winning the  war against?’ We are against terrorist organisations who are using genocide,  murder, rape to carry out their twisted view of the world. Labor is supporting the  government of Iraq in its efforts to secure strong borders and a peaceful life for its  citizens.

International experts freely acknowledge the situation in Syria is messy, it's incredibly  unclear. The idea that we can sort of bomb our way to peace across Syria and  resolve all the conflicts - what we need is greater support for the refugees. There are  millions of people who have had to leave their home and living in border countries.  Labor did lead the way and say we should bring 10,000 refugees to Australia. This  argument about extending Australian military involvement into a very confusing, very  difficult, very hard to see the end game conflict is one which Labor is not prepared to  go to at this point. The case hasn't been made.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about - on the processing, the regional processing,  Labor supports regional processing of asylum seekers but would you actually  seriously consider a situation where we are sending refugees to countries that are  politically unstable or in unstable areas of the world?

SHORTEN: There is a fair bit of hypothetical in that. I think the best answer I can  give you is: ask the people in charge, the Liberal Government, just to explain what's  going on. Sometimes I think the Liberals and indeed Labor periodically can  overcomplicate politics. I think the more direct we are with the Australian people, the  more we say this is the problem, this is why we are trying to solve and this is the way  we are going to solve it is the way to go. All I would ask the Government is if you are  engaging in discussions with other nations, why not sit down and talk about it with  the Opposition as well. It is a very vexed issue. A lot of people are concerned to

make sure people indirectly in our care on Manus Island and Nauru are being treated  properly. There is a lot of consternation in the community.

Labor does support regional resettlement. We don't want to re-open the seaway  between Java and Christmas Island where so many people drowned. Part of having  that policy is that the Government needs to make all efforts possible to sit down with  nations capable of absorbing refugees through discussions they have with Australia  and I just wish the Liberal Government would remove the, sort of, blanket of secrecy.  Let's not make it a domestic political point scoring game - people's lives are involved,  it's too important.

Labor will work with the Government to ensure a humane outcome for these  refugees. But this culture of secrecy, this suspicion that the Liberals have of the  media of what’s going on, of the Opposition and indeed, the Australian people, I don't  think leads to an effective, lasting consensus. I would ask the Liberals - just talk to us  and let's work through this together.

We won't take the same negative view that the Liberals took in Opposition.

Great, thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

