

SENATOR THE HON STEPHEN CONROY  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA WITH KIERAN GILBERT  THURSDAY, 23 JULY 2015

SUBJECT: Tony Abbott’s sham submarine process, asylum seeker boat  turn backs

Kieran Gilbert: This is AM Agenda.  With me now, the Shadow Defence Minister  Stephen Conroy live from Melbourne.  Thanks for joining me Senator Conroy.

I want to ask you about the submarine issue.  Reports today emerged from the  Senate Committee hearing that TKMS, the German company bidding for the next  generation subs, is saying it would be cheaper to have an Australian build.   Should we be sceptical about this though given that that would benefit that  company over the other bidders would it not?

Senator Stephen Conroy, Shadow Minister for Defence: Well the German  company that you’ve mentioned is one of the biggest submarine producers,  manufacturers in the world.  They produce them all over the world, not just in  Germany, and what they’re prepared to do is put their money where their mouth  is.  They’ve done their analysis and they are very firmly of the view that for the  build, maintain and sustain operation over the life cycle of the entire submarine  project, it is cheaper to build them in Australia.

The evidence is now in.  Tony Abbott is going through a sham process that he  created to save his own job - never forget that Tony Abbott only announced this  process because he was under a leadership threat back in February - and it is  well accepted that he had done a handshake deal with the Prime Minister of  Japan.  The Japanese had to be dragged screaming and kicking into this sham  process, but they still believe they’ve got it in the bag.



What TKMS have demonstrated - and put their money whether their mouth is -  is that it is cheaper to build them in Australia.  So all of these arguments from the  Government, all of this bad mouthing of the workforce - ‘can’t build a canoe’,  ‘that the cost overruns are too prohibitive’ - all of this bad mouthing is all about  delivering on Tony Abbott’s Captain’s Pick of our submarines to Japan.

Gilbert: So you still maintain this is, as you say - a sham process is the way you  put it.  So you think there is no way the Government will end up giving it to the  French or German bid, so they’re wasting their time essentially?  Is that your  view?

Conroy: Well it’s well known that the Prime Minister has cut a deal with the  Prime Minister of Japan and what he’s been forced to do is to go through this  process as a cover.  I mean the damning evidence from Defence officials at the  Senate Estimates earlier, just a month or so ago, was that there is no mature  submarine design that will be presented in December when the final offers come  in from the companies, no fixed price and no fixed delivery date.

I mean this is a process that should deliver two choices for the Cabinet and they  can look at the capability and the cost.  That should be what’s on the table, but  that’s not what this process is designed to achieve - because Tony Abbott can’t  afford to have a process which shows that the French or German bids are better  bids and better value for Australian taxpayers than the Japanese bid.  He has set  up a process that ensures he won’t get that.

Gilbert: But you would know as well as I do that - obviously you speak to these  individuals as well - the diplomatic corps, the representatives of these two  countries, the Germans and the French, both believe this is still legitimate - this  is still a legitimate bidding process and that they’re in with a chance.  You think  they’re being dudded?

Conroy: No, I think they can’t afford to say anything else.  If you talk to them  privately there are concerns about the governance of this project.

You’ve just got to look at the evidence again yesterday.  The Australian Embassy  in Japan has an officer whose day-to-day job is to hold the Japanese companies’  hands and assist them.  The Germans and French don’t need that - they’ve said  ‘no thanks’.  Why does the Japanese Government need an Australian Embassy  official on a day-to-day basis?  Why when Japan go and visit the Australian  Submarine Corporation in Adelaide are they escorted by Rear Admirals, senior  Defence officials - but the Germans and French go and they’re just left to wander  the place by themselves.

I mean this is a red carpet ride for Japan.  Everybody involved in this process  knows it and what we’ve got to see is a proper process, but Tony Abbott should

listen to the advice of the experts, which is that it’s cheaper to build it in  Australia.  He should direct that this process only consider the Australian builds.

Gilbert: Well Senator Xenophon was in Japan recently, says that the Japanese  are open to an Australian build.  If they did that would you be more inclined to be  open to a Japanese bid?

Conroy: No - we’re not opposed to a Japanese bid.  We’re opposed to a filthy  deal done by Tony Abbott to build them in Japan.  We have absolutely no  preference between Japanese submarines, French submarines and German  submarines.  We just want a fair dinkum process and we want to see, as now  has been publicly articulated, them built in Adelaide.  Tony Abbott made the  promise before the last election - 12 subs in Adelaide.  Now he’s got his choice -  do I break my promise to the people of Australia and Adelaide or do I break my  promise to the Prime Minister of Japan?

Gilbert:  I want to ask you about the boat turn back issue, because when Labor  previously had argued against turn backs it was on the basis of advice from the  Navy, among other elements of the decision.  But that was part of the argument  that was made by Labor previously - that the military advice was it was unsafe to  have turn backs.  Have you been sufficiently reassured that it is now safe given  Bill Shorten’s about face on this?

Conroy: Well part of the problem with this debate is the absolute secrecy that  this Government’s been involved in.  They refuse to actually articulate - explain -  to the Australian public what changes they’ve made, what it is that they’ve done  that has allowed that advice to change.  What Bill Shorten and Richard Marles  are arguing is that - if it’s safe, we should have it as a policy option on the table.

This is a very difficult debate for the Labor Party.  We have tortured ourselves -  debated this for many, many years - but what we saw during our last  Government was, through a combination of factors, nearly 1200 people died at  sea.  Now, that’s not acceptable for any person in the Labor Party.  We don’t  want to see anybody die at sea trying to come to Australia and we’ve got to have  a set of policy options that ensures that that is not repeated.  If the advice is that  it’s safe, then it should be on the table.

Gilbert: Just very quickly, will he win the vote?  Will he win the debate at the  conference at the weekend in Melbourne?

Conroy: Look it is very close and there is people of goodwill on both sides who  are very passionate about this.  But I believe, in the end, Bill’s position will carry  the conference floor and we will then be able to move on to talk about why does  Tony Abbott want to break another promise - the one he said no GST.  This is in  Liberal Party DNA.  So Tony Abbott is now barracking for a 15 percent GST -  another broken promise.



Gilbert: Senator Conroy, we’re out of time.  I appreciate your time this morning.   Thank you for that.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: GARTH MORRISON 0408 896 036

