The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer

1







TRANSCRIPT  3AW NEIL MITCHELL  TUESDAY 17 NOVEMBER 2015

E&OE

Subjects: National Platform for Economic Growth and Jobs; superannuation; National Disability  Insurance Scheme; social services portfolio; MYEFO; Paris terror attacks; Australia’s Syrian refugee  intake; Tony Abbott; Budget; natural health therapies.

NEIL MITCHELL: Treasurer, good morning.

TREASURER: Good morning, it’s good to be here.

MITCHELL: Thanks for coming in. A poll today said that 52 per cent of people support an increase in  the GST provided there is a trade-off. Does that increase the chance of it happening?

TREASURER: Well, what it says is that the Australian people are engaged in this discussion that we  are having and they are not falling for the opportunistic sort of scare campaign tactics we are seeing  from the Labor Party. The Australian people are intelligent people, they know that last time round  when these things were considered there was compensation but I should stress again the  Government has no preferred option and is not putting forward any proposal on this at the moment.

MITCHELL: But if you’ve got majority support, which that poll suggests you have, it must embolden  you?

TREASURER: Well, what it says is that the Australian people aren’t falling for the tactics of the Labor  Party. They are engaging with the Government. We are treating the Australian people with respect  on this issue and we are engaging with them fully. So, that means the conversation I think is heading  in a very mature direction and we will continue to have it.

MITCHELL: Are you doing your own polling on support for the GST - or preferred options?

TREASURER: Well, I am a bit disconnected from those sorts of parts of what the Party does and I am  sure the Party will do their own thing because that is separated obviously from Government. What I  am focussed on is just making sure that we work through these issues with the states and territories  because at the end of the day for anything to occur at that sort of level there needs to be the strong  recommendation and support of the states and territories.

MITCHELL: The Victorian Premier has indicated that he doesn’t support it but would if it went to an  election - if you went to an election and won. Now, on the polls you would walk in an election.

TREASURER: Well, that just sounds a bit like having your cake and eating it.

MITCHELL: Well if you get approval of the people, he won’t block it is what he is saying.

2



TREASURER: We’re not looking for people not to block it. The states and territories are the ones who  originally brought this matter to the federal Government under the previous leadership and we have  modelled in response to that request some scenarios. The states and territories will be significant  beneficiaries of any change to our tax mix and I should stress, what we are looking at here is a  change to the tax system. A better set of taxes rather than a bigger set of taxes. The states and  territories if you want to be a beneficiary you need to be a participant.

MITCHELL: Ok but let’s work it through though. If there was to be an increase in the GST, and people  want some sort of - not just compensation but trade-off; other taxes go. What other taxes could be  reviewed?

TREASURER: I can only really refer you to the history on our side of politics and when this was done  by Peter Costello and John Howard taxes, stamp duties on various transactions, income taxes, all of  these, wholesale sales taxes, all of that went.

MITCHELL: There are a few that survived too which we thought would go.

TREASURER: They did and some of those were state taxes which the states did not follow through on  as part of that original arrangement and that is why, I think, this time around we need to be very  clear if we are to go down this path about what everyone is going to do, what goes but I want to  see…

MITCHELL: So what would go? What could go from a federal point of view? What could you say, ok,  GST is going up that goes, federally.

TREASURER: What I have been focusing on is actually not consumption taxes, I have been focussing  on income taxes and as we said before I am very concerned that if you are on an average wage over  the last 15 years you are earning twice as much around that but you are paying almost three times  as much income tax and if you are on the average wage next year you will go onto the second  highest tax bracket. So, I’m concerned about that and how the personal income tax system is  actually holding back Australians throughout their working and saving and investing.

MITCHELL: So, could there be an increase in the GST and a trade-off by a reduction income tax?

TREASURER: Well, that is certainly what happened last time when that was looked at. They’re the  obvious types of things that you do as part of any package and that is why you have got to work  through all these details with the states and territories. I mean I have never said that this is about  trying to raise more taxes for more spending. That is not my objective, that is not the Government’s  objectives. States will bring their objectives to the table and we have to work together to try and get,  I think, a sensible compromise.

MITCHELL: So, are there any other taxes that you would look at dropping? Something you might like  to get rid of?

TREASURER: At the next meeting of state Treasurers we are looking at a whole range of state and  territory taxes and one that often comes up is the insurance levies and that costs Australians around  $6 billion a year and that is a state and territory charge, it is a tax on insuring your insurance and we  do have issues of under-insurance in this country - that is a fairly straight-forward state and territory  levy that could be dealt with but there are many others.

MITCHELL: Any federal taxes you could trade off?

TREASURER: Well, we are always concerned about the level of competitiveness of our tax system  and corporate taxes and the investment asset write-offs - the instant asset write-offs I should say - I

3



mean we introduced that for companies of turnovers of $2 million or less in the last Budget. If the  Budget allowed we would have very much have liked to have gone higher than that. These are the  sorts of trade-offs whether it is in corporate taxes, personal income taxes, that you can look at to  ensure that you change the tax system. It is not about increasing the tax burden it is about having a  better set of taxes.

MITCHELL: So, can you guarantee us the tax burden will be no higher?

TREASURER: We are still working through the compromise with the states and territories. That is  certainly our objective, that is what we would like to see.

MITCHELL: Would the federal tax take be no higher?

TREASURER: Well, the GST is a state tax collected by the federal Government so we are certainly not  looking at increasing other taxes, no.

MITCHELL: That’s a bit disingenuous. It is a state tax but it helps the federal government because it is  giving it back to the states. In simple terms, add the GST, increase in GST to what we are paying at  the end of the year are we going to be paying more tax overall, less, or the same?

TREASURER: Well, I can only show you the experience from when John Howard and Peter Costello  did it and of course there is a one-off adjustment that has to be made for compensation, that is what  happened last time and what is important is that last time we did not see an indexed effect of the  increase that was undertaken at that time. So, there is a one-off effect that you have to do with  compensation, you do that through the tax scales as well as through the payment system and this is  the lived experience of Australia. I think that is why we have seen what we have seen today. People  know when this was done before that there was adequate compensation. If anything there was  overcompensation - that is what the history tells us and there were big changes to the tax system.  Income tax levels were cut, and other taxes were cut right across the board.

MITCHELL: Will you spend less?

TREASURER: Well, certainly, the federal Government is looking to control its expenditure. We are  currently at GFC levels of spending - 25.9 per cent of GDP. Over the Budget and Forwards that is  projected to decline and we certainly want to see that decline.

MITCHELL: You’re not seriously looking at death duties, are you?

TREASURER: Well, I said yesterday that we are not ruling anything in or ruling anything out and I also  haven’t ruled out taxing space travel.

MITCHELL: It’s been floated seriously and it will terrify people the idea of death duties. Can’t we just  say no?

TREASURER: The second we go down that path, Neil, then the Government has made a clear  commitment that we are not going to get into that game, we’re not going to get into that old politics  game, we are having a very good debate, I think, with the Australian people, we are considering a  whole raft of very genuine options and we are going to continue to do that and treat the Australia  people, I think, with the appropriate level of respect.

MITCHELL: Terry, hello, go ahead, please.

CALLER: Good morning Mr Morrison, one of your few great Australians- how are self-funded retirees  going to be covered in this?

4





TREASURER: Well, the same way I think these things were looked at last time, Terry. Again, I stress,  we haven’t got to any point of preferred option or model. The Commonwealth always has the option  to simply deal with the taxes in its level of responsibility. If the states and territories wish to see the  GST increase they will make that recommendation at the end of our process.

MITCHELL: Can you, if the GST goes up, and you are leading that decision, effectively, if the GST goes  up and the states don’t lower their state taxes what are you going to do about it? We could be  sitting there were you put the GST and say well it is up to the states to reduce their taxes but they  don’t and we are stuck in the middle.

TREASURER: It’s not just about tax. There are the tax system changes we are talking about with the  states and territories. There is the Harper competition reforms which is all about giving Australians  greater choice and better spending right across all levels of governments. That is why I have never  been a fan of just giving the states a bucket of money to just keep ploughing into their current level  of spending. We want better spending, we want more efficient spending and that is what the Harper  reforms actually do [inaudible]. The Tax system is just playing one part in that process and so to get  back to Terry’s question on self-funded retirees we know that they are a key group which aren’t in  the payment system, predominantly - that is why they are self-funded retirees - and they are not  necessarily in the tax system in the same way that others are. So, that, if you were to go down that  path you would want to have a very specific set of measures which dealt with the situation of self-funded retirees - particularly those on modest incomes.

MITCHELL: The word fairness keeps coming up - define it.

TREASURER: It’s a fair go - that’s what it is. It’s, in this country, it isn’t about having equal incomes  for everybody but equal opportunities for everybody.

MITCHELL: Even the rich?

TREASURER: Well, why don’t they deserve a fair go?

MITCHELL: Because you seem to be targeting them in various ways - or talking about targeting  them; superannuation.

TREASURER: Well, that is what a fair go is all about. Now, people have had equal opportunities in  this country and they have done well and good for them but if we are looking at superannuation in  particular we have got to think of why do you have tax incentives for superannuation? It is a simple  answer and that is so people can be independent in their retirement. Now, there are some  Australians who won’t need any help to get to that position. There are some Australians who will  need that sort of tax support to ensure they can get to that level. Sadly, there are some Australians  who will always be dependent on a pension and that is why we have that system for over four  million Australians and it costs us over $40 billion a year.

MITCHELL: The changes to superannuation, as discussed, as suggested, seem to me to target  something less than rich though?

TREASURER: Well, we haven’t put forward any specific proposals on this yet, Neil, and that is why  we’re still working through those issues.

MITCHELL: That’s creating an atmosphere of nervousness at the moment.

TREASURER: I think it is important that we get to a position on it but I have set out some very clear  principles, particularly around stability and certainty on superannuation. I think it is very important

5



that when we consider things in the retirement phase that we understand that changes in that area  either in fact or in perception or practice have a retrospective element to it and I am no fan of that.

MITCHELL: We’ll take a break, come back with more from Scott Morrison - specifically the NDIS.

**advertisement break**

MITCHELL: Federal Treasurer, Scott Morrison is with me. Dennis, go ahead, please.

CALLER: Good morning and good morning Mr Morrison.

TREASURER: G’day Dennis.

CALLER: For every Australian man, woman, child and baby the Australian Government collects in  total over $15,000 per head - how come we can’t, or the Government can’t run the country on that?

TREASURER: We inherited a pretty high level of structural spending, Dennis, and this is what we are  trying to get under control. We have already brought savings through to the Budget of over $60  billion just in the last two years. If we had kept on the same trajectory of spending that the previous  government had us on the Budget would be almost $80 billion worse off at the moment. So, we  have got to get that spending under control. That is why I have always, since coming to the job, and  will always focus on to get the Budget under control you have got to get spending under control. On  the revenue side of things the objective is to grow the economy - that is how you lift revenues. You  don’t do it by increasing taxes, that is how Labor governments do things. What we are focussed on is  controlling spending and I think we have made a very strong start to that and we need to continue  on in controlling that expenditure.

MITCHELL: Thanks Dennis, a strong start to controlling expenditure. Maybe Tony Abbott and Joe  Hockey didn’t do everything wrong - did they?

TREASURER: Well, no one suggested they did.

MITCHELL: You got rid of them.

TREASURER: Well, over $60 billion in savings in our first two years and some of those were the ones I  talked about when I was Social Services Minister. You do have to control expenditure. We are not  having a discussion about the tax system to raise taxes to balance the Budget - that is not what it is  about. It is to grow the economy.

MITCHELL: You gave a speech last night and mentioned the National Disability Insurance Scheme.  You say it is heading towards $32 billion - can we afford it?

TREASURER: Well, there is the Medicare Levy increase of half a per cent - that’s not going to pay for  that and we have got a short-fall of about $5 billion at the start we’re now blowing out to around  $7.6 billion or thereabouts over that ten year period. So, that means across the welfare system,  across spending more generally we are going to have to target things so we can ensure that those…

MITCHELL: What do you mean by target?

TREASURER: Well, better address eligibility issues and we have done that in a range of areas. We’ve  got - what it is about is ensuring that the welfare system is fit for purpose and I will give you an  example…

MITCHELL: But addressing eligibility issues means taking it away from some people doesn’t it?

6





TREASURER: It means making sure it does what it is supposed to do. Let me give you an example,  Family Tax Benefit package which is in the Senate at the moment and which the Labor Party is not  supporting, there is the Family Tax Benefit supplement which was introduced over a decade ago, it  was introduced, first as a balancing item for people who had misestimated their annual income for  receiving a family tax benefit payment. So, it was there as a balancing item. Now, under the Labor  Government that got entrenched into an annual welfare payment - a sort of Christmas in July bonus  payment for the Family Tax Benefit. Now, in 2018/19 there won’t be the income estimation method.  It is a redundant payment and we have suggested actually getting rid of those supplements,  increasing the base level of family tax benefit payments and putting the savings into childcare

MITCHELL: What is the net gain there?

TREASURER: Well, it is several hundred million dollars.

MITCHELL: To the Budget?

TREASURER: It is several hundred million to the Budget but it is also enabling us to do the childcare  reforms and that is why we tied them together. That is what controlling expenditure means.

MITCHELL: You have committed to the NDIS - you’re not backing away?

TREASURER: Of course we’re not. No absolutely.

MITCHELL: Ok, so how do you pay for it?

TREASURER: The NDIS should be the first dollar we spend in social services.

MITCHELL: How do you pay for it?

TREASURER: By controlling expenditure and by ensuring that we are driving revenue up by growing  the economy. That is why everything we are doing, whether it is on the Free Trade Agreements or  whether it is on what we are doing with the Harper Reforms or the tax system changes - all of this is  designed to grow the economy. That is the way you actually lift revenue. Australia has an earnings  problem. We need to earn more as a country and that is how you deal with revenue issues.

MITCHELL: But the modelling reported today says that on the growth expectations we are looking at  about 3 per cent optimistically - you are going to have a $5 billion deficit every year. We are heading  for an NDIS of $32 billion how are you going to - where are the smoke and mirrors?

TREASURER: We don’t underestimate the Budget task that is why we constantly are pursuing savings  in the Senate and the Labor Party currently has over $55 billion worth of commitments that are  unaccounted for by their own tax and savings proposals. We understand you need to get that under  control. The MYEFO will be out in December, that will give an update on where the Budget is at. We  have had some additional commitments since the Budget like the extra spending on the refugee  intake and some infrastructure spending. We will be seeking to make that up in the course of MYEFO  and it is just a task you need to apply yourself to everyday, Neil.

MITCHELL: So, can you save your way out of it, or cut your way out of it or will you have to tax your  way out of it? Which is it?

TREASURER: Well, you have missed the key ingredient and that is to grow your economy.

7



MITCHELL: We’re growing at less than 3 per cent and nobody is predicting anything else with the  world economy. What are you telling me, we’re going to grow it, we are going to suddenly get up to  about 8 per cent are we?

TREASURER: 2.3 per cent was the average year growth last year for our economy.

MITCHELL: And the year before?

TREASURER: And 1 per cent was the growth for Canada - 1 per cent. Now, we are similar economies,  they grew at 1 we grew at 2.3. Glenn Stevens said that the headwinds we are facing in the economy  at the moment are the strongest we are likely to see in this environment and we are growing at 2.3  and we will look to get ourselves back to about 3 per cent, which is just under the trend. Now, that is  where we need to get to. The way we deal with our Budget overtime on the revenue side is to grow  the economy and that is why all of these things we are talking about; tax system changes, all of  these things are about growing the economy.

MITCHELL: So, are you telling me we have a growth rate of 3 per cent, everything is hunky dory and  all the money comes in that we need?

TREASURER: Well, eventually and you need to be slightly above that.

MITCHELL: How far above?

TREASURER:  Well, the long run average is a bit higher than that. Remember the long run average  includes the commodities boom that we had in this country. So, it is a process of growing your  economy, growing revenues and controlling expenditure and that will deliver a Budget balance over  the cycle.

MITCHELL: Is there an increase cost of security now?

TREASURER: Well, there already has been.

MITCHELL: But more given what has happened in Paris?

TREASURER: Well, we all look at these things constantly through the proper process and take the  advice but remember it was this Government that acted very quickly to boost our resources into our  national security agencies, border agencies, all of which have been run down and we acted very  quickly to do that. The first package was over $600 million.

MITCHELL: If there is a request for increased military involvement by Australians can it cost a lot?  Couldn’t we look at some sort of levy there?

TREASURER: Look, I am not going to get ahead of that debate, Neil, any request that would be made  of the Australian Government would be considered in the right process. We already have the second  largest deployment when it comes to supporting the global efforts there, the Coalition efforts in the  Middle East and any further action there is really going to be I think first the parameters set by  countries other than Australia and then we would consider our involvement of that in that context.

MITCHELL: What does that mean? Could there be a levy or not?

TREASURER: Well, Neil, why would I even respond to that? I mean you’re asking me…

MITCHELL: Because we are the ones…

8



TREASURER: I don’t think I have to go down that sort of hypothetical path.

MITCHELL: We are discussing the financial hole we are in and trying to dig our way out of. The  chances are that could get worse because of the international situation. How do we pay for it if we  have to?

TREASURER: Well, Neil, what I have said is our plan is to grow the economy, control expenditure, to  get the Budget back in a strong position. Any consideration of matter relating to national security or  any proposal we would consider from our allies in the Coalition efforts in the Middle East would  have to be considered in that context. So, I am not going to jump ahead of that and get into the  issues you have raised. I just think it is way too premature.

MITCHELL: What did you think of the words of the Grand Mufti yesterday when he was effectively  blaming the victims in my view?

TREASURER: Look, I was very disappointed and I support what Peter Dutton has said today and I  would encourage him to, I think, come out and clarify what his statement said. I was very  disappointed for Australian Muslims yesterday. I though Australian Muslims were let down by the  Mufti yesterday and the Imams Council who I understand that statement was issued on behalf of. I  think we’ve got into a much more mature discussion about these very complicated issues and I think  Australians Muslims would have been disappointed in those comments, certainly those who I have  close relationships with were and I really urge him to listen to his own community on this and to  reflect their views.

MITCHELL: The first family of refugees from Syria arrived today, I think. I feel for them walking into a  tense situation in this country. Can you as a former Minister in the area, be confident that these  people, not just this family but the 12,000 refugees have been properly screened.

TREASURER: I can be because we have a very long history of doing this well. There is a big difference  between people who are pouring across your borders illegally as was occurring in this country only  two years ago - our sea borders on those occasions - and what is happening in Europe where you  have hundreds of thousands of people just moving across the continent. That is not happening in  this country and it is not happening in this country because this Government took decisive action  and ended that. Now, the process we have to select people for this 12,000 has not changed since it  was first announced under the former Prime Minister. It is the same set of parameters. We are  focusing on those persecuted minorities and that obviously includes a very large Christian  component. In fact the majority, I would expect, and that is because it is those communities who are  at most long term risk in the Middle East. Christians will never be able to go back to some of these  countries for generations - for generations - and we are offering permanent resettlement. So, those  families who are coming, I think they will get the warmest of welcomes, I think they will get the best  settlement services in the world and they will be thoroughly screened and I think they will make very  good Australians.

MITCHELL: The former Prime Minister, I talked to Tony Abbott in a special programme on Saturday  night. He has certainly been out and about doing interviews, he is writing in The Australian today. Is  that helpful?

TREASURER: He is perfectly at liberty to do that.

MITCHELL: I know he is. Is it helpful?

TREASURER: Tony brings - he continues to have, I mean, his experience has not changed - he has a  lot to offer to the country, he has offered a lot to the country already, he has made an extraordinary  contribution both to our party…

9





MITCHELL: He told me the death cult is coming to get all of us - do you agree with that?

TREASURER: There is no doubt that its continued presence in the Middle East will continue to offer  some inducement to those all around the world to engage in the sort of terrible acts that we saw in  Paris. That is why our first responsibility is to ensure that Australia is as safe and secure as it possibly  can be. That is why we increased resources to our security and intelligence agencies. That is why we  have got, I think, the strongest border protection of anywhere, arguably, in the world to ensure that  we can keep Australians as safe as possible in what is a very complex environment.

MITCHELL: Can I ask you about the little Australian flag you are wearing on your lapel - little badge -  where is that from?

TREASURER: That was given to me by a supporter in my electorate. I wear it regularly. I have been  wearing it for years.

MITCHELL: Oh ok. Is it possible, you might not be able to answer this on the spot - I doubt you  could? Is it possible to assess what it costs to run government? I mean, as succinct from spending on  welfare or on other such things; what it costs to pay politicians, run Parliament, run the public  service - in other words the cost of administration.

TREASURER: Yeah, it’s all in the Budget papers there at least every year.

MITCHELL: Individually?

TREASURER: The full Budget paper number 2 goes through all the measures but specifically for each  Budget there is a full breakdown of the cost of running the Government - knock yourself out. It’s all  there. I know it costs us $440 billion to run the country in total - that is everything.

MITCHELL: Do you know how much of that is the cost of running government?

TREASURER: It’s all in the Budget, Neil.

MITCHELL: No, I wouldn’t expect you to know.

TREASURER: It’s all there, you can look it up.

MITCHELL: Thank you very much. Thank you for coming in. Just a silly question - are you into yoga or  any health therapies, natural therapies? Tai Chi?

TREASURER: I’m not, I suspect I would get tied up in knots pretty quick.

MITCHELL: What about acupuncture?

TREASURER: No, I’ve never done that.

MITCHELL: Vitamins?

TREASURER: Occasionally.

MITCHELL: Rolfing?

TREASURER: I don’t even know what that is.

10



MITCHELL: Neither do I.

TREASURER: I have got no idea what that is. I’m addicted to Indian curries, that is probably my  greatest sin.

MITCHELL: What do they do? No, I don’t want to know. What is your favourite curry?

TREASURER: I like a white lamb curry and that is my daughters favourite too. Every Saturday night in  my house, I do this with the kids and Jen and we have a great old night and then watch a movie  together.

MITCHELL: Curry and lager?

TREASURER: Well, I certainly have the lager - my six year old doesn’t.

MITCHELL: You have a six year old into curry?

TREASURER: Yeah she loves it. It took her awhile to warm up to it, the eight year old has always liked  them, but my youngest daughter - she loves Melbourne by the way, she has been here a couple of  times with us and at six years old she told me she wanted to open a restaurant in Melbourne.

MITCHELL: Does she cook for you?

TREASURER: Yeah, she has a go. She sort of mirrors what I am doing. I don’t know if we’d eat it yet  but she certainly has fun doing it.

MITCHELL: Because you cooked the curry along with Annabel Crabb, you were cooking the curries?

TREASURER: Yeah. I’ve been doing it. I took it up early this year, it’s just one of those things which  clears your head and is good to do with the family.

MITCHELL: I don’t think it is in the category of health therapies which are being…

TREASURER: No, the ghee that goes into the base I don’t think is the best for your health but it tastes  good.

MITCHELL: Well, come back to issues. Scott Morrison, thanks for coming in.

TREASURER: Thanks, Neil.

(ENDS)

Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253

