



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&EO TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL  MONDAY, 29 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Immigration policy

ALISON CARABINE: Richard Marles, welcome.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning Alison, how are you?

CARABINE: Very well thank you. Is Joel Fitzgibbon right, will Shadow Cabinet  end up supporting turnbacks?

MARLES: Well we retain concerns about turnbacks, it is a really difficult area  and there are a range of views on this issue within the party and out there in the  community. It’s complex and I understand those different views. But at the end of  the day we are concerned about the impact that turnbacks have in relation to the  relationship with Indonesia specifically when it comes to cooperating with  Indonesia around the question of asylum seekers vessels and of course all of this  happening under a shroud of secrecy. And I think all of that was bought into vivid  light with the incident that occurred a few weeks ago where there seems to be an  allegation that maybe money was paid to turn back an asylum seeker vessel.  Now obviously if that happened we are very concerned about that. But the point  about that incident is we still don’t exactly know what happened out there and it is  really clear that Indonesia were deeply concerned about it and I think that  highlights the concerns we retain around this issue and the Government frankly  have been hopeless in answering them.

CARABINE: So Labor does have concerns, it’s a difficult issue, there’s a range  of views, that’s all fair enough but a decision will have to be made because it will

come to a head at Conference next month. You  have previously expressed  qualified support for turnbacks, is that still the case? Are you still open minded  about adopting the policy?

MARLES: Well in terms of what I’ve said in the past, a lot was made of a little but  really the point I was making previously was -

CARABINE: Well what you said was that you would accept turnback if Indonesia  cooperated and it was safe to do so. That was pretty straight forward.

MARLES: Well the concerns that I expressed previously are not unlike the  concerns I just expressed to you now, we do - we are concerned about what this  is doing in terms of our relationship with Indonesia. And the point about that is,  it’s not just a question of seeing an end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels last  year and this, we need to be making sure we have an enduring resolution here  which sees an end to - you know, in this decade and the next and I don’t  understand how one can do that unless we do have a functioning relationship,  cooperation with Indonesia on this question. So I think it’s a pretty important point  to ask what is this doing in terms of our relationship with Indonesia and the  Government is in the position to understand that and they are being hopeless in  explaining that to us but also to the Australian people. But I want to make this  other point Alison, we are not about to do anything which sees a reopening of the  journey between Java and Christmas Island, we’re not about to do anything  which puts people smugglers back in business, and we’re not about to -

CARABINE: Does that mean adopting boat turnbacks? If you don’t want to see  the passage between Java and Australia reopened isn’t it fair to extrapolate that  means adopting turnbacks?

MARLES: Well I’ve just explained the concerns we have in relation to turnbacks  and explained the fact that the Government has failed to answer those concerns  and I think it’s also important then to state that the most significant step that any  Australian Government has taken in bringing an end to the flow of boats from  Java to Christmas Island is the Regional Resettlement Arrangement, offshore  processing that Labor put in place with PNG and Nauru back in July of 2013. But  look, these are, they’re obviously difficult issues, we are going to review all of our  policies in the lead up to the election and I’ve got no doubt that these matters will  be discussed at Conference in a month or so.

CARABINE: Yeah, there is no reference to turnbacks in the draft platform for  National Conference. Doesn’t that silence suggest that you are keeping your  options open? You want the room to move if the boats start arriving again?

MARLES: Well it doesn’t suggest anything more than what I’ve just explained to  you now.  We’ve got concerns in relation to turnbacks, the Government have  refused to answer those concerns. We are not about to do anything which sees a

reopening of the journey. Now in terms of what happens at that conference, I  genuinely don’t want to pre-empt what debates may arise there other than to say  that I think what you’ll see at Conference is a debate about what is a really  complex and difficult issue undertaken from a perspective of people having  nothing other than compassion and a sense of dignity in relation to those in the  world who are seeking asylum and it’s a very important difference to how we are  going to consider this issue to our political opponents in the Coalition.

CARABINE: Well some on the Left, not all, but some on the Left will never  accept turnback, it’s your job as shadow minister to come up with a policy. How  are you going to craft one which doesn’t end up splitting the party?

MARLES: Well I don’t think we’re going to split the party. This is a very difficult  issue and it’s been a difficult issue for a very long period of time -

CARABINE: But Richard Marles, New South Wales right, New South Wales right  want turnback. It looks like the party, at least the right wing of the party, is  bending over backwards to eliminate any difference between the Government  and Opposition when it comes to asylum boats. If indeed you adopt turnback how  are voters going to tell the difference between Labor and Liberal at the next  election?

MARLES: Well actually I think that’s not right at all in terms of your, the way  you’ve characterised what people in the party are seeking to do and there is a  huge difference between Labor and Liberal in relation to this question. We don’t  want to see a reopening of the journey between Java and Christmas Island and  for good reason, we don’t want to see - you’ve just got to let me finish this.

CARABINE: Sure go ahead.

MARLES: Because we don’t want to see the human tragedy which has unfolded  in the past happen again. We are motivated by a position of compassion but  whereas for the Government that is really the central piece of an architecture  which is really about putting a wall around Australia and turning Australia’s back  on the world’s problems. That is not Labor’s perspective at all. We acknowledge  that right now the world is going through its greatest period of humanitarian need  seen since the Second World War. There are more people seeking refuge, more  people -

CARABINE: Okay.

MARLES: - displaced than at any other point in time and we will have, we are  about having a much greater engagement with the world than we’ve ever had  before. As well -

CARABINE: And you can do that with turnback?



MARLES: Well we’re talking, this whole discussion that we’ve had this morning  and in the context of whatever tactics people use is about a particular journey  between Java and Christmas Island, there is a much bigger world out there.  Increasing the humanitarian intake -

CARABINE: Okay.

MARLES: - Which you’ll see is in our policy as well is very important. How we  engage with entities like the UNHCR, like the region, that has a huge impact on  the way in which we work with the rest of the world on these issues as does the  way in which we treat  people who are here -

CARABINE: Okay Richard Marles.

MARLES: - such as temporary protection visas, so there’s a huge difference out  there.

CARABINE: Okay, Richard Marles, thank you for your time this morning.

MARLES: It’s a pleasure Alison.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK TRAINOR 0407 078 138

