

THE HON ALANNAH MACTIERNAN MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR WESTERN  AUSTRALIA  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE  MEMBER FOR PERTH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS PM AGENDA WITH DAVID SPEERS

THURSDAY, 23 JULY 2015



SUBJECT/S: Boat turnback policy; Renewable Energy Target

DAVID SPEERS: Alannah MacTiernan, thank you for you your time this afternoon.  Where do stand on the idea of turning back asylum seeker boats?

ALANNAH MACTIERNAN, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  WESTERN AUSTRALIA; REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE:  Well look, I support absolutely the proposition that we need to have that as an option. It  is unclear because of the secrecy that has surrounded boat turnbacks just to what  extent it has been an important part of stemming the flow of people smuggling traffic.  But quite clearly, it potentially has been part of what has made the current policy  settings of offshore processing work. So we do need to understand we have an  obligation to manage this problem and that we have all the tools at our disposal that we  need to manage it.

SPEERS: I'm just wondering when you formed this view. Is this a recent position for you  to take? Have you previously opposed turnbacks and is it the fact that you've seen it  operate now or at least been told the way it's operating that's convinced you?

MACTIERNAN: Look, it's a combination of those things, certainly going into the last  election I strongly supported that change in direction that we had to take on board with  offshore processing. I believe that we do need to manage this problem. We cannot  allow that people smuggling trade to re-establish and if we took out the deterrence, we

would certainly be facing the prospect of boats resuming. We do see that the current  government's policy settings have been working and we need to leave open the  possibility of us engaging in boat turn-backs if that is a necessary part of keeping this  system working. We can't be sure that it is because there is just simply no information  being made available to the Australian public on this.

SPEERS: This is important because you talk about transparency; Richard Marles today  talked about this as well. What would be your ideal situation here, that every time there  is a turnback it's made clear, it’s made public what’s happened?

MACTIERNAN: I mean obviously during an operation that may not be something that  one would want to do, but certainly I just cannot see the benefit in not being transparent  about this, certainly within a short space of time. Look, this is a really, really tough policy  for many people in the Labor Party, but I say that the quid pro quo for this will be  something that is immeasurably valuable. We are going to double the intake of refugees  and that means that there's an additional 13,500 people from around the world, some of  the most vulnerable people who do not have the resources or are in the geography that  allows them to take a boat to Australia, that will have the capacity to be resettled  Australia. It’s a tough decision, and I think it's a necessary one, but there is a great  upside to this. If we can extract from this a doubling of our intake of refugees, well, I am  more than happy to stand behind this policy because I think that will deliver the best  increment in our overall humanitarian benefit.

SPEERS: Well how certain then is that deal or trade-off that you will double the refugee  intake? I don't think Bill Shorten has yet locked that in. Is your support for turn-backs  conditional upon the doubling of the refugee intake?

MACTIERNAN: Personally, I think we have to do that. I think that we have to. It's a  tough decision that many people feel troubled by, but I strongly believe that if we can  show that we are going to be delivering to 13,500 of the most vulnerable people the  world an opportunity of resettling, of establishing a life in Australia, I think that's a price  worth paying to deliver this policy.

SPEERS: You are one of the very few unaligned members of the Labor Party, you're  not from the Right faction or Left faction. I think there is only three of you in the caucus.

MACTIERNAN: Correct.

SPEERS: You can't be accused of being heavied by one of the factions into taking this  position.

MACTIERNAN: No.

SPEERS: You will be at the conference though. What is your best assessment of  whether this policy will prevail and whether the leader will prevail on turn-backs?

MACTIERNAN: Well look, I think it will be hotly contested and you don't get into politics  unless you're really prepared to be engaged in this contest of ideas. So it will be hotly  contested, but my view is that I think it’s more likely that this will get up than not. I know  that there are people of great goodwill on the left of politics that understand that we  have to have a system that is manageable and that if we don't manage these borders,  that we actually undermine the multicultural agenda that certainly my personal  experience, backed up by research, says that we build a stronger commitment in  Australia to multiculturalism when we are controlling our borders. I think that is  incredibly important for the future of this country and I know that there are a number of  my left colleagues that share that view. So my view is that this is tough, it's hard, but I  think at the end of the day this proposition will prevail.

SPEERS: And at the end of the day, what’s at stake for Bill Shorten if this doesn’t  prevail at the conference? Is his leadership over?

MACTIERNAN: Absolutely not. Leaders have got to have a go. You've got to be  prepared to stand up and align yourself with policies like this and likewise the bold  commitment to a 50 per cent renewable target by 2030. You've got to be prepared to  stand up for stuff. But it doesn't mean, in a democratic institution, that you’re always  going to win. Of course that can't mean that your leadership is over. We expect our  leaders to have views, to put them forward, to back ideas, but no leader can ever be  expected to win 100 per cent of their position. But I do think that this is not a question of  a factional view, this is a question of really being prepared to make the hard decisions  that are necessary to ensure that the people smuggling operations are not resumed.

SPEERS: A final question, you mentioned the renewables target as well. I’m keen to get  your thoughts on this. I know Caucus, indeed the Shadow Cabinet, haven't exactly  discussed this. We don’t know exactly what it is going to do to the price of electricity and  we don't know specifically how much it is going to reduce emissions; it’s not cheapest  way of bringing down emissions. What do you think about a 50 per cent renewable  energy target?

MACTIERNAN: Look, I actually think it is eminently achievable. I spent last week at the  Clean Energy Conference in Sydney and the rate at which this industry is expanding the  technology, is expanding the utilities now coming on board: they are now understanding  that they can no longer just keep putting their finger in the dyke and trying to resist  change, and are embracing new battery technology throughout networks. So I have  every confidence that we are going to be able to deliver this and ultimately what we will  delivering is cheaper electricity. You will remember that even the Warburton Review  found that persisting with renewables, and persisting with the previous target, would  see, by between 2017 and 2019, prices drop. So even if there is a short-term increase  in prices, all of the evidence tells us that in the long-term and, indeed in the medium-term, that we will be seeing prices reduce. So we've got to do this thing to get us on to  the low-cost trajectory.

SPEERS: We’re going to have to leave it there, thanks for joining us Alannah  MacTiernan.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK SCOTT, 0413 381 060

