

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RN DRIVE  THURSDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2015

SUBJECT/S:  Bali Nine, Human Rights Commission report, Tony Abbott’s  reference to the holocaust.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hi Patricia.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, PRESENTER: Let’s start by taking a listen to what you  said in Parliament today.

PLIBERSEK [recording]: I perhaps have a particular view on remorse and  redemption because of experiences in my own life. In 1988, my husband left prison  after being charged and convicted of a similar crime to these young men. I imagine  what would have happened if he had been caught in Thailand, instead of in  Australia, where that crime was committed, when he was coming back to Australia. I  think about - I didn’t know him at the time, this was thirty years ago, what the  world would have missed out on. They would have missed out on the three beautiful  children that we’ve had together. They would have missed out on a man who spent  the rest of his life making amends for the crime that he committed. I have another  perspective on this too. In 1997, I lost my brother to a violent crime in Port  Moresby. And I know that if I had been the one making the decision about the  punishment of the person who did that crime, I couldn’t have thought of a  punishment bad enough. That’s why we don’t make decisions about punishment on  the basis of how we feel, but on the basis of universal consistently applied rules.

KARVELAS: For those who haven’t heard your story, tell us briefly what happened  to your husband and why you wanted to share that story today.



PLIBERSEK: Well I don’t normally talk about what happened to Michael. It  happened well before I met him, about thirty years ago. When he was a teenager,  he was involved in a conviction to import heroin type crime, very similar to these  young men, Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran. He was picked up coming back to Australia  from Thailand and the reason I raised it today is obviously after thirty years, I feel  very strongly that if Michael had been picked up instead leaving a country with the  death penalty, it could have been him in this position. And I see the way that he’s  rebuilt his life and the way that he’s completely accepted that what he did was  wrong. He served his time in gaol. He’s come out, he’s worked hard to make a  contribution back to society and I think about these two young men and the stories  of the effort they’ve gone to to redeem themselves and I hope they’ll have the same  opportunity.

KARVELAS: You also talked about your experience of losing your brother to a  violent crime in PNG, to talk about the strong emotions you had at the time and how  they were not rational, can you go through that with us?

PLIBERSEK: The point I was making was how- the way that we make decisions  about crime and punishment in our society has to be thoughtful and consistent and  dispassionate. And my opposition to the death penalty is everywhere and for  everyone. So of course I am opposed to the death penalty for these two young men,  Australians in Indonesia, but I’m also opposed to the use of the death penalty for  Indonesians in Indonesia, or Americans in America, or Chinese in China. It is a  universal and consistent opposition to the death penalty. And it’s important not be  swayed by our emotions at these times, but to really stick to that moral foundation.

KARVELAS: Do you feel like the Government could be doing more because there  were certainly calls on Q&A this week, for instance, there were calls for the Prime  Minister or for the Government to withdraw aid money from Indonesia, to use  stronger levers to try and put pressure on Indonesia. Do you think that enough  pressure has been placed on Indonesia?

PLIBERSEK: There’s been an enormous amount of work behind the scenes, there  have been bipartisan approaches from the Prime Minister and Bill Shorten, the  Foreign Minister and I with Christine Milne, from the Attorney-General and the  Shadow Attorney-General. We’ve had a letter signed by well over a hundred  Members of Parliament. But a lot of that political activity has not been in the public  eye. All of our advice to date has been that using diplomatic channels, using contact  between our former diplomats, business people, Australians living in Indonesia and  so on, the advice has been that’s the most productive way to achieve the outcome  we want here. I’m not going to start complaining about what has or hasn’t been  done, I believe the Government has accepted all of the advice that our diplomats  have offered them on the measures they can take to help the young men.

KARVELAS: Now on the issue of a report by the Human Rights Commission that’s  raised serious concern about the welfare of children in detention, the Prime Minister  has made some very strong remarks today about the time that Labor was in charge

and there were more children in detention and the children that died at sea. Do you  accept some responsibility for your time in government and the treatment of  children in detention during that period?

PLIBERSEK: I don’t believe any child should be in immigration detention, I don’t  think anyone thinks it’s a good place for children. And it’s important after their  families have had health, security and identity checks to be out of detention as  quickly as possible.

KARVELAS: Do you regret that Labor participated in a policy that saw children at  high numbers in immigration detention when Labor was in power?

PLIBERSEK: I’m phenomenally disappointed that the Prime Minister has seen fit to  try and make this a party political issue and that he’s dragged the name of the  Human Rights Commissioner through the mud in an effort to discredit the excellent  work that the Human Rights Commission does. I think if you’re going to look at the  record of the different parties on immigration, you would have to ask why it was the  Liberals in opposition opposed Labor’s proposal to send asylum seekers to Malaysia  for processing where adults could have worked and lived in the community, children  could have gone to school, and people would have had access to health care and  other social support.

KARVELAS: The Human Rights Commissioner is calling for a Royal Commission. Do  you think that’s appropriate?

PLIBERSEK: Well we’ve only received the report today. The Government’s had it  for months. Of course it’s important that we take a little time to read it in detail and  consider the recommendations in detail.

KARVELAS: Now the Prime Minister was under some scrutiny in Parliament today  over this comment.

ABBOTT [recording]: Members opposite want to know about jobs. The Members  opposite, defence jobs in this country declined by 10%, there was a holocaust of  jobs in defence industries under Members opposite.

KARVELAS: Now Tony Abbott later apologised for that reference to the holocaust.  Was it just a Parliamentary impassioned speech or was it that he needs to answer  more questions on this?

PLIBERSEK: Patricia, I’m just not going to dignify the use of that sort of language  in the Parliament with commentary and analysis. I’m pleased the Prime Minister  apologised, he should never have used that word in that context in the first place.

KARVELAS: It’s ended the issue though, his apology, in your view?

PLIBERSEK: I think a lot of people would have been deeply hurt by what they  would have seen as a trivialisation of one of the worst events of our collective  history.

KARVELAS: Tanya Plibersek, thanks for joining us on RN Drive.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you, Patricia.



ENDS

