TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 14/06/2015

TITLE: Sky News - Australian Agenda

TOPICS: Housing affordability, negative gearing, Operation Sovereign  Borders, Budget, superannuation, NDIS, Labor’s bank deposit tax



PETER VAN ONSELEN: That is where we will start our interview with the Finance Minister, joining us  live out of Perth, Senator Mathias Cormann. Thanks very much for your company, Senator.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Good to be here.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Alright, let me ask you about housing affordability. I mean this is something  you will need to work with the States to do anything about, let’s be frank about that. In other words the  Federation White Paper is going to be very important to any collaborative attempt to address housing  affordability. How hopeful are you that we will see something tangible via the Government’s response  to come out of this particular Federation White Paper?

MATHIAS CORMANN: You’re right. The price of anything, including the price of housing is a function  of supply and demand. If demand exceeds supply, prices go up. If supply exceeds demand, prices go  down. What we see in the market now is that in Sydney and Melbourne in particular, prices are  edging up, which has incidentally attracted additional investment into housing construction, which is  the usual response that you get to increasing prices. So there will be to an extent, a supply response  as a result of what is happening in the market. But beyond that, the most sustainable way to improve  housing affordability is to increase supply. A lot of those levers are levers that State Governments  have at their disposal. We are working with State and Territory Governments as appropriate to see  what can best be done in order to address issues as appropriate.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Would you agree that the other two things that are the best way to sort of  deal with housing affordability is just to have a good job and hold onto it and get pay increases?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Our economic plan is focussed on strengthening growth, creating more jobs  and making sure that everyone has the best opportunity to get ahead, because we understand that  the better the job that you can get it is self evident that the better your opportunity to accessing the  housing market. We fully appreciate the challenges faced by first home buyers. We understand that it  is important as part of the overall plan to give everyone the best possible opportunity in a stronger  economy to get ahead.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Senator, can I just jump in on that. Do you think that people need to be  reasonable in their expectations on this, because obviously people jumped all over the Treasurer’s  comments over the course of last week when he talked about this. And the Opposition reacted by  saying, what about nurses and teachers and policeman who can’t have the kind of salary increases  that other professions can. But if you look at real estate, there’s plenty of real estate available, even in  Sydney, that people from different middle and working class backgrounds can afford. It is a matter of  where you choose to live. Do people have to manage expectations?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I don’t think there is anything wrong with aspiration. I think that all of us, for  our families, want the best that we can provide. We want to, aspire to improve ourselves. That is  absolutely appropriate and important. That is where the Government comes in as well with our plan  for a stronger economy and for more growth. We want people to be as successful as they possibly  can be. We want people to strive to get ahead. With the policies that we’re putting in place we want to  provide the framework where people have the best possible opportunity to do so.

PAUL KELLY: As far as you’re concerned Minister is it a priority for the Government to tackle this  housing affordability issue?

MATHIAS CORMANN: What is a priority for us is to put Australia on a stronger foundation for the  future, to strengthen growth, create more jobs, to get the Budget back into surplus as soon as  possible and to give people the best possible opportunity to get ahead and yes, working with the  States on initiatives to increase supply that will help make access to housing more affordable. But the  principle point here is, that we want to provide the settings where individual Australians have the best  possible opportunity to be successful, including having the best possible opportunity to access the  housing market. There’s always a range of factors at play in any market. Right now in Sydney and  Melbourne in particular, with demand exceeding supply, there is upward pressure on prices.

PAUL KELLY: Can I just ask you as a matter of broad principle, do you believe that the Reserve  Bank should set interest rates according to the overall national requirements of the economy rather  than for housing asset prices in particular cities?

MATHIAS CORMANN: As a matter of broad principle, I believe that the Reserve Bank needs to make  these judgements independently based on its analysis of the economic situation. The Reserve Bank  has a mandate to make judgements based on what is happening in the domestic and the global  economy and that is what they do. I fully support the independence of the Reserve Bank.

PAUL KELLY: Okay, well let’s go to the issue of negative gearing. The Labor party has been running  on this hard as an option, reforming negative gearing policy. What’s your view about the impact that  this would have on the housing market?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I’m interested in hearing you say that the Labor party is running hard on this,  because as late as Thursday or Friday, I saw Bill Shorten being interviewed and at pains to say that  the Labor party had no such plans to make changes to negative gearing. I understand that there is a  level of backgrounding being done by various people, presumably from within the Labor party. I’m not  quite sure what the Labor party’s position on negative gearing is. What I can say is that a previous  Labor government tried to make change in this space. The Hawke Government tried to make change  in this space, and very quickly had to reverse the decisions that they made in relation to negative  gearing because of the effect it had on rental prices. It is very simple, if you make it harder for people  to invest in the private housing market and to provide private rental accommodation, if you reduce the  supply of rental accommodation, you increase the price of rental accommodation. That is not  something that would be in the public interest. From our point of view, the principle that you are able  to deduct the cost of generating this income, including from income related to other activities, is a  principle that has been in place for a very long time. We don’t have any plans to make any change to  it, because we are very conscious of that fact that it would be counter productive in terms of  facilitating access to affordable rental accommodation.

PAUL KELLY: Yeah, I mean surely that’s not an adequate answer though. If you’ve got tax  concession like this it completely distorts investment patterns. We’ve had a lot of criticism emerging  now from independent economic think tanks about the impact of negative gearing. Surely as Finance  Minister its worthwhile reassessing this issue isn’t it?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I will leave you to make judgement on whether you think it is an adequate  answer or not an adequate answer. What I do take issue with though, this is not a tax concession.  Somebody who invests in generating an income, somebody who invests in providing private rental

accommodation, is able to deduct the cost of the interest on the loan, the cost of various other  aspects of providing that rental accommodation from that income. To the extent that there are losses  they are able to deduct those losses from income generated by other activities. That is not a  concession. That is our tax law at work as it has existed for a very long time. As I would just point out  again, the evidence is actually there where a previous Labor government did try to fiddle with this and  very quickly had to realise the error of their ways and very quickly had to correct their approach. Right  now, to the extent that we are concerned about housing affordability, to the extent that we are  concerned that there is an imbalance between demand and supply for accommodation, if you make it  harder for people to supply private rental accommodation and there is similar demand, or growing  demand moving forward, then that would put upward pressure on rental prices. We don’t believe that  is something that would be appropriate to let happen at this point in time.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: So where are the big reforms Senator, going to come from if the  Government’s not prepared to move on the GST without all the States agreeing and that’s like herding  cats. If superannuation has been ruled out both in this term and the next by the Prime Minister. If  negative gearing is not going to be touched and if bracket creep isn’t going to be addressed, in fact  it’s getting worse with the change agreed to by Labor in relation to the tax free threshold. Where are  the big changes likely to come from when we do get a response from the Government to these White  Papers?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Right now we have only just started with the discussion paper. Submissions  closed the other week. Only ...interrupted

< VAN>But everything has been ruled out before that’s even started.

MATHIAS CORMANN: I don’t believe that everything has been ruled out at all. There is a process  now underway. Over the next few months we will be putting the Green Paper together, then the White  Paper, where it will become more and more clear where the Government thinks we should go in terms  of making our tax system simpler, fairer and more efficient.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Can we just go to bracket creep for a moment. Your Senate colleague from  the Liberal Democrats, Senator David Leyonhjelm, I spoke to him during the week, he’s none too  impressed by the Government’s back flip in relation to bracket creep. Now this has been supported by  the Labor party of course. The tax free threshold is not going to be adjusted by about a thousand  dollars or so as was originally planned. His frustration is that he carved that out specifically when  negotiating over the carbon tax and he feels incredibly let down by that, along with Bob Day. What’s  your reaction to that?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Firstly, there was no back flip. Secondly there was no carve out. The  Government has always been very clear since well before the last election, that we would seek to  implement the Labor budget measure, in their last budget, to reverse the second round of income tax  cuts that were linked to the carbon tax. Labor in their last budget, asserted that as a result of their  decision to move from a fixed carbon tax to a floating carbon tax with a price of $12.40 a tonne  instead of $25.40 a tonne, that it was no longer necessary. So the decision for the second round of  tax ... interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: So why does Senator Leyonhjelm felt let down?

MATHIAS CORMANN: If I might finish. If I could just finish my answer. So Labor decided in their last  budget, that it was no longer appropriate to proceed with the second round of income tax cuts and  that they would defer them until such time as the carbon tax would get back to $25.40. Under our  Government, the carbon price is zero dollars and it will be zero dollars for as long as we are the  Government and as such, we decided and we said so before the last election, that we would not

proceed with that second round of income tax cuts. When we took that into the Parliament, even  though it was a Labor budget measure, Labor initially voted against it. Labor now has had a change of  heart and Labor has decided to support their own budget measure. This is part of about $6.5 billion  worth of measures that Labor initiated in their last budget, banked in their last budget but failed to  legislate and which they ended up opposing when we tried to do their work for them. I can’t speak for  Senator Leyonhjelm, but what I can say is that this is entirely consistent with what we said before the  election and ever since.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Alright we’re going to take a break here on Australian Agenda. We’re talking  to the Finance Minister, Mathias Cormann. We’ll continue that discussion when we come back. And  as mentioned earlier, a little later in the program we will be talking to David Murray who chaired the  Financial Services Inquiry. Back in a moment.

[BREAK]

Welcome back. You’re watching Australian Agenda where Paul Kelly and I are talking to the Finance  Minister, Mathias Cormann. Senator Cormann, I want to ask you about these accusations from the  United Nations that Australia are paying people smugglers to turn their boats around. The Prime

Minister has refused to deny this. He says he’ll do whatever it takes to stop the boats, so to speak. I  wonder as Finance Minister, given that all Government spending has to be approved by you, have  you approved any brown paper bags to be paid to asylum seekers?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Your comment is a bit incomplete there. When you say he refused to deny it,  he refused to comment on it, and he refused to confirm or deny, which is consistent with the long  standing approach taken by the Prime Minister not to comment on operational on water matters. We  have to remember that the people who got the people smuggling trade going again, the people that  gave the biggest ever cash injection to the people smugglers business model, was the Labor party  when they dismantled the successful border protection policies of the previous Howard Government.  Not only did they cause 50,000 illegal boat arrivals to get to Australia, but they also generated  significant additional cash flows for people smugglers while putting people’s lives at risk ... interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: But I have to ask something. The traditional approach of not commentating  about operational matters, it can’t be considered good enough for a government when you’ve got the  UN levelling an accusation of paying people smugglers to turn boats around. To refuse to deny that or  at least explain that, I mean the operational matters argument can’t give a government, an elected  government in a democratic society carte blanche to turn around and just refuse to answer what  would be incredibly alarming questions. Can it? Surely.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Let me make a couple of points. Firstly, I am the Minister for Finance. I am  not involved in day to day operational matters in relation to Operation Sovereign Borders. Secondly ...  interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: But as an elected Senator you must be concerned. I mean you must want to  know this.

MATHIAS CORMANN: What I want to know is that people are no longer dying at sea as a result of  our successful efforts to stop the boats. The previous government put thousands of lives at risk by  dismantling the successful policies of the previous Howard Government. It is an important part of a  successful operation to stop the boats to ensure that there are certain disciplines in place, which  includes not providing intelligence information to the people smugglers. That is the approach that has  been consistently taken by the Prime Minister. Questions in relations to the specific operational  matters are answered as appropriate by the Minister for Immigration, Minister Dutton, and he has  done so on this occasion. This proposition that somehow the Prime Minister has refused to deny and  that somehow this is translated into payments have been made is just wrong. No indications have  been made whatsoever that payments have been made and I don’t accept for one minute the  proposition that has been put by some people and the interpretation that has been put by some  people on all of this. The truth of the matter is, that we came into Government with a clear mandate to  stop the boats. We have stopped the boats. Part of our successful efforts to stop the boats was to  deploy certain disciplines in the way these operations are handled.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: But Senator, I’ve got to ask this. It appears that Julie Bishop and Peter  Dutton have said it didn’t happen. The Prime Minister for some reason hasn’t backed that up ...  interrupted

MATHIAS CORMANN: It does not appear that, that is exactly what they said. When you say it  appears... interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Well then why won’t the Prime Minister

MATHIAS CORMANN: That is... interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: If they have said that on the record, I can’t understand why the Prime  Minister would refuse to back that up. Is there something that they don’t know that the Prime Minister  and his office does know?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The Minister with most direct responsibility, on a day to day basis, for  Operation Sovereign Borders, for our efforts to stop the boats is the Minister for Immigration, it is

Minister Dutton. He has got the most direct involvement. He has got the most direct responsibility day  to day to answer questions in relation to these matters. He was asked about that and he has said...  interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: But why won’t the Prime Minister just back him up? Why won’t the Prime  Minister just consistently back up his Foreign Minister, who is also his Deputy, as well as his  Immigration Minister and say, as they have both said, we have not done this.

MATHIAS CORMANN: There are a whole range of people across Australia, perhaps including you  Peter, who don’t support our efforts to stop the boats. We went into the election in 2013 very clearly  saying to the Australian people, we will do what it takes to stop those boats, because we don’t want to  put people’s lives at risk by embarking on this very perilous journey from Indonesia to Australia. We  have done what was needed to be done in order to stop the boats. Those efforts have been  successful and part of those efforts has been that the Prime Minister does not provide a running  commentary in relation to on water, operational matters. But I just hasten to add again here, the only  party in Australia that provided a significant boost to the people smugglers business model was the  Australian Labor party when they decided recklessly and irresponsibly to dismantle the successful  border protection policies that had been put into place by the Howard Government.

PAUL KELLY: As Finance Minister can you give a guarantee that no such payments to smugglers  have been made?

MATHIAS CORMANN: As I said to you, as Finance Minister, I am not involved in day to day  operational matters related to Operation Sovereign Borders. So again, you can now try to over  interpret that answer. But I will have to stick to the same formula as the Prime Minister and that is I  don’t comment in relation to operational matters related to Operation Sovereign Borders. From my  point of view, I actually literally am not involved in that aspect of Government administration. The  Minister with responsibility for these matters is the Minister for Immigration.

PAUL KELLY: Now Senator, as you travel around the country do you find that wind farms are visually  awful?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I don’t think that wind farms are particularly attractive looking, but that’s not  what they are there for. They are there to generate energy. So I’m not sure that my views on what  they look like are particularly relevant.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: The Prime Minister thinks they sound awful. The Treasurer said that he  thinks that they look awful. What do you think looks and sounds more awful, a coal mine or a wind  farm?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Again, I can see that certain journalists get quite interested in what the  personal tastes of individual politicians are in relation to things that they can look at. I don’t think that  the purpose of wind farm or a coal mine or a gold mine or an iron ore mine or you name it, I don’t  think the purpose of any of these things is to look particularly good. The purpose is quite different in  relation to a wind farm and a coal mine, the purpose is to help generate energy. When it comes to  renewable energy ...interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: That’s my point though Senator, I have got to just jump in there, that’s my  point in a sense, I don’t mind that coal mine or an iron ore mine sounds a little bit loud or perhaps  doesn’t look that pretty but for some reason a wind farm it can be commentated by a Prime Minister  that it doesn’t sound great, or it doesn’t look great. What’s the relevance of that? And where’s the  consistency? That’s the case isn’t it? Who cares?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well Peter, hang on. We’re being put in a position where we’ve got to answer  the questions that are put to us. You’ve just asked me whether I think they look good or they don’t  look good. If you don’t think it is relevant why are you asking me the question? And once you do ask  me the question then I’ve got to provide an... interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: But I’m asking the question, the reason I’m asking the question is because  the Prime Minister thought it was note worthy to actually comment about the sound of a wind farm. I  suspect he wouldn’t do the same about a coal mine, a gold mine, an iron ore mine. He’s done it about  wind farms for some sort of polemic concern about renewable energy, which I just think is a little bit  silly.

MATHIAS CORMANN: You know what, all of us get asked questions and we answer the questions to  the best of our ability. Sometimes the questions are relevant and the answer is relevant. Sometimes  the questions are a little bit less relevant and then by definition and necessarily the answer is a little  bit less relevant. I’m not sure how much is achieved here. In relation to renewable energy, the  important point here is that a compromise has been reached on a bipartisan basis on the way  forward. Initially, the Renewable Energy Target was meant to be 20 per cent. Because of what’s been  happening in the economy and in the market, because of the way that was designed, that became in  effect a target heading for 28-29 per cent, with significant consequences for the cost of doing  business, the cost of electricity for consumers and business. We felt that it was necessary to bring  that Renewable Energy Target back to where it was meant to be. We’ve been able to reach a  compromise that the Renewable Energy Target is now set at effectively 23 per cent by 2020. That  provides certainty to that important sector of the economy and that is the only thing that matters here  really.

PAUL KELLY: Minister, the Government is still struggling with some of its May Budget measures.  The most recent Budget measures in terms of getting them through the Senate. In terms of getting  Senate approval. How confident are you that you will be able to secure the major measures in this  Budget?

MATHIAS CORMANN: In this sitting fortnight we are still dealing with measures from Labor’s last  budget in 2013. So there is nothing unusual that we are still working our way through some of the  measures from a Budget five weeks ago. That is just the usual Parliamentary process. We will be  putting our legislation to the Senate, to the Parliament overall and to the Senate, in an orderly fashion.  Our priority for this fortnight is to get our small business and jobs package through as part of our plan  to boost growth and create more jobs. There’s a range of other priorities, the appropriation bills will  have to go through. In the second week of the fortnight we will be seeking to pursue the families  package. So we’ll be working our way through things one by one. Given the indications by the Labor  party that they will support their own measure to not proceed with the second round of income tax  cuts linked to the carbon tax that is expected to proceed in this sitting fortnight. So we’ll just continue

one by one to give effect to the measures that we’ve put forward in our Budget and to implement our  broader plan for stronger growth and more jobs.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: What about superannuation though. Are you comfortable having that ruled  out by your Prime Minister both this term and next given that everyone from Arthur Sinodinos to the  new Secretary of Treasury, even to the super industry quite frankly have talked about the need to  make some changes here and as I understand it at least one property mogul has as many as two  thousand properties in his personal superannuation account where on retirement he won’t pay a lick  of tax for the rental income from those two thousand properties. I mean that needs reform surely?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I was the Shadow Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation in the  lead up to the last election and I was centrally involved in crafting our policy commitment not to make  any unexpected detrimental changes to superannuation in our first term of Government. The reason  we did that was because we recognised the importance of certainty and stability in policy settings if  we wanted to encourage as many Australians as possible to save for their retirement, to save so they  could achieve a self-funded retirement and not rely on the taxpayer. The problem with this area of  policy is that some people seek to use extreme examples and outliers to promote a policy change that  applies to everyone. My view ...interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Are you happy to extend it to a second term though Senator? Because you  are going to get both the Federation and Tax White Papers finalised before this next election and  presumably you will have a package to respond to that. But the Prime Minister has ruled it out for the  following three years even if he wins the next election and that is where I think there is some concern  within the Government.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Not just the Prime Minister, the Treasurer in his Budget speech on Budget  night said very clearly that the Coalition would not increases taxes on superannuation. That is what  the Labor party is proposing. The Labor party is proposing to increase taxes on people’s retirement  savings in order to pay for their Budget black hole. What we are saying is we believe that people  across Australia saving for their retirement need certainty and stability in policy settings. We believe it  is important to continue to incentivise and encourage people to put more of their money into  superannuation, so they can look after their own needs in retirement. The Labor party when Bill  Shorten was the Minister for Financial Services and Superannuation was running class warfare in  relation to superannuation then, clearly they are trying to do so again. They will try and cloak it in this  pretense of wanting to attack the rich, but the truth is that their measures are squarely aimed at the  aspirational middle-class. The Coalition is not going to be the party of higher taxes on  superannuation. We are going to be the party of certainty and stability when it comes to  superannuation policy settings and the Labor party is going to be the party that wants to go after  people’s retirement savings in order to pay for their excessive spending.

PAUL KELLY: The Treasury Secretary, John Fraser, has indicated there is a case for action in this  area of superannuation concessions, he’s got it wrong has he?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I sat next to the Secretary of Treasury in Senate Estimates when this whole  issue was explored at length. What he talked about was over the very long term and in the context of  the Intergenerational Report going over 40 years to 2055, that clearly once you reach certain phases  in the development of superannuation that over the very long term, some adjustments are likely to  have to be considered. But that is not a situation that we are in now and certainly the Government’s

position is very clear. We will not be entertaining any increase in taxes on superannuation and the  Treasurer has made that very clear in his speech on Budget night.

PAUL KELLY: I guess one of the questions here is if the Government is concerned about bracket  creep and the marginal tax rates for middle Australia, for working Australians, how do you generate  the revenue to deliver significant tax reform in terms of addressing the bracket creep problem?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The answer has got to be on the spending side. The previous government put  us on a spending growth trajectory that was unsustainable. When we came into Government  spending as a share of GDP was headed for 26.5 per cent by 2023-24. We are now peaking at 25.9  per cent and bringing that down to 25.3 per cent over the forward estimates. We have got to continue  to work to get spending as a share of GDP on a more sustainable foundation. The Intergenerational  Report showed that over the next few decades if we didn’t make any change to spending as a share  of GDP under the previous Governments policy settings, it was headed for 37 per cent. Now when  you are on a trajectory like that the temptation for governments in that situation is to just keep  increasing tax. Our effort is to get spending under control so we give ourselves the fiscal space to  provide income tax cuts down the track. In the Budget our revenue assumptions are based on a cap  where tax revenue as a share of GDP is not going past 23.9 per cent. That implies that at some point  down the track there would be some income tax cuts to correct for the effect of bracket creep.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Is the NDIS fiscally sustainable?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The NDIS is a very significant and strongly growing expenditure item. It is a  very important initiative, which does have bipartisan support. The Coalition is working very hard to  give effect to it and the Minister responsible, Senator Fifield, is doing a very good job to ensure that is  done in the most efficient and best targeted way possible. Items of expenditure like on the NDIS are  another reason why we have to make space in other parts of the Budget. Whenever you identify  higher priority spending areas you need to ensure that you find other comparatively lower priority  spending areas that you can reduce spending in and that is what the Government is doing.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: So is the NDIS fiscally sustainable?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We are committed to making sure that the NDIS is affordable in our Budget  over the medium to long term, which is why we are pursuing fiscal reforms in other parts of the  Budget. If I may just say so, if the Labor party was genuinely committed to the NDIS they would help  us reduce spending in other areas in order to pay for it. So far, since Bill Shorten became Leader of  the Opposition he has not identified a single spending reduction proposal. He has not identified a

single alternative spending reduction proposal. Not one dollar of savings have been put forward by  the alternative Prime Minister and he is still opposing about $17 billion worth of savings and revenue  measures that we have put forward. He is still confronted with a $56 billion budget black hole as a  result of the decisions that he has made so far.

PAUL KELLY: Minister, in relation to the NDIS, isn’t the reality that it is not funded in the longer term?

MATHIAS CORMANN: It is absolutely the reality that the NDIS is not fully funded. The previous  government made some changes to the Medicare Levy Surcharge, which contributed some revenue  to it. It is certainly not fully funded. We are still in deficit, so Government expenditure overall is not fully  funded. The reason that we are working so hard to reduce spending growth in other areas, is among  other things to make the necessary space to pay for the NDIS, which we believe, and that is a bi-partisan position, which we believe is a very important initiative.

PAUL KELLY: The Government doesn’t seem to have the political courage to put this issue on the  table and ask the Australian people what they would like to see cut back in order to fund the NDIS.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Hang on, our first Budget and our second Budget is our plan to...interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Quite different Budget’s though Senator, they are extremely different  Budgets.

MATHIAS CORMANN: I will let you provide a running commentary on what your assessment is. The  first Budget was the first Budget, which involved a significant change in direction given the very bad  trajectory that we were on when we came into Government. The second Budget builds on the

progress that we have made since the first. It does make some adjustments given some of the  developments over the year in between the first and the second Budget. Makes some adjustments  and decided not to proceed with certain measures ...interrupted

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Just some minor things such as the Medicare copayment, the indexation  changes to the pension there was also no PPL between Budget 1 and Budget 2, I mean pretty  significantly different Budgets you would have to agree. I mean that isn’t a commentary fact, that is a

fact.

MATHIAS CORMANN: So in our first Budget we were able to control spending growth at one per  cent on average, per annum above inflation compared to 3.6 per cent spending growth on average,  above inflation under the previous government in their first five years. In this Budget it is 1.5 per cent.  We are still on track to achieve a surplus on the same timetable by 2019-20. So yes, we have made  some adjustments based on some of the feedback and some of the developments in the Parliament  over the 12 months of the intervening period. That is just good government, to take into account what  is happening and the feedback. After having consulted further in relation to some matters we have  made some adjustments along the way. I don’t shy away from that at all.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Well hard to do that. One quick final question if I can Senator before we let  you go. Our next guest is David Murray, he chaired the Financial Services Inquiry. His inquiry  recommended against a deposit tax, the Government is planning to go ahead with a deposit tax. Why  did he get that wrong?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The deposit tax as you call it was an initiative of the previous Labor  government which they initiated and banked in their last Budget. The Government has not actually  provided its response to the Murray Inquiry yet. What we said when the issue arose after our election  to Government is that we would be considering this issue as we consider the Government’s response  to the Financial Systems Inquiry. That response is due in the next few months and that response will  include our attitude and our decision on the way forward in relation to Labor’s deposit tax initiative,  which they included in the Budget.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Well the other part of that is the capital requirements on Banks going up,  that David Murray recommended. The banks say that that would increase the costs of doing business,

which could well put interest rates up, in the middle of a housing affordability debate, the Government  can’t be too keen on that, can it?

MATHIAS CORMANN: These are all the sorts of things that the Government is currently considering  as we are mulling over the Government’s response to the Financial Systems Inquiry. Once we have  considered all of the relevant information, the recommendations and the options on the way forward  and once we have made a decision there will be a public announcement. I am sure that the Treasurer  and the Assistant Treasurer will be very happy to come and talk to you about that response once it is  made.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: That would be wonderful. Mathias Cormann, you have always been  generous to us on Australian Agenda with your time, again today, thanks very much for it.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Always good to be here.

[ENDS]



