

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW

INTERVIEW with DAVID LIPSON - SKY NEWS AM AGENDA   WEDNESDAY, 22 APRIL 2015

SUBJECT/ S: Labor’s plan for fair and sustainable super; M edicare  Benefits Review ; Asylum seekers.

JOURNALIST - DAVID LIPSON: Well the wealthiest Australians would lose  $14 billion over ten years in superannuation tax concessions under a new Labor  policy to be unveiled by the Opposition Leader and the Shadow Treasurer today,  joining me now to discuss further is Labor front bencher and the Shadow  Immigration Minister, Richard Marles, thanks very much for your company.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND  BORDER PROTECTION: Morning David.

LIPSON: Firstly, to the first element of the plan which would impose a 15 per  cent tax on any earnings from superannuation over $75,000 that would apply to  people with $1.5 million or more in their super accounts, what is that element  aimed at, is it just about saving the Budget money or is it also about presenting  a more sustainable superannuation system?



MARLES: Well David, I’ll obviously let Bill and Chris go through the details of  this announcement later today but it is about both the elements that you’ve just  described.  It is about looking at how this can make a contribution to the Budget  over the medium term and it is also about making sure that we have a  sustainable superannuation system and what has been proposed and what will  be announced today is a fair proposal and a deeply considered proposal and I  think the point I’d really like to make to you this morning David, is that we are  using our time in opposition to think about the challenges which face our nation  and come up with ideas which can deal with them.  That really stands in stark  contrast to the Coalition who spent six years on the opposition bench as  essentially doing nothing other than saying no to the then Labor Government  and if there wasn’t a policy which you could reduce to a three word slogan, they  were not interested in it and we are all paying the price of that now.  This is a  package which has gone through extensive consultation with the sector, which  has gone through a Shadow Expenditure Review Committee process, which has  gone through the Shadow Cabinet, it is a significant contribution to the national  debate, it deals with the challenges that our Budget faces over the medium term  and it along with the multi-national tax, look to add $20 billion to the bottom line  of the Federal Budget over the next ten years and that is a significant  contribution.

LIPSON: Yeah it is certainly a significant policy that’s been announced, a saving  of $14 billion over ten years as I announced, would you expect wealthier  Australians to be pretty upset at that?  That’s a whole lot of money that they  would’ve been expecting to have in their retirement.

MARLES: Well firstly we’re not shying away from the difficult challenges which  the Budget presents over the medium term and if you look at the Government  now having delivered a profoundly unfair first Budget, appears now to have  completely given up on the task of dealing with the challenges that the Budget  faces in terms of debt and deficit over the medium and long term.  We are not  scared of dealing with those issues and of course these are difficult decisions.   Whenever you are taking about raising that kind of money you are talking  necessarily about difficult decisions.  But this is fair, it’s not going to have an  impact on people who receive any part of the pension, it is aimed at obviously  keeping the superannuation system sustainable but it’s done so in a way where  those who would be affected are in a position to make a contribution so this is a  deeply considered proposal, one which has involved a lot of consultation and it is  a significant contribution to the national debate and it stands in stark contrast to  the way in which the Coalition went about their business when they were in  opposition and we’re all paying the price for that now.

LIPSON: Why is the focus from Labor all on superannuation and not on the  sustainability of the pension system?  At the moment which does give benefits to  some fairly wealthy Australians?

MARLES: Well firstly, we’ve considered a number of issues, so the multinational  tax is obviously not just about superannuation but the pension plays a really  important part in our nations life and we are not about attacking the pension  which is what this government has been doing since the last Budget.  I don’t  think there is anything more fundamentally Labor than a commitment to the  pension and a future Shorten Government would absolutely retain that  commitment which is why we have stood steadfastly behind the pension, in  support of the pension, this is a package which will not affect anyone who  receives the pension and I think that’s a critically element of it.

LIPSON: OK well moving onto the Government’s planned revamp of the  Medicare system, we’ve heard from the Health Minister, Sussan Ley, just earlier,  what do you make of this?  Do you believe there are efficiencies, significant ones  that can be found in the system?

MARLES: David, we cautiously welcome a review of the Medical Benefits  Scheme, it’s something we undertook while we were in Government and  something we would do if we were in Government in the future.  It is important  to make sure that the Medical Benefit Scheme stays up to date and it is  obviously important to look at questions of over servicing and to make sure that  people are not rorting the system but in saying all of that, we are deeply  suspicious about the form of this Government and reviews that the Government  have taken of this kind.  Let’s not forget that immediately prior to the election we  heard the Government announce a Commission of Audit which it told us was just  a routine matter of business, nothing to see here, and what came out of it was  the most unfair Budget that this country has ever seen.  We are concerned that  what we will have with this review is another mechanism by which this  Government can come up with a new heath care tax and I don’t know how many  GP taxes you need to look at before you understand that this is a tax which  totally stinks.

LIPSON: So in terms of the services that are currently there, would Labor  accept any of those services being cut or any of the benefits that people receive  from the Government being reduced or cut?

MARLES: We are open to a review of the Medical Benefits Scheme, it’s  something that we undertook while we were in Government and indeed the  measures that were looked at while we were in Government have seen  something like $1 billion worth of savings over a five year period.  So we’re  absolutely open to that and as I say we cautiously welcome the Government

finally supporting the review process that Labor had in place, but this  Government has form in using reviews of this kind to put in place taxes through  the back door.  This is a Government which has never been about improving the  services of Government, it has always been about finding a new way to tax  people without having previously told them and that is our concern, or our  suspicion about the process which the Health Minister has announced.

LIPSON: Richard Marles, I want to get your thoughts on the asylum seeker, or  the migrant crisis in the Mediterranean at the moment more than more than 800  people died in one boat capsizing earlier this week and there have been other  boats run aground, what should Europe do to deal with this crisis?

MARLES: We’ve seen play out, in the last week, an enormous human tragedy  and it really comes off the back of a year or more of similar, or not as big single  incidents, but we’ve seen something like 4,000 people perish on the  Mediterranean during the course of last year.  This is by any measure a huge  human tragedy.  I think it does remind us of the tragedy of people drowning at  sea and that’s something we have experienced not too long ago and it’s really  important that we never forget how tragic those events were and it’s important  we pay very close attention to the need to make sure we don’t see that kind of  human tragedy play out on our borders again.  I think we can also look at these  events and see that the scourge of people smuggling is something that we need  to be combating with every fibre of our existence.  People smugglers in this  circumstance are criminal syndicates who are preying on vulnerable people with  tragic consequences.  Beyond that I’m not going to start to suggest how the  governments of Europe ought to deal with this because there are circumstances  in relation to the Mediterranean which are quite different to what we have seen  between Java and Christmas Island and I think in that respect the Government  could heed that caution as well.  I have heard comments of the Prime Minister  recently which I think are astonishing comments and deeply cynical comments.

LIPSON: Could, do you think, boats be turned back in the Mediterranean as the  Government here has done?

MARLES: Well these are the comments I heard the Prime Minister make in, I  think the last 24 hours, these are astounding David, and at the end of the day  they are totally hopeless, really.  I mean the Government likes to portray that  what has occurred in an Australian context in terms of the end, we hope, of the  flow of asylum seeker vessels from Java to Christmas Island is being entirely  about the Government’s policy of turning boats back.  But there is not a serious  member of our own military, not a serious member of our own public service  involved in these endeavours who for a moment believes that it would have been  even possible to turn boats around but for the fact that the Regional  Resettlement Arrangement that Labor put in place saw a reduction in the flow of

asylum seeker vessels from Java to Christmas Island by 90 per cent before the  Abbott Government was even elected, so I think that’s the first point we need to  bear in mind, but the second point here David is the number of asylum seeker  vessels we have seen flow from North Africa into Europe is of an order of  magnitude entirely different to anything we have seen off the Australian coast.   So the idea that you could be turning around thousands of boats on the  Mediterranean is just completely silly and there would be members of our own  military and our own public service who are engaged in efforts off the coast of  Christmas Island who would be shaking their heads at the stupidity of our Prime  Minister today, I mean, at best David, this is profound ignorance on the Prime  Minister’s part but at worst I think these are deeply cynical comments which seek  to gain a small political advantage in our own country while trading on the  misery that has come from an appalling human tragedy and I don’t think that  three word slogan lecturing from a Prime Minister on the other side of the world  is going to make any useful contribution to the events in the Mediterranean.

LIPSON: Shadow Immigration Minister, Richard Marles, thanks very much for  joining us on AM Agenda and apologies to Jamie Briggs, the Assistant  Infrastructure Minister and any fans of him at home we were planning to bring  you to him as well but we had some technical issues there.  AM Agenda  continues after the break, hope you can stay with us.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563



