MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION

PETER DUTTON

Minister's council re-launched for 2015

Tuesday, 19 May 2015

The Minister’s Council on Asylum Seekers and Detention (MCASD) is holding a two day meeting in  Canberra this week.

The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton recently appointed new members  to the council and the incoming members are attending meetings yesterday and today.

Mr Dutton met with the new council yesterday.

“The new council will continue to provide independent advice on often complex and contentious  issues covering immigration detention and the resolution of individuals’ immigration status,” Mr  Dutton said.

“Council members have been selected from diverse backgrounds and work in a variety of disciplines  related to immigration and asylum seeker issues.

“I have appointed a reduced council of nine members, a number which balances the need for expert  advice with the reduction of people in immigration detention.”

Last night Mr Dutton attended an official council dinner which also provided a chance to farewell  and thank the outgoing members - Dr Jamal Rifi, Ms Libby Lloyd AM, Ms Caroline (Caz) Coleman,  and Mr Noel Clement - for their service.

“I want to thank the outgoing members for their efforts and commitment to a number of Ministers  over an extended period,” Mr Dutton said.

“They have delivered expert advice on policy, asylum seeker issues and detention, and have  represented a range of localities, cultures and organisations.”

The council is chaired by Mr Paris Aristotle AM, a long term member and an active chair of  the council since 2009.

Two new members have been appointed to the council, Dr Georgia Paxton and Ms Catherine Scarth,  who will bring a fresh perspective through expertise in paediatric immigration health and  multicultural education.

Dr Paxton has led the Immigrant Health Service at the Royal Children’s Hospital in Melbourne since  2006 and has worked in refugee health for over 10 years.

Ms Scarth has over 20 years’ experience in designing and implementing a wide range of innovative  social programmes and was appointed Chief Executive Officer of Adult Multicultural Education  Services (AMES) in 2011.

The council has been appointed for a period of three years.

