



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS, TO THE POINT   TUESDAY, 16 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Payments to people smugglers; national conference

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Can you shed a bit of light on this, what did go on during  Labor’s time?

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION, RICHARD  MARLES: Well I can absolutely tell you we didn’t turn back boats by paying people  smugglers, we didn’t pay people smugglers to keep asylum seekers on leaky boats out  in the water.

JOURNALIST: But isn’t the point that you may have paid them for other things, that’s  what I think could be of interest to this debate, could there be other strategic reasons to  pay people smugglers?

MARLES: Look Peter, I’ve seen reports in the paper today referring to ASIS and  particularly an article which starts on the front page of The Australian by Rowan Callick,  which deals with this question. Now if ultimately, if we are going to ask questions,  answer questions in relation to the conduct of ASIS, we are not going to do that, in fact  it would ultimately be illegal to do that, and more to the point we have not been asking  the Government to do that. We have not and I am appalled by the fact that what the  Government is doing is putting ASIS out there in terms of this debate. Let’s go back to  the facts Peter, what we had was an extraordinary allegation last week that the  Immigration Minister and then the Foreign Minister say it did not happen, the Prime  Minister then does an interview inviting us all to believe that maybe it did happen, it is

now the subject of an investigation in Indonesia, we have got the Indonesian Foreign  Minister commenting, we’ve got the UNHCR commenting, it is utterly legitimate that we  ask questions about that and that we interrogate all of that, cause what we have from  the Government is an extraordinary proposition and the Prime Minister and his  Immigration Minister completely at odds. Now what we are then seeing is because of  the difficulty of all of that, the Government is trying to throw ASIS into the frame, throw  ASIS under the bus in order to distract attention from an incompetent Minister, that is  actually what is going on here. And the idea that we are now being put in a position  where the Government is essentially backgrounding journalists to raise questions about  ASIS, I mean of course we are not going to answer questions about ASIS and we’re not  expecting the Government to do so either.

JOURNALIST: Okay but nobody has backgrounded me on this, I would just like to  know whether either side of politics have paid people smugglers for any reason,  because we are told constantly they are the scum of humanity for the trade that they  ply, I would like to know if there is any reason for any security organisation in this  country to pay people smugglers, on the Government’s watch, what we want to know is  whether they are paying them to turn people around on boats, I would like to know if on  Labor’s watch there are other reasons that we pay them.

MARLES: Well what you have seen Peter, are reports which specifically reference  ASIS and that then leads to the line of questioning that you have just done and this is  the Government desperately trying to get away from the facts of the situation.



JOURNALIST: Mr Marles I do want to get back to the Government situation, because I  have been as appalled by it as anyone, I’ve been pretty strong in my commentary and  my tweeting as well about that issue but can we first just put to be quickly whether or  not your side did or did not pay people smugglers and then we can get back to the  Government’s refusal to engage on the same discussion.

MARLES: We are not going answer questions in respect of the conduct of ASIS and we  are not asking the Government to do that either, there is no hypocrisy here, the people  that have put this in the frame desperately with a view to distract the attention away  from the way in which they have conducted themselves in relation to paying people

smugglers to keep people on the water, I mean that’s what we are talking about - it is  the Government that have put ASIS into the frame and of course we are not going to  talk about it because it would be unlawful to do so, there is no hypocrisy in that, there is  no hypocrisy in that, can I make this point as well Peter, I’m not revealing any state  secrets here, ASIS is an agency which works in foreign affairs and you know that I was  a portfolio holder in that portfolio for the better part of three years, I know the  organisation pretty well, I’ve met many people who work with it. The reason we don’t  talk about it is because it endangers people’s lives and I have met the people in  question so I’m just not going to go there and we are not expecting the Government to  go there, but this has nothing to do with ASIS, what it has to do with is the fact that an  allegation was made last week, the Minister denied and then the Prime Minister  (inaudible) with a press conference which invites us all to believe that it happened.



JOURNALIST: Let me ask you about that, irrespective of the issue and you know that I  would like the Government to answer whether they are or they are not, just to clarify  paying people smugglers to turn around boats, I want an answer to that.

MARLES: And we should get that answer.

JOURNALIST: Well I agree, I mean personally I would like the answer from the Labor  side historically as well, but obviously.

MARLES: But I can tell you that we’ve never paid money to turn around boats.

JOURNALIST: But I’d just like to know if anyone is paying people smugglers period.  Because we are constantly told how evil they are, I would just like to know but look, let’s  get back to the issue at hand with the Government, if the Government are running the  strategy that they are running, then it appears to me that they are quite happy for your  side to keep asking questions on this, they seem to think that it is a political winner for  them to be talking about boats, even if there is a sniff of controversy  around it, because  they are not actually giving us an answer, that strikes me as the Government strategy,  do you feel like you are playing into their hands, even though you are asking what I  think are legitimate questions?

MARLES: Well I think we are asking very legitimate questions Peter, that is the first  point, but let’s examine that strategy. If that strategy is right, on the part of the  Government, it says everything about what the Government has been doing here and  it’s a disgrace. Playing politics, at the expense of policy, playing politics instead of  actually resolving this issue, and might I say if we go back to the Malaysia arrangement,  which we were trying to do when Labor was in power, which would have had a real  chance by the logic of the Government’s own rationale here, in terms of how they say  they have stopped the boats, if we had supported Malaysia years ago we would have  seen this be brought to an end much sooner, far less deaths at sea, far less boats  coming from Indonesia to Christmas Island. But what we saw then was an act by the  Coalition of teaming up with the Greens to vote down Malaysia using rhetoric which no  one could possibly believe now given the way in which we’ve seen the Government  behave, that was the Government, that was the Coalition rather, putting politics ahead  of policy and if what you’re saying now is that their strategy is essentially to keep this in  the media so we’re all talking about it that again is them using this issue to play politics  rather than looking at the policy. Peter this is a deeply complicated issue -



JOURNALIST: So where does Labor go from here Richard Marles? Give me a sense of  where you go from here on this.

MARLES: This is a deeply complicated issue, we have to get the policy right, we’ve to  get the answer to these very difficult questions right. Our view is let’s work together in  terms of trying to do that and the politics can follow but let’s actually try and see that we  have an enduring resolution to the question of asylum seeker vessels coming from

Indonesia to Christmas Island so that we don’t see any people dying in the future, no  one wants to reopen that journey, that’s unequivocally our view and we are happy to  work with anyone in terms of pursuing that, but our concern about what the revelations  of the last week is that if what we’re talking about with the Government is that they’re  actually paying people to turn boats around that raises a dangerous new element to this  whole debate which is the prospect of a new pull factor, a new business model for  people smugglers and we have an enormous concern about that.

JOURNALIST: I should note that Bill Shorten has pushed back his press conference  we’ll bring that to you when it comes live, I’m talking to Richard Marles, the Shadow  Immigration spokesperson, one last question if I can, it was many months ago now that  you and I spoke I think on Australian Agenda where you seemed to posit the idea of  Labor perhaps coming around to supporting the notion of turn backs, your leader Bill  Shorten who we’re going to hear from shortly on another issue at that press conference  shut that down pretty quickly and we didn’t hear from you for a little while after that, are  still looking internally at trying to pursue that line or is that something that Labor is now  resolute on, no turn backs?

MARLES: Well Peter our answer to that actually has been, you know, was clear  throughout all those interviews I might say and is clear now and for the sake of the  record and in fact what I think we’ve seen in the last week highlights that our concerns  and our points in relation to turn backs. The first goes to the question of our relationship  with Indonesia, we watched our own Foreign Minister raise a whole lot of questions  about that yesterday, we’ve seen the Indonesian Foreign Minister out on this as well. It  just point to the fact if we’re to have an enduring resolution to this, not measured over  last year and this, but measured in terms of this decade and next, we have to be  working cooperatively, hand in glove with our nearest neighbour from where these  vessels are coming and the question we’ve had in respect of turn backs, which we’ve  asked the Government to answer which they refuse to do, is what is this doing in terms  of that relationship? The second point is that it’s all happening under a shroud of  secrecy and so the kind of tactics that are being employed -

JOURNALIST: Ok but let me just jump in again if I can Mr Marles.

MARLES:  We can’t get to the bottom of that.

JOURNALIST: But if I can just jump in again, you seem to be leaving the door open for  it, some months ago, Bill Shorten seemed to shut it, just yesterday Tanya Plibersek said  that this is something that could perhaps happen, it’ll be debated at national conference.  Where do you sit on this ahead of national conference, where no doubt you’ll be in the  thick of it on this particular issue? Are turn backs of the table for you?

MARLES:  Well look, I’ve just answered that question, we’ve got concerns about turn  backs, we’ve been asking the Government in relation to those concerns to answer them  and they have resolutely failed to do so and so in those circumstances those concerns  remain. In terms of national conference, I don’t want to pre-empt exactly what debates

will come but I think it is fair to say that there will be unquestionably be a whole lot of  discussion about this at national conference, a good thing I might say and what’s going  to characterise that conversation, which will be very different to what we see on the  other side of politics is a debate which is founded on strong values, values of  compassion, values of fairness, values of generosity and we will apply those values to  the very difficult situation here and I think all of us understand there is nothing  compassionate about people dying at sea and no one has any interest what so ever in  reopening the journey between Java and Christmas Island.

JOURNALIST: Alright, Richard Marles, appreciate your time, thanks very much for  joining us on News hour, thank you.

MARLES:  Thanks Peter.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI - 0427051563

