





THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 8 JULY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Turnbull Split on National Security; Tony Abbott’s Royal  Commission into Trade Unions.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Good morning, thanks very much for coming. I want to  make some comments about the Government’s handling of national security. It’s  clear now that the Government has real problems in dealing with national security.  There is no doubt that there has been some mishandling of particular matters.

Only a few weeks ago, we saw one of the most detailed leaks from Cabinet on a  Government that’s rancorous and deeply divided, about proposed national security  legislation. And the leak was as detailed as I've ever seen of any Cabinet.

Of course,  we have also seen backgrounding against the Government on the  matters from within Government.

It's just been recently disclosed that the Man Monis letter that was not referred to the  inquiry was in fact known to the Prime Minister and the Government for four days  before they corrected the record.

So what you had was the Foreign Minister, who was acting on behalf of the Attorney-General in the House of Representatives, answer questions that were clearly wrong.  Those questions and those answers were not corrected in the following sitting week  and the Prime Minister's own brief made clear that the letter that had been written by  Man Monis to the Attorney-General had not been part of the inquiry into the Martin  Place siege.

That was not corrected by the Government and I would contend the reason why that  was not corrected by the Government until the end of the sitting week was

because they did not want the Opposition to scrutinise the deficiencies within  Government with respect to these matters.

And now we’ve have had the remarkable comments by the Minister for  Communications, Malcolm Turnbull. Malcolm Turnbull did make some thoughtful  reflections on the tension between liberty and security in his contribution most  recently, but he made a very pointed attack upon the conduct and the motives of  the Government with respect to national security. This now is a Government deeply  divided and dysfunctional on national security matters.

Malcolm Turnbull effectively suggested that the Prime Minister and other  Ministers including the Minister for Immigration were politicising national security  matters and that is a bad thing and that is something that the Prime Minister needs  to attend to.

What the Prime Minister needs to do with respect to this matter is either make clear  that he agrees with Malcolm Turnbull's comments or make very clear what he is  going to do in response to the comments made by Malcolm Turnbull on  these matters.

Let's be very clear here, there is no bigger issue for any Government than national  security. That is why the Labor Opposition throughout the entire parliamentary  term has worked constructively and in a bipartisan manner with respect to this  issue. That is why Bill Shorten has worked closely with the Prime Minister  to reconcile any points of  difference, to get full briefings because on an issue like  this you do not want to see a division.

The accusation against the Prime Minister is that he is looking for division. If  he wants to see division, he only needs to look within government. Because  the comments by Malcolm Turnbull most recently underline the leadership tensions  and the prism of national security in which it's been viewed. This is something that is  of utmost importance I think to the nation and I think most Australians will want to  see the Prime Minister explain the comments of Mr Turnbull. Does he agree  with them and if he doesn't agree with them what will he do about it?

Happy to take some questions.

JOURNALIST: What do you think the Prime Minister should do?

O’CONNOR: I think there needs to be a declaration by the Prime Minister on the  comments made by Mr Turnbull. The first thing we need to hear is what does  the Prime Minister think of these comments? Let's be clear here, Mr Turnbull has  effectively said if you criticise a person for having a different point of view on  proposed national security legislation you are stupid if you call them friends of  terrorists. That is a clear attack upon the way in which the Prime Minister has  conducted himself, it's a very thinly veiled attack. There’s barely a veil there at all, I  would argue.

The Prime Minister needs to attend to this. There is no bigger issue for a national  Government than national security. That is why the Opposition and Bill Shorten in

particular has made very clear we work in a bipartisan and constructive way on  this issue. We should not be looking for division, we should be working together  on these matters and yet this Government time and time again is divided and  dysfunctional on this issue and the PM needs to attend to his Minister  for Communications.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten is appearing before the Trade Union Royal Commission -

O’CONNOR: Can we just deal with this matter and then get on to that.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Prime Minister is over exaggerating the issue of  national security for his own political purposes? Do you think that’s beyond a doubt?

O’CONNOR: It is not a question of what I think at this point, but what  Malcolm Turnbull thinks, a senior Cabinet Minister, a former Liberal leader no less,  has attacked the Prime Minister in the way in which he is conducting national  security.

We're watching a public display of a senior Minister and a Prime Minister having  a fight through the prism of leadership tensions. No doubt about that.

This is not a way a Government can conduct itself and this matter needs to  be resolved by the Prime Minister and it starts by him making clear, does he  still support the Minister for Communications? Does he support the comments he  made? And if he doesn't support those comments, what will he do about it?

JOURNALIST: But Mark Dreyfus has said some similar things. Why isn't  Labor reflecting more on these thoughtful reflections by Malcolm Turnbull?

O’CONNOR: I think we’ve always said that there is a constant tension between  these competing issues. The rights of individuals and indeed the need to provide  proper security for the nation and its citizens. That is true. That is something that you  need to reconcile and work through. That’s why rather than having divisions or  allowing for any politicisation, the Opposition has worked through with the  Government on such sensitive matters.

But unlike the discourse if you like, between the Opposition and the Government,  you have within Government, a rancorous divide and now you have a very senior  Minister, no less than the former Leader of the Liberal Party, attack the conduct, the  motives of the Prime Minister on national security matters. There can be no bigger  charge against the Prime Minister than the way in which he’s conducting himself and  the Prime Minister needs to deal with the Minister for Communication.

JOURNALIST: What’s more concerning though - the politicisation of national  security or discord within the Liberal Party, surely you’re more worried about the  former?

O’CONNOR: Discord and disunity and dysfunction within the Cabinet of the  Government of Australia is of concern.

The fact that we’re reading in detail, the rancorous divide of Cabinet discussions on  national security matters is of concern to Labor and it should be of concern to  everyone. The fact that we have senior Ministers attacking the Prime Minister on  national security matters, is of concern to Labor and it should be of concern to  everyone.

These are the matters that need to be resolved by the Prime Minister. He needs to  show leadership. He needs to either agree with the Minister for Communications  Malcolm Turnbull or he has to deal with this issue. You cannot have a senior  Minister, a senior Cabinet Minister, a former Liberal Leader and the Prime Minister,  divided publicly on matters of national security. It’s not in the nation’s interests and it  needs to be dealt with the by the Prime Minister immediately.

JOURNALIST: But if national security has been politicised, doesn’t that throw into  question Labor’s support, Labor’s bipartisan support for all these measures?

O’CONNOR: Labor has always believed that national security is the most significant  matter that confronts any national government. That’s not to say that we don’t work  through these matters. For example, we made constructive changes to national  security legislation that was accepted by the Government. We’ve also looked at  whether in fact there’s possibilities that national security legislation proposed by the  Government would be challenged by the courts. We have been working thoughtfully  through these matters. We’ve been constructively critical. And that’s our job. It’s not  to agree with the Government, but it is to work sensitively in a bipartisan way on  these matters.

But where we see deficiencies in their proposals, we’ve brought it to the attention of  the Government and indeed we’ve brought it to the attention of the nation. But we’ve  done it in a way that’s been focused on the legislation or the approach by the  Government. What we’re seeing here however, is Malcom Turnbull attacking the  Prime Minister and using national security to do it. And that is not acceptable for a  national Government.

JOURNALIST: Mr O’Connor, Mr Shorten is appearing before the Royal Commission  today. Do you think his performance there will in any way have a bearing on his  leadership and position in the Labor Party?

O’CONNOR:  Bill will lead us to the next election. Bill has spent almost his entire  working life advancing the interests of working people. Fighting for workers in  workplaces. Working with business too.

The thing about Bill Shorten is not only does he defend workers and advance their  interests, he understands that you need successful companies to have secure jobs  and a growing economy. And that is why he’s the right person, not only to lead us to  the next election, but to be Prime Minister of this country.

What you will see today in Bill is a person who is passionate about working people  and has defended their interests. And this $80 million witch hunt by the Government  will not in any way impact on Bill Shorten. This is a witch hunt. This is an executive  inquiry, it is not a judicial inquiry. There are no procedural fairness rules in this

inquiry. For example, hearsay is admissible, cross-examination is discretionary,  dependant on what the Royal Commissioner wants to do. Bill is now the third Labor  leader this parliamentary term that’s been summoned to Tony Abbott’s commissions.

It is unprecedented that the Government would use taxpayers’ money, $80 million.  That’s five times more than is spent on fighting and reducing domestic violence in  this nation. I mean, this is unprecedented. This is as I say, the third Labor leader -   using the powers of the state, taxpayers’ money to attack political opponents and it’s  unacceptable.

We know that Tony Abbott is a negative politician and he plays it tough, but this is  going beyond the bounds of conventional politics and I think most Australians are  seeing this for what it is and that’s an attack on the opponents of the Government  and using taxpayers’ money and using the offices of the Government to do it.

JOURNALIST: On the issue of national security, what’s your view of asylum seeker  turnbacks? I mean isn’t Labor divided on that issue as well?

O’CONNOR: We’ll deal with those matters. We’ve made very clear that we will want  to have a strong deterrent. I say, as the former Minister for both Immigration and  Home Affairs, I’ve always believed we need a strong deterrent.

JOURNALIST: Do you agree with boat turnbacks then?

O’CONNOR: Let me finish this answer. We believe we need a strong deterrent to  make sure people don’t die at sea. I was actually on Christmas Island only 12 hours  after 50 people perished - their vessel smashed against the rocks in December  2010. I believe it’s absolutely vital that Labor has a strong deterrent, this country has  a strong deterrent against people harming themselves getting on unseaworthy  vessels on perilous journeys.

In relation to our policies, the platform will be determined at National Conference.  The policies will be determined by the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party. But at its  heart it will be humane, it will be just, but we will have a strong deterrent so that we  do not see a resurgence of boats entering dangerous waters and seeing men,  woman and children die at sea.

JOURNALIST: You have colleagues that now say they support it, do you? Do you  support it?

O’CONNOR: I’m saying to you we’ll determine these matters. I’ll leave the detail to  Richard Marles the Shadow Minister on these matters, and I’ll of course be involved  in the debate at National Conference. But I can assure you that my view is that we  have to have a strong deterrent. I don’t want to see people’s lives lost at sea. And  that has to form part of our policy response in that area.

JOURNALIST: Back to the Royal Commission, you’re calling it a witch hunt. Are you  questioning the process of the Royal Commission or the integrity of the Royal  Commission?

O’CONNOR: Firstly, I’m saying the intention and motive of the Government to spend  $80 million of taxpayers money to attack its political opponents should be criticised. It  is a waste of taxpayers’ money.

Bill is the third Labor Leader that’s been called to one of Tony Abbott’s commissions.  It’s becoming patently clear that the Prime Minister is using taxpayers’ money and  the offices of the Government to attack its political opponents.

JOURNALIST: There have been serious allegations that have come out of it. Not  just to do with Bill Shorten, but the CFMEU. Do you not think that’s worthy -

O’CONNOR: Any serious allegations should be dealt with by crime fighting  agencies. The Australian Crime Commission, I’m not sure if people understand the  history of the Australian Crime Commission, but it was established after a  recommendation by an earlier Royal Commission. That Crime Commission, that  reports to the Minister for Justice, has coercive powers and deals with serious crime.

If there are any serious allegations about criminal conduct then there is the  Australian Federal Police, the Australian Crime Commission, the State Police, and  there are other Commonwealth and State agencies to deal with these matters.

This is about a show trial and a witch hunt to attack the political opponents of the  Government. It’s not the right approach and we believe it should be dealt with, as I  say, by those crime fighting agencies. Let’s spend less money on lawyers, and more  money on police.

JOURNALIST: Mr O’Connor, with respect, you mentioned there’s due processes  lacking in a Royal Commission. The same rules apply in other Royal Commissions  that Labor has supported, such as the Royal Commission into institutional responses  to child sexual abuse.

O’CONNOR: That’s a very good point you raise, because that’s the point isn’t it? We  could have actually had a Royal Commission into the Howard Government going to  war in Iraq based on a lie, when the Government knew it was a lie. We could have  had a Royal Commission into the wheat for weapons scandal . We had one Royal  Commission when in Government, it was on institutional child sex abuse, something  that is a blight on this nation. Something that victims of abuse needed to have an  opportunity to tell their story and get some remedy where possible.

That’s our choice. We chose to have a Royal Commission into child sex abuse. Tony  Abbott chooses to have a Royal Commission into the union movement because he  wants to destroy the union movement. He hates the union movement.

He wants to introduce WorkChoices. The last time he did it, the union movement and  others campaigned against it. If you can weaken the union movement by attacking  them this way and attacking Labor this way he believes he can radicalise the  industrial relation laws in this country.

That’s his motivation, to attack not only Bill Shorten and the Labor Party but to  reintroduce WorkChoices. That is his long term plan and anyone who knows  anything about Tony Abbott knows that’s the case.

JOURNALIST: But Mr O’Connor, my question is really directed at the process. So if  we put aside for the moment any potential ideological reasons for calling the  Commission, are you trying to suggest that Bill Shorten or whoever else is brought  before this particular Commission will not get as fair a hearing as other Royal  Commissions held the same way.

O’CONNOR: I’m saying the Royal Commission is not a court of law. The Royal  Commission is not a judicial enquiry. The Royal Commission does not have  procedural fairness in the same way that court of law does. The Royal Commission,  for example, allows hearsay - it’s admissible.  Allegations that someone else said  something is admissible. The Royal Commissioner decides who gets to cross  examine whom. Now that is not what Australians think is a court of law.

My point is that Tony Abbott has said that Bill has something to answer. Well what I  say is, Tony Abbott has something to answer. Why spend $80 million on a witch hunt  when you could be spending it on health and education. Or a better campaign to  reduce domestic violence. That is what he has to answer. He also has to answer  what he thinks of Malcolm Turnbull’s comments on national security today.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

