

THE HON ALANNAH MACTIERNAN MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR WESTERN  AUSTRALIA  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE  MEMBER FOR PERTH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS LUNCHTIME AGENDA   THURSDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2015

SUBJECT/S: Children in detention; Unemployment.

DAVID LIPSON: Joining me here in the Canberra studio, Liberal MP Angus Taylor and  Shadow Parliamentary Secretary Alannah MacTiernan.  Thanks so much for both of  your time.

Firstly to you I just want to get a response to what Richard Marles was saying there,  particularly in regards to whether or not this is a political report or not into asylum seeker  children.  Is it clear there is a problem that we have to deal with now with these children  showing horrible signs of distress and abuse?

ANGUS TAYLOR, MEMBER FOR HUME: Look, when in doubt I always go to the facts  and the facts were that in July 2013 there were almost 2,000 children in detention and  now we’re down closer to 200.  Whatever way you look at it that is a huge success.  The  biggest part of that is that the boats have stopped coming but we’ve also made a big  effort to get people out of detention.  And you’ve got to remember that some that  remained have remained because their families have actually chosen to stay there, or  one of their parents.  So they’re the facts. Now it’s true that to the extent that conditions  could be improved we should continue to work towards that and that’s exactly what  we’ve been doing since we’ve got into government, but I’d go right back to those  fundamental facts that really count, they are the number that I’ve already given you.

LIPSON: But you don’t agree with Labor that they should be released as soon as  possible.

TAYLOR: Labor had 2,000 people in detention, so really we shouldn’t be lectured to by  a party that allowed that to happen.

ALANNAH MACTIERNAN, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  WESTERN AUSTRALIA: No that’s not the point.

TAYLOR: It is.

LIPSON: Alannah, let’s not get into a debate about this, we’ve just got a lot to get into  and we did just hear a long time from Richard Marles.  I want to talk about  unemployment.  The figures have come out unexpectedly high.  6.4% that’s a 12 year  high.  Angus Taylor, is the Government still on target for a million new jobs?

TAYLOR: You should remember of course that any Australian out of work, it’s a bad  thing and we should fix that.  But I’d make a couple of key points.  Number one is the  trend unemployment rate has stayed at 6.3%, the second thing is that we have created  over 200,000 jobs last year which is exactly on target to achieve a million in five years.   The third thing I’d say is we have a great opportunity now as a country as the dollar  comes down to gets some of these export industries like agriculture, one that I am very  passionate about to create more jobs and the real task ahead of us now is to give those  industries the opportunities they need.  Free trade agreements, less red tape are  exactly the sort of things that we need to make that possible and that is exactly what we  are doing.

LIPSON: Alannah on these figures, how much of this is directly at the feet of the  Government and how much of this has to do with external factors and other things going  on.

MACTIERNAN:  Well I think it is time that the Government has to accept responsibility  for this, I think the prescription, and their belief that getting rid of a price on carbon was  going to be the answer to Australia’s economic position is just clearly demonstrated to  be completely wrong, completely inadequate.  We have got policy that is just taking us  backwards.  For just a small thing, look at the renewable energy target.  The uncertainty  that has created around that has meant that in the past 18 months there has been no  investment in renewable energy.  That is a growing sunrise industry cut.  The policies  that we have seen in the Defence sector, the submarine debacle, affecting advanced  manufacturing, affecting investment in Australia - Toyota, Ford, all of the cutting of  assistance to car companies.  The recipe has been demonstrated to have failed by the  number.

LIPSON: A lot of jobs have been lost in the mining sector.  Eric Abetz made the point  that it would have been worse had we had the carbon tax and the mining tax.

MACTIERNAN:  I think that there is absolutely no evidence to support that, absolutely  no evidence to support that.  What we are seeing here is…

LIPSON: Isn’t it self-evident though?

MACTIERNAN: But it’s not self-evident.  For a start we know with the mining tax that all  of those companies during that period, the very modest mining tax - all of the  companies involved returned record profit - profit levels, production levels, higher than  they had ever before.  So quite clearly the mining tax was not having an impact on the  economy and the carbon tax - the price on carbon has not been the dampener on  industry that the Government’s claiming.  We need a more creative understanding of  how our economy works.

LIPSON:  Angus, a response to that.

TAYLOR:  Look that is just quite wrong, I can tell you one of the major mining players  that has huge investments in Australia and has created a huge number of jobs in  Australia.  When the mining tax was announced, basically said we have to diversity  beyond Australia.  We have to invest in other countries because we can’t afford to be so  exposed to a country that would do that to us.  So for Alannah to say that they had  choices where to invest and that those policies had no impact is absolute rot.  Now we  have to fix it, the lower dollar is providing us with enormous opportunities and that is  exactly what we are going to do.

LIPSON:  We are rapidly running out of time.

MACTIERNAN:  But you have to look at the figures Angus, the unemployment level is  increasing.

LIPSON:  Now we want to look at the Bali 9 statements - they are really strong  statements from both Julie Bishop and Tanya Plibersek today - let’s have a listen.

[Clip of Bishop and Plibersek speeches]

LIPSON: The Government and others have been working behind the scenes and  through diplomatic channels and have been avoiding megaphone diplomacy was the  term being used.  Is this plea from both the Government and the Opposition an ominous  sign for the two Bali 9 smugglers who are on death row Angus?

TAYLOR: Look, I don’t know, I am not close enough to know what the prospects are but  it’s clear there is bipartisan agreement that we shouldn’t have the death penalty in  Australia - we don’t support the death penalty in Indonesia.  We respect their  sovereignty, but this is wrong, the death penalty is quite simply morally wrong and we’re  asking the Indonesian Government to change their view on this.

LIPSON: There is also hint or suggestion of hypocrisy that Indonesia had actually made  representations to other countries to try to get its citizens off death row at a time when  it’s putting Australians to death.

MACTIERNAN:  Well, look I think we are a very good friend of Indonesia and we really  do want close ties, and I think the whole tenor that we struck today in the Parliamentary  debate was to plea to Indonesia as our friend to respect the position and the concerns  of Australians.  We are not there lecturing them, saying you are our very good friend  please do not do this, and those examples that were being raised are were not raised to  create - say that Indonesia was being hypocritical, but rather extend that same  compassion that was shown to your workers in Saudi to our people.

LIPSON: Great to see some bipartisanship on that one.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KARISSA DOMONDON 0414 211 396

