

SENATOR THE HON STEPHEN CONROY  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA







SPEECH TO THE SYDNEY INSTITUTE

‘DEFENDING AUSTRALIA’S NATIONAL INTERESTS IN A CHANGING WORLD’

SYDNEY

WEDNESDAY, 9 DECEMBER 2015



*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***

Thank you very much.

I want to thank Gerard Henderson for the kind invitation to address this distinguished  gathering tonight.

I also want to acknowledge the contribution of the Sydney Institute to Australian public  discourse.

Gerard and his team should be proud of their efforts to foster informed, independent  and non-partisan debate and discussion in this country.

I have now been the Shadow Defence Minister for a little over two years.

As I have come to appreciate, there are few portfolios that encompass so much and of  such importance.

It has been a busy two years for me, but it has also been a period of significant change  for Defence.



Australia has re-committed personnel to Iraq in significant numbers, and is now  conducting air operations over Syria.

The next Defence White Paper has been further delayed and major capability decisions  remain unresolved.

Defence is undergoing significant reform through the First Principles Review - but  implementation is only beginning.

And, of course, Defence now has its third Minister in just over two years.

In my view, Defence is a uniquely important portfolio for the simple reason that it  involves sending our fellow men and women into harm’s way to protect our country from  people who would do it harm.

Defence is also about preparing ourselves to do just that - to make the best possible  decisions, to give our men and women the best kit and training to do the best possible  job defending Australia and our citizens from those who would do us harm.

Defence thus sits at a unique intersection of national security, foreign policy, and  economic and industry policy.

Tonight, I will touch on just a few reasons why Defence is so important.  I intend to focus on three issues.

The first is to explain Labor’s approach to Defence - to outline those principles that  inform my approach to this portfolio.

The second is to describe what I consider to be the key security dynamics evident  across the globe and in our region.

And, finally, to outline some of the force structure, capability and organisational  challenges that lie ahead for Defence.

Labor’s Approach to Defence

A central tenet of Labor’s approach to Defence is the principle of national self-reliance.

As an independent nation, Australia’s armed forces need to be able to defend our nation  without relying on others.

This is an important element of ensuring that Australia is able to pursue its national  interests without the undue influence of others.

But it should not be confused with notions of Australia ‘going it alone’.



Australia has benefited enormously from a system of institutions, laws, norms and  ideals that emerged from the ashes of World War II.

Institutions like the United Nations, and laws like the Law of the Sea, that provide the  framework for our security today - the security that has underpinned our national  prosperity.

As I have said in the past, Labor recognises that Australia cannot act in isolation-  That the security challenges of our time require coordinated, international responses-

And that Australia cannot be safe if we are surrounded by insecurity.

That is why Labor believes that Australia must continue to invest in, and protect, the  international system from which we have so benefitted.

Only through these efforts can we ultimately provide for and protect our nation and our  people.

The other element of Labor’s approach to Defence, and national security more broadly,  is bipartisanship.

Labor’s Shadow Foreign Minister, Tanya Plibersek, gave an eloquent account of our  views on bipartisanship earlier this year, so I do not propose to revisit this issue at  length.

But I do want to make a few general points.

Labor strongly believes that the best outcomes for Australia’s national security are  achieved through consensus and bipartisanship.

Our nation’s security must be devoid of political gamesmanship.

This is a genuine commitment by Labor and, to its credit, the Government has usually  reciprocated.

I have seen some commentary of late that suggests that bipartisanship could become a  byword for political expediency.

I firmly reject this.

Labor does not - and will not - offer our bipartisan support lightly.

And while we strive for bipartisanship, there are matters on which Labor disagrees with  the Government - such as the Future Submarines.

But on the whole, we believe a consensus driven approach is the best way to protect  our nation and national interests.

Global Challenges

The security challenges across the globe are numerous and complex - and the post-Cold War peace dividend seems like an increasingly distant memory.

I see two main security trends at play.

The first is ungoverned spaces and fragile states.

Instead of the hoped for end to the 9/11 decade, extremist groups continue to take  advantage of ungoverned spaces and weak states to establish safe-havens from which  they export violence.

This is most obvious in the Middle East, but it is occurring across the globe, including in  Africa and Asia.

Radicalised non-state actors are a new normal - and, as a result, once again Australia  has committed significant numbers of military personnel to the Middle East.

We have put our personnel in harm’s way to help those in need and to prevent a  despicable terrorist group from doing us harm at home.

These non-state actors pose a different challenge to traditional actors - and our  responses, therefore, must be different.

In any confrontation on a traditional battlefield, our military forces far outmatch these  groups.

But they do not wage war in a traditional sense and, as a result, military force is but one  - albeit important - tool that must be brought to bear.

Nevertheless, these groups are likely to remain a central reason for the deployment of  our forces to far-flung places for the foreseeable future.

As this audience would be aware, Labor has provided bipartisan support for Australia’s  assistance to Iraq and, more recently, air operations across Iraq’s border with Syria.

We believe it is in the national interest to contribute to the campaign against Daesh,  although we have been upfront about our concerns with the coherence of the strategy  guiding the international effort.

Labor is not alone in its concerns - and there has been much criticism in recent months  of the international strategy in Iraq and Syria.



Some of this criticism, frankly, appears to be motived more by a desire to achieve  political change in Washington than in Damascus.

Yet it is true that, to date, the international effort has not achieved all that we might  hope.

But we should not overlook some of the successes.

The briefings I have received indicate that Daesh’s aggressive advance in Iraq has  been largely halted, and in some instances, reversed.

Our training efforts - which will ultimately help Iraq protect itself - are making progress.

But our role is a supporting role.

The key to success will be a demonstrable commitment by Iraq’s leaders to overcoming  sectarian divides and to unite for a common goal.

I believe success is Iraq is achievable - but only Iraq’s people and their leaders can  provide the fundamental ingredient for success.

Meanwhile, the situation in Syria is a humanitarian catastrophe and a threat to global  security.

Former US commander and CIA chief, David Petraeus, has described the crisis in Syria  as a geopolitical Chernobyl.

Of a population of 22 million, over 4 million Syrians are now refugees and over 7 million  are internally displaced.

This, in a country smaller than my home state of Victoria.

As we have tragically seen in the streets of Paris, the situation in Syria is a serious  security threat that stretches beyond its borders.

Much of the recent debate in Australia has focussed on ‘tactical’ questions of whether  we should contribute more personnel - or different personnel - to this theatre.

We should instead focus our national debate on what we hope to achieve - on our  strategic objectives - and then set about the task of determining what forces to commit.

We must also acknowledge that a durable solution will demand more than just military  intervention - it will require diplomatic effort and a political solution.

There will not be a lasting solution absent an agreed way forward between the major  players involved in the conflict.

And it cannot simply be a solution decided upon in Washington, Moscow or Canberra.

As Peter Leahy has argued - Middle Eastern countries must be at the forefront of  solving the Middle East’s problems.

If an agreed solution ultimately calls for additional international contributions, then that is  something Australia should consider - and Labor will be a constructive partner in those  discussions.

But, as a starting point, the international community should be encouraging the Arab  states with the means to do so to secure a post-conflict Syria.

Shifting Power Relations

Ungoverned spaces and weak states are one of two key security trends - the other is  shifting power relations.

It is in our region, to our north, where the greatest shifts are occurring - a generational  transformation is underway as decades of stability lead to enormous economic growth.

In a post-GFC world in which developed economies have struggled to grow, Asia has  become the world’s economic engine.

But as economic weight has shifted to our region, so too has strategic competition  increased.

Asia’s economic rise has led to a period of intense military build-up and modernisation.

Among the members of ASEAN, military spending between 2010 and 2014 is estimated  to have risen by an average of 37.6 per cent.

The Japanese Ministry of Defense’s budget request for 2016 is the largest in Japan’s  history.

South Korea is planning to raise defence spending by 3.6 per cent next year.

And while China’s military spending is hard to gauge with accuracy, the trend is  undeniable.

The past five years have seen double digit increases, with a declared defence budget of  around US$145 billion dollars - the second highest in the world.

Of themselves, these trends are neither surprising nor a cause for alarm.



It is understandable that countries with healthy economies will want to modernise their  militaries - and having more capable militaries in the region that can contribute to  common security goals is desirable.

But coupled with a lack of transparency and historical grievances, these trends could  have unforeseen consequences.

In a period of flux, it would be comforting to assume that the multilateral system that has  served us well to date will be a stabilising force.

But as DFAT Secretary Peter Varghese has noted, multilateralism is under intense  pressure and is not delivering on our expectations.

In Mr Varghese’s words:

“… emerging powers are no longer willing to accept rules they did not write or outcomes  which they perceive do not take their interests into account.”

As a result, the future of global leadership could be described as contested.

For a middle power like Australia, for whom the international system provides a means  to project our interests beyond our relative strategic weight, this is a concerning  prospect.

A Strong Alliance

Notwithstanding the shifts underway, for the foreseeable future, the United States will  remain the preeminent global and regional power.

Ever since Labor Prime Minister John Curtin ‘looked to America’ during our darkest  hours, Australia’s alliance with the United States has underpinned our national security  settings.

Labor strongly believes that this special relationship remains firmly in our national  interest - and that an engaged and active United States is a common good for our  region.

Our alliance is an art, not a science - it is a relationship that is not defined by a precise  formula or quid pro quo - and it is more than the sum of its parts.

It is also, in my view, a relationship that requires constant investment, innovation and  reinvention to meet new challenges.

This is particularly true of our defence cooperation under the alliance-

Cooperation that is increasingly defined by common and shared platforms and  systems-

Whether through platforms like the Joint Strike Fighter or Growler aircraft - or systems  like our AEGIS-equipped Air Warfare Destroyers.

Labor has been at the forefront of evolving the alliance to respond to new challenges.

This includes extending the ANZUS treaty to cover cyber threats, and increased  bilateral cooperation on space.

And it was under the Gillard Labor Government that Australia and the United States  agreed to the Force Posture Initiatives in our north.

These initiatives will eventually see a Marine Air Ground Task Force rotating through  the Northern Territory, and US fighter, bomber and tanker aircraft making regular visits  to our northern air bases.

And as we look to the future, the initiatives provide an umbrella for further enhancing  practical cooperation - including, potentially, naval cooperation.

Over time, I would like to see the initiatives evolve-

To be seen less as separate air, ground - and, perhaps, naval - initiatives, and more as  a comprehensive platform for high-end, integrated, joint activities with the United  States-

As a platform for bilateral defence cooperation that strengthens our operational  capabilities and deepens our ability to respond to regional contingencies in a period of  uncertainty.

This proud Labor legacy holds the promise of a new era of cooperation under the  alliance - as well as a platform for increased cooperation with other partners in our  region.

Yet, the initiatives seem to have stalled under the current Government, with prospects  for further enhancement distant.

There are some understandable reasons for this - costly infrastructure upgrades will be  needed to fully realise the initiatives.

But I encourage the Government not to let discussions about dollars and cents unduly  delay initiatives that are of strategic benefit to our nation and the basis for our alliance  cooperation for decades to come.

China



China’s rise is at the centre of changes occurring in our region - it is not the only factor,  but it is the most prominent.

And its relationship with the United States will be the defining feature of this century.

Labor strongly supports the peaceful rise of China.

China’s transformation has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty.

As our relationship with China matures and deepens over time, so too should we  expand the links between our defence forces and personnel.

We conduct an annual bilateral Defence Strategic Dialogue with China, and some  limited military training and exercising, including naval live fire exercises.

We can, and we must, continue to build on this cooperation.

That is how we build the people-to-people and organisational linkages that are so  important to mutual understanding and effective cooperation.

While others have argued that China’s rise will lead to an inevitable ‘choice’ for Australia  between our alliance with the United States and our growing relationship with China - I  disagree.

I reject the notion that there must be a binary, zero sum ‘choice’.

We are, in the words of Defence Secretary Dennis Richardson, “friends with both, allies  with one”.

I believe that we can continue to invest in our alliance with the United States while we  simultaneously seek to build cooperation with China.

It is important to acknowledge that our relationships with both differ.

Our relationship with the United States is long and deep.

Our relationship with modern China is only just developing.

It is a relationship centred on trade that, I hope, will develop over time into a rounded  and mature relationship as trust and confidence builds.

We can expect China to want a greater say in existing global and regional  arrangements and institutions - and to promote new arrangements and institutions  which reflect its interests.

But trust and confidence will also require China to demonstrate a commitment to  supporting the international system of laws and norms from which both our countries  have directly benefitted.

South China Sea

Nowhere is it more apparent that the international system is under pressure and in need  of support than in our region - particularly in the South China Sea.

As Bill Shorten has said, Australia is not a disinterested observer in this matter.

As a maritime trading nation, we have a direct interest in freedom of navigation and are  the beneficiaries of an international system of laws and norms.

Like all nations, we have a right of passage through the oceans and skies of the region,  in accordance with international law.

We do not take a position on the competing claims - whether they be the claims of  China, the Philippines, Vietnam - or any other claimant.

It is important to acknowledge that China is not the only country that has sought to  change the facts on the ground in the South China Sea.

But China’s reclamation efforts are an order of magnitude beyond those of any other  claimant and have been a catalyst for increased concern.

China is estimated to have reclaimed more than 2900 acres in the area - around 17  times more land in 20 months than the other claimants combined over the past 40  years.

It has frustrated efforts in ASEAN to finalise a Code of Conduct, whilst also refusing to  participate in the case that the Philippines has brought before the Permanent Court of  Arbitration in The Hague.

This does not excuse the actions of other claimants - all must cease their efforts to  change the facts on the ground and work towards a solution that is consistent with  international law.

Our interest - Australia’s interest - is in supporting the international system.

For this reason, Labor welcomes the recent activities by the United States in the South  China Sea as an important affirmation of international law and norms.

I believe that other likeminded countries, including Australia, also have an obligation to  act in support of international law and norms in the South China Sea.

These actions must not be directed at any single claimant.

And I would encourage all nations to become parties to the UN Convention on the Law  of the Sea, including the United States, as a confidence building measure and further  step towards a normative rules based approach to resolving disputes.

The Future Force

I would like to conclude this evening with a few observations about future organisational  and force structure challenges for Defence.

I started my remarks by explaining why national self-reliance is a key tenet of Labor’s  approach to Defence.

We recognise that self-reliance can only be achieved by having certainty in Defence  funding - the certainty necessary for Defence to make substantial investments in  personnel and capability.

Labor has previously committed to increasing Defence funding towards a target of two  per cent of GDP.

And earlier this year, Bill Shorten urged the Government to set out a credible trajectory  to two per cent of GDP in its forthcoming White Paper that is capable of bipartisan  support.

Since then, the White Paper has been delayed and the Government is yet to explain  how it will achieve its funding target.

I hope this does not portend a diminution in the Government’s commitment because  Defence needs certainty to prepare for a range of challenges now and into the future.

As the region modernises, maintaining Australia’s capability edge will become more  challenging.

At the same time, Australian forces are increasingly required to operate across the  spectrum - from high-end counter-terrorism operations to humanitarian assistance and  disaster relief.

If Australia is to meet the security challenges I have outlined this evening, we need a  force at the cutting edge of electronic warfare, intelligence, surveillance,  reconnaissance, and research and technology.

We will need a defence force that is networked from satellite to soldier, and equipped  with fully integrated and secure systems.

And we will need to be able to manage data on a huge scale, while maintaining its  integrity and security.

Meanwhile, emerging areas like space and cyber will continue to pose new challenges.

Indeed, as we were reminded in the past week with the hacking of the Bureau of  Meteorology, others will use cyber space as a new attack vector and as a way to reveal  our secrets.

Across the three services, our defence force is undergoing a significant program of  modernisation and change.

Navy is in the process of renewing its fleet - there is hardly a class of ship that will not  be replaced or upgraded in the coming decades.

Under Plan BEERSHEBA, Army has been transitioning from three specialised Brigades  to a balanced force of three multi-role Brigades.

And the Air Force is undergoing significant modernisation, with new capabilities like the  P8s, Growler and Joint Strike Fighter progressively entering into service.

Looking ahead, I see the next wave of change being driven by increased use of  unmanned systems across the air and sea - and, potentially, land - domains.

For now, remotely piloted systems will complement crewed platforms - but the long-term trend is likely to see automated and remotely piloted systems take an increasingly  prominent role in force design.

Some of these systems will very likely be armed, which will pose new legal and ethical  challenges as we develop methods of use that accord with community expectations.

But the most pressing challenge facing Defence is integration.

This has been recognised by successive Governments and by Defence.

That is why Labor has been supportive of key elements of the First Principles Review  process - particularly the ‘One Defence’ model.

I see merit in a strong strategic centre in Defence and a greater degree of contestability  in capability decision-making.

These steps, I hope, will help ensure that decision-making focuses on enterprise-wide  rather than Service-specific objectives.

Put simply, there is no point having the best helicopter for Army, if it cannot work  effectively on Navy’s Landing Helicopter Dock ships.



As with all reform, the proof will be in implementation - and much of the hard work  arising from the First Principles Review lies ahead.

Labor will be watching closely as Defence implements the First Principles Review.

Consistent with our approach to date, Labor will be constructive participant in this  process-

As we will in the broader debate around Australia’s national security.

That is, quite rightly, what the Australian public expects from its political leaders.

And it is an expectation Labor will continue to fulfil.

Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: GARTH MORRISON 0408 896 036

