

1





The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

TRANSCRIPT

ABC News Radio

10 November 2015





Subject: Christmas Island Detention Centre disturbance

E & EO Transcript

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton good morning.

PETER DUTTON: Good morning Marius.

JOURNALIST: Can you just bring us up to date with the latest on the situation on  Christmas Island with the Australian Federal Police there now?

PETER DUTTON: The latest advice I have is that is the Australian Federal Police  along with Serco officers are working their way through the centre to restore order.

My understanding is that, on the latest advice at least that I have received, is that  there has been little resistance to the entry of the officers in terms of no physical  threat to the officers. The operation hasn’t concluded.

So that’s the preliminary advice and once order is restored we can deal with the  clean-up.

The Government has been very clear about the fact that we have a hardened  population within Christmas Island Immigration Detention Centre.

Detainees are now assessed on their individual risk by the Australian Border Force  officers and people who pose the highest risk or higher risk are those who are  accommodated now on Christmas Island Detention Centre.

Originally it was used for people who came off boats and now it is used for those  people who pose a higher risk. That is the threat that the officers on the ground are  dealing with and I have confidence that they will restore order shortly.

JOURNALIST: Can I clarify you said little resistance. Do you mean no resistance?

PETER DUTTON: That was the initial report I had in one of the early briefings this  morning.



2





I just haven’t had an update in the last few minutes, but the officers obviously will  move through the compound.

It is important to understand that within the Immigration Detention Centre now on  Christmas Island we have a number of people who have serious criminal histories. A  number of people have been involved in outlaw motorcycle gangs and people who  have been charged with serious assaults including grievous bodily assault and  manslaughter.

So we are dealing with some serious criminals and once order is restored then if  people are found to have wilfully damaged Australian Government property then  investigations will be undertaken and people will face the full force of the law.

JOURNALIST: In fact that’s a source of concern that there are these serious  criminals that you referred to. People are concerned that relatively innocent or  entirely innocent asylum seekers are mixed with those serious criminals to their own  risk. Is that the case?

PETER DUTTON: No Marius and the point that I made before is that the Australian  Border Force do individual assessments.

So for most people who would come off boats they would pose a low risk and if they  were required to be held in detention, bearing in mind that many live on bridging  visas in the community until their matters are resolved in their favour or not, those  people will go into a lower security detention arrangement on the mainland.

But if somebody has been out on a bridging visa, for example, and they have  committed a sexual assault or grievous bodily harm then that individual risk posed by  that person - whether they have come off a boat or whether they have been out on a  visa in the community otherwise - their threat will be derived from their own actions.

The assessment will be made and it’s on that basis, not the basic on which they  arrived, that the officers will make a determination about the threat level that they  pose.

JOURNALIST: This unrest followed the discovery of an asylum seeker killed at the  weekend on Christmas Island. Has the circumstances of his death been resolved?

PETER DUTTON: No, but it is a tragic circumstance obviously.

The information that I have, the advice that I have, is that this person escaped from  the centre sometime on Saturday. His body was found outside of the centre on  Sunday. There had obviously been a search untaken on both Saturday and Sunday  and tragically he was found deceased.

As I’m advised there are no suspicious circumstances in relation to his death, but the  Australian Federal Police are investigating that matter and they will ultimately deliver  their report to the coroner who will conduct his enquires and release the report after  that.



3





JOURNALIST: A continuing criticism of the Government when incidences like this  happen or when self-harm incidences are reported or when other incidences are  reported unofficially is why the level of secrecy for the Government? Why not have  greater transparency in handling the issue?

PETER DUTTON: Well again Marius that is to buy the line if you like of some of the  critics of the Government. The fact is that the Commonwealth Ombudsman has  access and can go into the centre whenever is deemed appropriate.

We have visits from the International Red Cross, we have visits from other NGOs,  but there is a level of operational requirement in all of these matters.

I can’t broadcast, for example, the every move of the Australian Federal Police as  they’re going through the compound because that’s an operational matter.

But there is a level of oversight and information is released regularly.

As I say, as you would see in any detention centre or correctional facility within  Australia, there is a level of operational secrecy that’s required to maintain order and  to protect both the officers running the centre as well as the detainees.

Our job is to make sure that people that have had their visas cancelled because of  character failures or where they’ve committed serious criminal offences, they’ve had  their visas cancelled and they’re held in detention, our responsibility is to return them  to their country of origin as quickly as possible.

In some cases people obviously are appealing through the courts their cancellation  and so it will necessarily take some time for the matters to be resolved.

We have to try and work with those people to return them as quickly as possible  because if they’ve caused harm in the Australian community and they’ve breached  their visa conditions then, as would be the case for any Australian overseas, the visa  is cancelled and the person is returned as quickly as possible to their country of  origin.

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton, thank you very much.

PETER DUTTON: Thanks, Marius. Thank you.

[ENDS]



