

THE HON MARK BUTLER MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER  ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC CAPITAL HILL  MONDAY, 22 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Abbott’s secret plans to cut Commonwealth funding to  schools; GST; ALP National Conference

HOST: But Labor frontbencher as we saw, Mark Butler has been among the first  to cry foul over the idea when it first arose. We spoke to him about that and other  matters a short time ago. As the Government looks to rework the federation  through its discussion paper inevitably funding of public schools comes into the  mix. We've had the spectacle of means testing of public school fees come into a  discussion paper and then be ruled out by ministers today, do you think that's the  end of the matter?

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER: It's not. This is an extraordinary leak of a green paper  prepared by the Commonwealth to restructure the Federation. We must  remember it comes on the back of a couple of things, firstly the promise by the  PM not to cut education before the last election and to be on a unity ticket, in his  words, on Gonski school funding but then we saw $30 billion of cuts last year in  the Budget. Cuts that the Catholic commission says will cause fees to rise and  potentially schools in their system to close and is already leading to literacy and  numeracy programs to cease.

HOST: But cuts that haven't been fully delivered yet. They’re the subject of  ongoing discussions with the States?



BUTLER: They're in this year's Budget. They were delivered in last year's  Budget but are reflected in this year’s Budget in full, so by 2018 schools will only  be indexed to inflation which all experts is manifestly inadequate. So we have a  very bad situation already and now this morning we have a leak that says the  Commonwealth, under Tony Abbott, might wash its hands entirely of schools  funding which would lead to another $2 billion every year being cut from schools,  which is where this proposal for means testing of public schools or at public  school fees has come from.

HOST: If you're doing a root and branch review of how the Federation works it's  inevitable that it's going to have an impact on the way hospitals and the way that  schools, the big ticket items, are funded, isn't it?



BUTLER: There are core assumptions about how our social contract in Australia  works and there are no more core elements to our social contract than that there  will be universal free education for all of our children and there will be universal  free public hospitals available to all patients. Every Australian wakes up every  day thinking that every Commonwealth Government, every State Government,  no matter what their political hue, will adhere to that core social contract. This  morning, we see a green paper from Tony Abbott that seeks to tear up the most  fundamental assumption about how our Governments operate.

HOST: You'd be relieved to hear from Joe Hockey and from others that this is not  Government policy?

BUTLER: Well it's in a green paper. It's proposed by the Commonwealth. The  only reason we are talking about this this morning, the only reason school  communities have this extra layer of fear over and above $30 billion of cuts  already imposed by Tony Abbott, is because the Commonwealth has prepared  this paper. Option number one is for the Commonwealth to remove itself entirely  from schools leading to $2 billion less funding every year, leading to the idea that  public school fees would have to be paid by Australian parents.



HOST: The States are obviously cash strapped and feeling the squeeze. Your  own state premier from South Australia, Jay Weatherill's, even now advocating  extending the GST to financial services. Is that a good idea?



BUTLER: I'll let Jay talk for himself about that. What we saw last week in the  South Australian Budget was a very ambitious level of tax reform, the removal of  stamp duties from commercial transactions and the raising of ideas about the  Commonwealth taking over a range of what are essentially inefficient state  taxation arrangements so Jay obviously wants a discussion about efficient  forward-looking tax reform, but what Labor will never be interested in is imposing  the GST on household items like health, education, fresh food and increasing the  rate, which is what Tony Abbott has floated.



HOST: Is there a dividing lean between financial services, the cost of which  could flow through to consumers in certain way, and the sort of items you're  talking about?

BUTLER: Federal Labor has been very clear about our position which is that we  don't support broadening the base particularly to those items that impact on the  household budget - food, education and the like, and we don't support an  increase in the rate from 10 per cent, these are things that Joe Hockey and Tony  Abbott have floated. They are things which they deliberately wanted the states to  talk about by imposing $80 billion of cuts to schools and hospitals funding.



HOST: As incoming National President of the ALP. Do you expect the next  national conference to deal in any way with an anti-boat turn back motion?



BUTLER: There are obviously discussions that are still under way about our  policy platform. This has been a great piece of work that's involved thousands of  party members and affiliated unions looking at a platform that Bill Shorten will be  proud to take to the 2016 election. As you get closer to conference, sometimes  these debates get hotter. At the end of the day, we will have to wait to see what  is debated on the conference floor in in this policy area and a number of others.



HOST: The spectacle of being opposed to turn backs or having a debate about it  could play into the hands of your opponents?



BUTLER: I’m not going to leap at those shadows. We don't know what  conference will be debating on the conference floor. We took some very hard  decisions towards the end of our period in Government around regional  resettlement that have already led to huge reductions in the number of boat  arrivals particularly from Java to Christmas Island; things like the resettlement  arrangements to Manus Island and to Nauru, decisions taken by Prime Minister  Rudd. This is a hard area of policy, been a hard one for Labor for many years but  we'll see at conference time what the debate is.



HOST: Mark Butler, thank you.



ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: JO MEEHAN 0408 803 428

