foreignminister.gov.au  http://foreignminister.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2015/jb_tr_150830b.aspx?w=tb1CaGpkPX%2FlS0K%2Bg9ZKEg%3D%3D



Sky News Viewpoint - interview with Chris Kenny



Subjects: Da’esh, air strikes in Syria, the Canning by-election, Border Force, Cabinet and AFL.



Transcript, E&OE



30 August 2015



CHRIS



KENNY



I am joined in the studio now by the



Foreign Minister Julie Bishop. Thanks for joining us again



Foreign Minister.



There is always so much to talk to you about, so I appreciate you joining us.



JULIE



BISHOP



My pleasure.



CHRIS



KENNY



May I start off with the battle



against Islamic State in Iraq and Syria - I want to come to Australia’s



deployment in a moment - but first up I heard on Jonathan Spyer on this program



on Friday night, he suggested



that Islamic State is reasonably well contained



but not enough is being done on the ground to eliminate it within its



so-called



caliphate. He has been in Syria and Iraq of late. Is that the case? Do you



believe you have them



contained but you actually need to liberate that area so



to speak?



JULIE BISHOP



The long-term goal of



course is to ensure that national sovereign governments are in control of



their



own territory and can protect their own people. That’s why we are supporting



the Iraqi Government try and



take back the territory that has been claimed by



Islamic State or Da’esh as it is called over there, and help build



the capacity



of the Iraqi Security Forces so that they can protect their own people.



In Syria it



is far more complex because of course the Assad regime lost all legitimacy when



it used chemical



weapons against its own people and there are more players



involved in Syria - Iraq, Iran, Hezbollah, Russia



backing Assad - you have



different minority groups and Al-Nusra as well as Islamic State in Syria. But



we are



making progress with the airstrikes. The airstrikes in Iraq have



contained the march of Islamic State into other



territories. You remember how



they used to form columns and go out with their black flags and vehicles so



that’s



been contained…



CHRIS



KENNY



Contained in Ramadi, only 60 or 70



kilometres from Baghdad.



JULIE



BISHOP



That’s true but 12 months ago there



was a real fear that Baghdad might fall and that’s when I



went to Iraq and met



with the Government and signed up that status of forces agreement - well it is



technically not



- but an agreement as to Australia’s engagement in Iraq at the



request of the Iraqi Government. So the airstrikes



are having an impact.



In Syria, the



United States has now asked Australia to consider joining the Coalition. A



number of countries in the



region are part of those airstrikes - the UAE, Saudi



Arabia, Jordan and now Turkey last night took part for the first



time in US



airstrikes to target ISIL or Da’esh. So the airstrikes will continue but of



course the challenge is to



ensure that the security forces on the ground of



Iraq and the moderate Syrian forces in Syria can take back that



territory and



protect the people.



CHRIS



KENNY



Yet to formally make the decision



about whether or not Australian aircrafts can cross the border



into Syria. Now



of course the United States wanted Australia to do that from the start - they



wanted our missions



to be able to disregard the border, fly into Syria as well



- what’s changing? We decided then that the legal



technicalities made it not



worth us committing to that or restricting our actions to Iraqi airspace,



what’s changed



that we want to re-examine this?



JULIE



BISHOP



It is effectively one theatre of war,



one conflict, because Da’esh began in Iraq, moved into Syria



and is now back in



Iraq, and that border area between Syria and Iraq is essentially ungoverned



space. Neither the



Assad regime nor the Abadi Government…



CHRIS



KENNY



But that was always the case.



JULIE



BISHOP



Hang on Chris, but there was a large



coalition of countries committing to support the United



States and there have



been a number of countries carrying out airstrikes in Iraq - Australia



supported that



because we were asked by the Iraqi Government so it was



clear-cut.



In the case



of Syria it is more complex. The legal situation is different. The United



States is relying on the principle



of collective self-defence, Turkey is



relying individual and collective self-defence. We have now been asked to



focus



on Syria. We are considering that. We will take our own legal advice and



consult with Coalition partners and



other stakeholders in this and make a



decision on this.



CHRIS



KENNY



Of course it is more complex in a



legal sense because there’s a sovereign government who is not



going to invite



you in to help them defend their territory in Syria. This is where the United



Nations Security Council



could be useful, but your old friend Russia of course



will stymie any action to get United Nations cover for more



serious operations.



JULIE



BISHOP



That’s right and the difficulty with



Syria is that the Assad regime will seek to benefit from any



attacks on ISIL or



Islamic State/Da’esh. But any attacks by the Coalition should not be seen as



support for Assad.



I mean his regime has been horrendous in its behaviour, its



conduct against its own people.



But what we



are seeking to do is contain and defeat Da’esh so that its tentacles can’t



spread further and of course



we have 120 or more Australians who are fighting



with Da’esh and we are concerned that as hardened terrorists



they might make



their way back to Australia and seek to carry out a terrorist act here.



CHRIS



KENNY



I presume you’d like to see more



action in Iraq and Syria by the Europeans, both the EU and



European nations



doing more to deal with this threat. Do you think they might start to do more



given the people



smuggling crisis that is rising to unspeakable levels in



Europe now which is driven in part of course by what’s



happening in Syria as



well as in Libya. Doesn’t this show that the Europeans need to do more about



resolving



situations in the source countries?



JULIE



BISHOP



I think that the crisis that is



unfolding in Europe will focus their attention - this humanitarian crisis



is



unprecedented. The UNHCR estimates that around 40 per cent of those currently



seeking asylum in Europe are



coming from Syria and there are a significant



number also coming from Libya and also up through the horn of



Africa - Nigeria,



Somalia, Mali as well as Afghanistan. So the conflict in North Africa and the



Middle East is having



a huge impact on Europe.



And while



there are European nations already involved in the Coalition undertaking



airstrikes - Netherlands,



Poland, Belgium, a number of countries are supporting



the US - this will really focus their minds on trying to



prevent the flow of



asylum seekers and some are economic asylum seekers, others are fleeing



persecution, war,



conflict. It will focus their attention on trying to resolve



the situation at its source and that will include military and



political



solutions in both Syria and Iraq.



CHRIS



KENNY



And when will Australia formally make



the decision on whether or not to approve these operations



in Syria - possibly



we read based out of Turkey, which is a turnaround for the history books,



Australian forces



operating out of Turkey.



JULIE



BISHOP



There is no specific timeframe. The US



have asked us to consider this and they are continuing



their airstrikes. The



Canadians, the Brits, the Jordanians, they are all involved. We will take our



own legal advice,



we will consult with Coalition partners and then we will make



a decision.



CHRIS



KENNY



Now there have been some horrible



political claims suggesting that the whole question of going



into Syria was



raised as an attempt at having a khaki by-election in Canning. This is patently



nonsense because



the conversation between Tony Abbott and Barack Obama about



this predates the untimely death of Don Randall.



JULIE



BISHOP



It occurred weeks ago. In fact, the



issue of Syria and being one theatre of war with Iraq has been



around for



months. We were discussing this with the United States very early on. As you



said, the United States



has always seen this as one theatre of war. They



believe that the legal principle of collective self-defence of Iraq



and its



people justifies their airstrikes over Syria. So this is an issue that has been



on the agenda for a long time.



CHRIS



KENNY



I raise this as a segue into those



major issues of state and international crisis into the grubby



domestic



politics. Because that kind of ridiculous conspiracy theory is being pushed not



just by people on Twitter



but by Ray Martin on Channel Ten I noticed last week,



who has been appointed by the ABC to look at ABC-bias on



Q&A. It just shows



that the level of debate in this country is reaching the lowest levels



imaginable.



JULIE



BISHOP



That is an utterly false assumption



and just looking at the timeline shows there is nothing in it.



And to suggest



that we are trying to contrive this outcome in the Canning by-election is



offensive and ridiculous.



Of course, the Canning by-election has come about as



a result of the untimely death of my friend and colleague



Don Randall.



It has



nothing to do with our commitment to the Iraqi Government and the notion of



collective self-defence of Iraq.



We’ve been in Iraq for some time now - coming



up to 12 months or more - so it was just a ridiculous suggestion



and really



doesn’t reflect well on Ray Martin.



CHRIS



KENNY



Well it doesn’t. But look at those



other excerpts I showed at the start of the program in relation to



this Border



Force story in Melbourne. You have Andrew Wilkie invoking Stalin who was



responsible for millions of



death and the East German regime. You’ve got Tony



Windsor suggesting that your Government wants to provoke



a terrorist act on our



shores. How do you deal with this - not just these swipes - but the fact that



they are run,



particularly on the ABC, unquestioned? How are you going to fight



back against this sort of hysteria?



JULIE



BISHOP



There is nothing like relevance



deprivation syndrome is there? And in the case of Mr Wilkie and



Mr Windsor,



they obviously have an acute case of it. But to draw some sort of parallel



between arbitrary,



totalitarian regimes and the Australian Government is



complete and utter nonsense. It makes them look ridiculous



but it is also



preposterous. For sensible - seemingly sensible - elected representatives to



try and draw analogies



between Hitler’s Germany, Pinochet’s regime, Stalin’s



Russia and a misguided press release, it is just



outrageous.



CHRIS



KENNY



Let’s just clarify. Obviously it was a



poorly worded press release, but you are a lawyer, are our law



enforcement



officers - whether they are customs, border force, police or whatever - are



they able to randomly



pull people on the streets and demand their



identification and the likes? My understanding, that is now within our



rule of



law?



JULIE



BISHOP



Absolutely not, and that was never the



intention and certainly is not government policy. It was



never going to happen,



and anybody with an ounce of sense could see that there was a mistake in the



wording of



the press release. The Border Force made it quite clear that it was



a very poorly worded press release and



people could have taken it the wrong



way. But we came out and said clearly this was not the intention, this was



not



going to happen and anyone who knew anything about law enforcement in this



country knew it wouldn’t be



policy.



CHRIS



KENNY



Yet Bill Shorten talks about a ‘Police



State’ - a quasi ‘Police State’.



JULIE



BISHOP



Well that is outrageous language. A



‘Police State’ - meaning a totalitarian regime - is just



nonsense. But I think



the Australian voters are smart enough to see this kind of overgrown hyperbole



is just



ridiculous in these circumstances.



CHRIS



KENNY



I want to ask you about Bill Shorten



because he of course is also attacking the trade union royal



commission. He has



joined with the ACTU - the Labor party really trying to get Dyson Heydon to



stand aside - he



will announce that decision tomorrow. Can you tell us that



whatever Dyson Heydon decides to do that the royal



commission will continue?



Because otherwise we are seeing it shut down by the very people who it has made



revelations about.



JULIE



BISHOP



Bill Shorten has very selective



outrage. He is outraged about poorly worded press release but he



is not



outraged about the systemic corruption in the union movement. And those who are



leading the charge



against Dyson Heydon and that includes Bill Shorten, have



one motivation and that is to stop the investigation into



corrupt union



officials and behaviour that was ripping off honest union workers.



They are



trying to protect these union officials from further investigation. Already



about 26 officials have been



referred for further investigation and



prosecution. And so for those who are trying to close down this royal



commission, all they are trying to do is protect corruption and behaviour that



was working against the interests of



honest union members.



CHRIS



KENNY



So will they fail no matter what Dyson



Heydon decides? The royal commission will continue



somehow?



JULIE BISHOP



This Royal Commission



must continue on behalf of those honest union members who have been



ripped off



by corrupt union bosses, who put their own personal interests ahead of the



people they are meant to be



representing.



CHRIS



KENNY



Two matters I want to clear up before



I let you go. One is Canning, you have been on the ground



campaigning with



Andrew Hastie. What is your assessment of how he has recovered from that



initial smear



against him and what are the issues that it is going to be fought



on - local or is it very much a referendum on the



Abbott Government?



JULIE



BISHOP



He is an outstanding Australian. He



will bring rare insights and qualities for the role of a Member



for Canning. I



believe that he is one of the most outstanding candidates I’ve seen on either



side of politics for a



very, very long time - a serving officer in the SAS, he



brings those leadership qualities.



CHRIS



KENNY



So there is no chance he will lose if



he’s such a great candidate and you have an 11 per cent



margin, the Government



can be in no fear of losing the seat.



JULIE



BISHOP



I have every confidence that the



people of Canning will want a person of his temperament and his



character to



represent them, and that is what it is all about. This is a by-election, there



will always be challenges



for the incumbent Government during a by-election,



but this has come about because of the untimely death of Don



Randall and the



people of Canning get to choose who they want to represent them in Canberra.



And I don’t



believe they can find anybody more outstanding, more committed to



their interests than Andrew Hastie.



CHRIS



KENNY



Well speaking about politicians and



ambition and how much they can deliver, I also want to ask



you in the context



of possible reshuffles, a lot of talk there could be a reshuffle in the



Government’s frontbench



later in the year. You of course when you were first



Deputy Liberal Leader in Opposition had the Shadow Treasury



portfolio, a lot of



political drama around that, and Joe Hockey took the job you went into Foreign



Affairs. It hasn’t



really worked out for Joe Hockey and he seemed very much



like the weak link in the Government, don’t we need



one of the Government’s



best campaigners, best advocates in that crucial treasury portfolio?



JULIE



BISHOP



We have to remember that Joe Hockey as



Treasurer inherited the worse set of national accounts



of any government in



living memory. Yet only six years earlier the Labor Government under Kevin Rudd



had



inherited the very best set of financial accounts. So Joe has had to deal



with not only the debt and deficit that was



brought about by six years of Labor



incompetence and mismanagement of our national finances, but is also



dealing



with an irresponsible Labor group of Senators…



CHRIS



KENNY



We know it is a tough job, but the



point is most observers in the country think that Malcolm



Turnbull or Scott



Morrison or even yourself could do a better job than Joe Hockey.



JULIE



BISHOP



Well rather than criticise Joe I would



call on Labor to work with him, accept responsibility for the



legacy they left



- the worse debt and deficit that we have ever seen in Australia’s history -



and work with him to find



the solutions.



They are



being irresponsible in the Senate, they are blocking even their own savings



that they put up. They are



blocking the establishment of the ABCC - which is a



productivity measure bringing back lawful practices in our



workplaces, our



building sites - and yet Labor is blocking it. So Joe has a very tough gig but



I am sure he is up for



it.



CHRIS



KENNY



There you go, we have spent the best



part of 15 minutes with you. You are a former board



member of the West Coast



Eagles, of course, as a big Crows man I haven’t even mentioned football today,



thanks



very much for your time.



JULIE



BISHOP



It’s not today, but well done the



Crows, but it is the Grand Final that counts.



Media enquiries



Minister's office: (02) 6277 7500



DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555

