

THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  SKY NEWS TO THE POINT  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2015

SUBJECT/S: Terrorism; Syria; National Security Committee of Cabinet; Syrian  refugees; Port of Darwin; Worker exploitation; MYEFO.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, HOST: Brendan O’Connor, Shadow Minister for Employment  and Workplace Relations, joining us from Canberra, thank you.

PETER VAN ONSELEN, HOST: Am I allowed to participate in this interview after your  tweet?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Not sure.

VAN ONSELEN: There was certainly no emphatic yes there, Kristina Keneally -

KENEALLY: Well I guess if you give Brendan O’Connor the choice between just me or  me and you what do you think he’s really going to honestly take if there’s no -

VAN ONSELEN: We all like a friendly interview from a fellow traveller, I’m not going to  add to that one.

O’CONNOR: Can I interrupt you two interviewing each other perhaps?

KENEALLY: Brendan what do you make of the poll out today? 3 out of 4 Australians  seem to believe a terrorist attack is likely to occur in Australia and some 44 per cent are  concerned about us taking the 12,000 Syrian refugees.

O’CONNOR: It’s entirely unsurprising that people would be concerned. I think the fear -  I think in Western countries generally it has been heightened by the atrocities in Paris

but really since the 9-11 attacks, the bombings in Madrid, in Bali on our doorstop, in  London, has I think really ensured that people would feel that we have to be ever  vigilant because there is a threat and the terror alert is high. The agencies all confirm  that and therefore, public opinion about this being a significant challenge is quite  understandable.

KENEALLY: The public seem to be quite divided as do many opinion leaders in this  country and indeed politicians about whether or not Australia should one day  contemplate putting boots on the ground? We’ve seen Kevin Andrews out today arguing  that Australia should contemplate special forces being sent over to Syria and Iraq.  Obama and Turnbull seem to be far more enthusiastic to that but if you look ahead to  the US Presidential election it seems likely that we’re going to get a more hawkish US  President than we currently have. I mean doesn’t this mean Australia really has to start  to grapple with this question about putting boots on the ground in the Middle East?

O’CONNOR: I think we’re quite rightly reserving that option and I think it’s the case that  firstly the advice we’ve received by national security agencies is such that the  contribution we’re making is certainly significant and doesn’t need troops on the ground.  It’s a huge decision, a very significant threshold decision, to put Australian Defence  personnel in a war zone in that manner and I think at this point the Government is  correct not taking the gratuitous advice by some former Ministers as to what we should  consider doing.

KENEALLY: There does seem to be a great deal of unity between the Government and  the Opposition on national security and that’s certainly welcome but you have raised  some concerns and you have a level of agreement with Kevin Andrews when it comes  to the issue of the Immigration Minister and whether or not he should sit on the National  Security Committee. How concerned are you about that?

O’CONNOR: I want to state that my concerns were first expressed in September when  the Prime Minister chose not to include the Minister for Immigration on the National  Security Committee of Cabinet. I think that’s a wrong decision, it’s a bad decision. I  believe that given the increased nature of non-conventional threats - the non-state  violence that’s occurring around the world and in comparable countries and indeed the  concerns we’ve had at home, to attacks at home would suggest that it is quite right for  the most significant cabinet committee to have a national security cabinet Minster as a  permanent member.

The fact that the Government chose not to have the Minister for Immigration sit does  raise questions, I believe, about the judgement of the Prime Minister with respect to this  matter and he should reverse that decision.

VAN ONSELEN: It’s not the first time it’s happened, though. Amanda Vanstone in that  portfolio didn’t sit on the National Security Committee either and that was under John  Howard’s Prime Ministership.

O’CONNOR: It’s happened before, but I have to say to you, Peter, that the fact is that  the concerns dealing with border protection firstly indicate the portfolio has significantly

changed. It now incorporates Customs. And in fact when we were in Government I was  the Minister for Justice first then Home Affairs and I was put on as a member of the  National Security Committee of Cabinet. And certainly as Minister for Immigration I was  a permanent member. That meant that my agencies were also there for the entire time.

To hark back to a time when Senator Vanstone was Minister misses point that we are in  a situation where the threat is more likely from unconventional areas and that therefore  means that the Minister for Immigration, particularly, as I say, given the changes to the  machinery of Government, is of such a nature that would really require the Government  to ensure that the Minister and his or her agencies sat permanently in that absolutely  vital decision making body.

And the fact that the Prime Minister chose not to do so is a mistake. And I don’t believe  everyone should see this through the prism of the destabilisation by the losers of recent  times of the Government. I think this matter should be seen as a policy decision which  was a wrong decision and the Government can correct it and Malcolm Turnbull can  correct that very easily.

VAN ONSELEN: What do you think of Senator Cory Bernardi’s comments that the  Cabinet should reconsider taking the 12,000 refugees from Syria in light of his concerns  and view that there could well be terrorists among them?

O’CONNOR: I think the decision made by the Government was supported by the  Opposition and we still support the decision. But can I say as someone who has held  two portfolios that go to these issues we would want to make sure that the Government  is very rigorous in examining the backgrounds and the identity of these refugees.

Of course, the overwhelming number, Peter,  would be people who have suffered  enormously. Lost family members, perhaps endured violence towards them, and we  are, I think, a big and generous nation and we should be playing our part.

But at the same time we have to be very vigilant to ensure that we’re not in any way  endangering our citizens by not sufficiently oversighting the entrance of those people  into Australia, so that’s an important thing.

The agencies of Government, ASIO and the Department of Immigration and Border  Protection and others should be involved in ensuring that we do not in any way  endanger our nation or our citizens.

KENEALLY: Brendan O’Connor, can I take you to the issue of the Port of Darwin. We  saw during Prime Minister Turnbull’s trip overseas that the US President Barrack  Obama raised concerns with him about the leasing of the port to a Chinese company.  We now see that Senator Nick Xenophon is proposing to move for an inquiry into the  lease of that port amid growing security concerns. Is Labor aware of the Senator's plans  and are you likely to back that inquiry?

O'CONNOR: I haven't seen the terms of reference by Senator Xenophon. I understand  the Opposition Leader Bill Shorten has raised concerns, and quite rightly too. This is a  very significant port. As you know, most of our Defence assets are located in our  northern areas and the fact that we just so recently signed up with the United States an  agreement about their presence in Darwin, I think it was very unfortunate to say the  least that the Government had not formally informed the United States that these lease  arrangements were taking place. And the fact that the Prime Minister dismissed it in  such a supercilious way I thought was also unfortunate, because these matters should  be taken very seriously. I think the concerns of our most important ally should be taken  very seriously and it didn't appear that was the case when the Prime Minister was taking  questions on this matter only recently.

VAN ONSELEN: Brendan O'Connor, I want to ask you about the Labor leadership.  You're a senior figure in the Parliamentary Left of the Labor Party. You had 60 per cent  members back Anthony Albanese for the leadership but the Parliamentary Labor Party  seemed to fracture between its various parts and you know, deliver the leadership to Bill  Shorten. Bill Shorten was somebody who played an instrumental role in removing your  good friend Julia Gillard from the Prime Ministership late in the last cycle of the Labor  Government. When is the Labor Left going to get its act together and put Anthony  Albanese in the top job?

O'CONNOR: Well, thanks for the loaded question Peter! (Laughter)

VAN ONSELEN: Maybe that's why you didn't want me to - (Laughter)

O'CONNOR: Yeah, maybe we should've kept you out of it altogether! Nah, not at all.

Look there's no doubt things have changed and some of it is more challenging. That's  always likely when you have person come in and gets a honey moon period, as is the  case with Malcolm Turnbull. But let's be very clear here if you wanted to talk about the  history of leadership ballots in the Labor Party, right from I think the Keating-Hawke  years onwards, there's been no decision making that's been confined on a factional  basis. People have voted for what they believe to be the best candidate.

And if you look though all of those ballots, many          of which I've been involved in  Peter, you would realise that they're not determined on factional lines and nor should  they be. This should be a decision as to who is best to lead the Federal Parliamentary  Labor Party. We've made that decision. And we'll stick with that decision. And we'll  continue to prosecute the arguments that matter most to Australians.

Namely, making sure that their Family Tax benefits are not going to be attacked.  They're not going to pay $100,000 university fees. That we have policies in place to  prevent the exploitation of workers in this country. So we will continue to advance the  arguments that we believe are necessary and we will be very contestable at the next  election.

KENEALLY:  Well let me ask you about a policy matter then. Get off - my colleague,  Peter Van Onselen loves to go on about  leadership challenges. Let me ask a policy  related question. The Government is apparently looking to make it easier - that is, to  lessen the penalties for companies that don’t pay superannuation to their employees.  And we ‘ve got stories out today about Pizza Hut drivers being underpaid some $12 an  hour. Not paying superannuation. Using sham contracts is the allegation in a class  section lawsuit. How concerned are you about the potential for the change in the  penalties against those companies that underpay superannuation and what is Labor  going to do about this?

O’CONNOR: Well I’m concerned. I’m not sure that we have formally determined a  position, but I can tell you this, Kristina, I’m concerned that a policy will be announced  that will invite people to not pay what is lawfully required. I’m not of a view that you  should reward people who don’t provide workers what they are entitled to under law,  and at the same time as a result punish those very good employers who of course are  the majority, and who are doing the right thing.

Under the guise of red tape this Government likes to erode the employment protections  of Australian workers and I think we need to really closely examine this decision. And  further to that we’re seeing one example after another, from Baiadi, 7-Eleven, Myer and  now Pizza Hut where we’re having very significant levels of exploitation of workers, and  we’re expecting the government to respond to it but to date there has been very little  effort by the government to do anything. I can assure you that we will continue to not  only push the government, Kristina, but we’ll be announcing policies in the near future  about how we redress what is becoming clearly widespread exploitation within sectors  of our labour market and affecting many thousands of workers.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I asked you a final question Brendan O’Connor about projections  in the Budget. The Government are making some musings now that in those out years -  the third and fourth year of the projections in the Budget, which are always just done as  trend growth and therefore it has always been above 3 per cent, sometimes even 3.5  per cent - that they might look to change that and they’ve got a certain amount of  support coming in from places like the Reserve Bank Governor and so on, that modern  growth in reality is probably more likely to have a 2 in front of it. This will of course  completely change the dynamic of the way both sides of politics approached the Budget  because you wouldn’t have these sudden massive growth amounts in the third and  fourth years of the out years that are unlikely to ever materialise. What’s your reaction to  that? Are you comfortable with having that discussion?

O’CONNOR: Happy to have a discussion provided the public are also part of that  discussion and people are aware of exactly what the Government is doing. Let’s be  clear here this Government has doubled the deficit within two years after attacking the  former Government for a deficit, and we know they are looking to change the goalposts  in order to have a better mid-year economic forecast. I think you will see Scott Morrison  with a pea and thimble trying to pretend that things are better than they really are. And  also pretend that it is all about expenditure when we know that revenue has been

declining for some time now. So the Government needs to be transparent about what it  is looking to do. I don’t mind having a conversation inviting governments and  oppositions to look over the  longer term. I do think there are occasions where we can  get caught up on a short sighted fetish around deficit, but let’s be very clear as to what  is being considered here, and it’s not just about trying to justify what has been a terrible,  indeed woeful economic performance by this government since its election. The fact  that Malcolm Turnbull has taken over doesn’t mean that the fundamentals have been  fixed. We’ve got almost a wage recession in this country, unemployment is still high,  economic growth is very low and that is why we are having such major problems in  relation to accumulating revenue,  apart from obviously other international factors as  well. I’m happy to have the conversation, but it’s an issue.

KENEALLY: Brendan O’Connor we’re going to have to leave it there. Thank you so  much for joining us on To The Point.

O’CONNOR: Sure enough.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

