



THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MEMBER FOR ISAACS





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST  FRIDAY, 12 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT: Citizenship, Iraq, Countering Violent Extremism, Gillian Triggs.

FRAN KELLY: The Shadow Attorney General, Mark Dreyfus, was there at the summit,  he joins me in the breakfast studio. Mark Dreyfus welcome to RN Breakfast

MARK DREYFUS: Good to be with you, Fran.

KELLY: So there’s the Prime Minister, publicly saying he’s grateful for the Opposition’s  support for this legislation. Will you support it, full stop? Is he right?

DREYFUS: We haven’t seen the legislation yet. And it needs to be, I need to be clear  about this Fran, Labor stands with the Government, on the objective of keeping  Australians safe. Of course national security is of paramount objective of every  government. But that does not mean that we are going to agree with the Government on  every single measure they propose, and as yet, on this measure, we haven’t seen what  it is that they are proposing. There’s no Bill, and despite the fact the Government’s been  talking about this since January 2014, more than 18 months.



KELLY:  But just a week or so ago Bill Shorten said yes, the Opposition does back the  Government in this notion of stripping dual citizens who are accused of terrorism or

found to be terrorists, of their citizenship. That sounded like you were going to support  it. So it’s only in principle support?

DREYFUS: What he said was that we support in principle looking at if it needs to be  extended, an extension of the existing law which says that if you take up arms against  Australia, and you are a citizen of another country, and Australia’s at war with the  country that you’re fighting for, you lose your citizenship. It’s actually automatic. It’s  been there in the Citizenship Act since 1948. As Bill has said, we’ve now got a situation  with non-state actors. We’ve got armed groups that Australians are participating in, and  if the law can be updated to deal with that situation we’re very pleased to look at that but  we are waiting to see what the Government’s coming forward. And over and over again  we’ve now had people from the conservative side of politics, conservative constitution  lawyers like Greg Craven or former Liberal ministers like Amanda Vanstone pointing to  very serious problems if the Government goes forward with some of the ideas they’ve  talked about. Stripping sole citizens of their citizenship, for example that’s one of the  ideas that’s been canvased. Or entirely a ministerial discretion, that’s something that  Peter Dutton’s spoken about. We need to see what the Government is going to put  forward here.

KELLY: When will you get that legislation? Do you know? ‘Cause the Government  wants to introduce it in the next fortnight.

DREYFUS:  The Government has variously said, ‘soon’, ‘in coming months’ and ‘in  coming weeks.’ I think we may now be getting it sometime in the next sitting fortnight.  Not of course for passage, it’ll have to be referred to a parliamentary committee,  probably the Intelligence Committee. That’s a good thing because we’ve shown through  our work, through Labor’s work on the Intelligence Committee, that by careful scrutiny,  inadequate legislation that the Government has put forward in this national security  area, can be improved.

KELLY: We just heard concerns from Gillian Triggs, President of the Human Rights  Commission about this proposal, and she’s very concerned, in fact the speech she’s  giving tonight, and she gave similar speech in Melbourne last week, about the degree of

what she calls ‘executive overreach’ in this country, and she’s critical of both sides of  politics for government overreach let’s have a listen:

GILLIAN TRIGGS: What has been happening, particularly over the last 15 years  has been a willingness of Parliament of both major parties, whether in opposition  or government, to pass laws which actually increase executive power and most

worryingly, do so in a way that excludes the capacity of our judges and our courts  to determine whether that law is properly applied.

KELLY:  That’s Gillian Triggs and she’s accusing all sides of politics. In a sense, Labor  keeps talking tough on security but in the end seems to be passing the laws. The

metadata laws got the support of the Opposition, the detention of asylum seekers,  indefinite detention was there under a Labor government. These are the sort of  concerns that Gillian Triggs is raising in her address. Do you accept that executive  overreach is becoming entrenched?

DREYFUS: I accept that we always, and this is what Gillian Triggs also said, we always  need to look at balance, Fran. And that’s, if you look closely, what Labor has done over  the last six or seven months with the four Bills that the Government has brought forward  in the national security area, what we’ve done is to ensure that there were reviews  periods, that there were checks and balances, that there are better safeguards, in some  cases that there be sunset periods on these laws because they need to be recognised  as extreme laws. We would all hope for a short period and that’s why we have sunset  provisions. In every sense, the task that Labor’s undertaken is to act as a reviewer of  what I believe has been in some cases inadequate bills brought forward by the  Government. Yes, we have to work on national security, yes we share with the  Government the objective of keeping Australians safe but that doesn’t mean, I’ll say it  again, that we agree on every method, and we will continue to subject everything that  the government brings forward to adequate review. We wouldn’t be being a proper  opposition if we weren’t doing that.

KELLY: It’s twelve past eight on Breakfast, our guest is the Shadow Attorney General,  Mark Dreyfus. You were there at the summit yesterday. The Prime Minister sent a pretty  clear message, well, that’s how it was interpreted anyway, that he is willing to consider  perhaps additional Australian soldiers to Iraq, to back up the efforts by the United States  and the Iraqi forces against IS, is willing to take the fight up to IS, would the Opposition  support increasing our commitment?

DREYFUS: We’ve laid down some very clear principals on this, Fran. We’ve said only in  Iraq. We’ve said that we are there to assist the Iraqi Government and that when they’re  ready to stand on their own feet, Australia should withdraw. We’ve said that if there’s  any misbehaviour at all by Iraqi troops, that should be a basis for Australian withdrawal,  and it’s time that the Prime Minister actually explained where he’s going with this. Yet  again, we see this government not being very forthcoming with information. We see this  government- I’ll add a fourth principle that Labor made clear, which is that we will not  have our ground troops engaging with Daesh, we’re there in a training role only. So  they’re the four principles. If the Prime Minister is say that should be some change in  Australian operations in Iraq, he needs to explain himself, he should be making a  ministerial statement to the Australian Parliament, he should be holding a press  conference, and he should certainly be providing a briefing to the Opposition, none of  which has occurred.

KELLY: The Prime Minister is making it very clear to everybody, though, how he feels  about ISIS, and in his opening comments to the summit, there’s been a little bit of  commentary about this, his language was very strong, he said Daesh is coming, if it  can, for every person, for every government, with a simple message, ‘submit or die’,  and at brazen claim to universal dominion, you can’t negotiate with an entity like this,  you can only fight it. And of course he refers ISIS or Daesh as a ‘Death Cult.’ It was an  international audience there for the Prime Minister’s speech, did you get a sense of how  people heard those comments?

DREYFUS: I think that some people listening were pretty uncomfortable with those  comments. Of course I welcome the Government holding a regional summit on  countering violent extremism, it follows on an excellent initiative from President Obama  back on the 18th of February this year, when he held a summit at the White House,  attended by many, many more ministers and countries than unfortunately turned up in  Sydney yesterday, there were only six ministers there. But still, it’s a good thing the  Government’s doing. However, one of the themes of this conference, some of the  speakers at the conference are also speaking in the media about this, is the need for  care in the way we communicate. Terrorism, of course, feeds on terror. That’s its basis.  Terrorists want to create an atmosphere of terrorism, and I think all responsible leaders  need to be very careful that they are not in fact adding to the power of terrorists by the  language that they use, and worsening the environment in which we should be  conducting the countering violence extremism effort that we’ve got to engage with.

KELLY: Do you think that’s what’s happening?

DREYFUS: I think that countering violent extremism needs to depend on working with  families, with community groups, at a very fine grain level, and if national leaders speak  in an irresponsible way, if national leaders use language that is going to alienate some  parts of the community or alienate families, then they need to think again, we need to be  looking for different language.

KELLY: Can I just ask you finally, as I mentioned we spoke to Gillian Triggs earlier,  she’s been heavily criticised by the Government, for some of the policy  recommendations she’s made, the report she did on children in detention, the timing of  that. She gave an explanation of that timing. You’ve heard her explanation, do you think  it stands up? Do you think that there’s an orchestrated campaign against Gillian Triggs?  What do you think is happening here? Does she leave herself open with this, that was a  critical report of children in detention, and it came out under this government, not under  your government, yet there were more kids in detention under your government.

DREYFUS: I heard Gillian Triggs this morning, I’ve heard her before. She made it clear  that her concern is with the length of time that children have been spending in detention,

and I’d invite every single person listening to go away and read the report on children in  detention by the Human Rights Commission because even a casual reading will show  that it criticises Labor in government just as much as much as it criticises the Coalition  Government in relation to children in detention. I think there has been an orchestrated  campaign against Gillian Triggs, I think it’s disgraceful, I think it has to stop, and in  particular I’d single out the Attorney General whose job it is to defend independent  statutory office holders just as it is his job to defend judges. Instead of defending Gillian  Triggs, who is doing no more than her job as directed by her act of Parliament, the  Attorney General has joined in the attack against her. That’s disgraceful. I want this  campaign to stop. Of course, governments are entitled to engage with the Human  Rights Commission, they might not like everything that the Human Rights Commission  says and does, the proper way to deal with that is to answer with facts and argument,  not to engage in the personal attack that we’ve seen, particularly directed at Gillian  Triggs.

KELLY: Mark Dreyfus, thank you very much for joining us.

DREYFUS: Thank you Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARCUS PRIEST 0402 914 466



