

1





The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

TRANSCRIPT

Ray Hadley weekly interview 2GB/4BC

26 November 2015





Subject:  Terrorist threat, Australian Citizenship Amendment (Allegiance to  Australia) Bill 2015, Bill Shorten’s comments on New Zealand criminals, Syrian  refugees

E & EO Transcript

JOURNALIST: Australian Security agencies are looking to the strategy behind the  Paris attacks to see how many they prevent, or how to prevent a similar mass  casualty attack in Australia.

Cath Burn was talking, the Deputy Commissioner in NSW, to Alan Jones yesterday  saying that she feels there is a real threat and we’ve been asked by the Prime  Minister not to over emphasize those threats.

Which is it?

PETER DUTTON: Well Ray obviously there is a real threat and I think that is the  point the Prime Minister was making in his speech.

But we need to make sure that we deal with it in a rational way, in a reassuring way,  so that Australians know that we are working with police forces with our intelligence  agencies who are able to stare these threats down.

Already ASIO and the Australian Federal Police and other agencies have thwarted a  number of attempts.

For us as a country, as a western country, like the US, the UK and any other  democracy, we are under threat because these people are opposed to the way in  which we live. They hate the fact that young girls can go to school, that they can be  educated, that we have a great health system - they are opposed to all of that.

I think the point the Prime Minister was making in his statement is that we have, like  a few other countries, a great capacity to stare the threat down.



2



It is real and we have got significant assets in our police and our intelligence  agencies to keep us as safe as humanly possible, but we need to be alert to the fact  that these people are seeking to do us harm.

JOURNALIST: This Bill to strip citizenship from dual citizens convicted of terrorism  is still before Parliament.

Where is that up to?

PETER DUTTON: Ray it will come on next week. I was hoping that it could have  been dealt with this week, but there was some late advice from the Solicitor General  about a minor amendment that needed to be made.

We have had good discussions with my opposite number Richard Marles overnight  and also we have met with the Chair and Deputy Chair of the Intelligence Committee  so that we could go through the amendments.

The Labor Party obviously has a process to go through which I respect and they will  do that next week.

Then the Bill in its amended form will pass through the Lower House and then pass  through the Senate and become law after that.

It is going to become a considerable tool for us to use against many of these foreign  fighters wanting to return to our country.

JOURNALIST: You said through the Senate.

Are you confident it will be guided that way? You don’t think there will be too much  opposition from the crossbenchers or the Labor Party?

PETER DUTTON: I don’t think so Ray. I think the Labor Party get that this law is  needed and that it is necessary.

As I say I have had good discussions with Richard Marles, my opposite, who  understands the Government is very serious about getting this law through, because  if we do we can strip dual citizens of their Australian citizenship.

It means that in some cases we can prevent people from returning to Australia and if  we do that then we are a safer place.

JOURNALIST: Not so with Bill Shorten and his opposite number in New Zealand -  the opposition leader over there Andrew Little.

He has indicated to them that if were to become Prime Minister, which is two  chances - none and buckleys - according to the polls, he would soften Australia’s  policy on deporting criminals born across the Tasman.

PETER DUTTON: I was pretty amazed by that story today.



3



I met with Andrew Little and Phil Gough both from the Labour Opposition in New  Zealand and we had a good meeting.

I made it very clear to them that the Government wasn’t going to change policy in  relation to cancelling the visas of people here committing criminal acts. We spoke  about some of the bikies that we have cancelled their visas of and people that have  committed offences on children.

There are some pretty serious criminals and we have cancelled their visas and we  have sent them packing.

Now if Mr Shorten is telling people that they are going to water down these laws then  I think he needs to come out and make a clear statement to the Australian public  today - why?

Why on earth would you give a free pass to some child molester, or some bikie, or  somebody who has been involved in a serious assault or armed robbery? Why would  you side with them over the public safety of Australians?

I think people support the Government in making our society safer and in the work  we are doing here.

I have got to say I was pretty blown away by Bill Shorten’s announcement and I think  he needs to come out and clarify it today.

JOURNALIST: Just another thing about Syrian refugees. We are broadcasting at the  moment to Coffs Harbour on 2CS and people have expressed concerns about local  stories in local media about how they will be among the region centres where we will  relocate Syrian refugees when they start to arrive in numbers.

Their concerns aren’t about the fact that they are Syrians, their concerns are that  there is high unemployment in the area and public housing is at a premium

How do you battle that, if you are going to put people like this in Coffs Harbour, or  Wagga Wagga or anywhere else as a matter of fact in regional Queensland without  jobs? What do you do?

PETER DUTTON: Well Ray one of the big aspects to this policy is employment. We  need to make sure that we can help people get into jobs quickly because we know  otherwise that people end up on welfare long-term.

So that’s no different from people coming under the Humanitarian Programme or  people who are born in Australia - it’s the same problem that we have. If people are  out of work then there are all sorts of social problems that come with that.

So the Northern Territory for arguments sake is begging and pleading for people to  go there because they have many jobs that they just can’t fill.



4



So we will try and match people to areas where there is an opportunity to go into a  job, to work with local businesses and local community groups that have expressed  support and a desire for people to come and live in that community.

In the end, these people are fleeing the terrorists that we have seen incur the  damage in Paris. These people will have seen the same terrorists attack their  families and in particular for a lot of the Christian minorities they have been attacked  simply because of their religious belief.

They have seen family members abducted and assaulted then you can understand  that they would like to get away from that terrorist activity and regime. That’s the idea  of this programme that we can provide support to those people.

We are not going to compromise on our national security and if we have a hesitation  in relation to anyone then they won’t be coming under this programme. All the  biometrics, fingerprints and all of the security checks with the US and our other  partners will be conducted before anyone comes.

So we will be assured as best we can of the security aspects, but it is important that  people go into communities where there is work.

JOURNALIST:  Ok. As always thanks for your time. We will talk again next week.

PETER DUTTON:  Thanks mate, take care.

[ENDS]







