

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2015

SUBJECTS:  Submarines; Report into children in detention; M r Chan  and Mr Sukumaran; Abbott Government’s foreign aid cuts.



KIERAN GILBERT, PRESENTER: Joining me first this morning on the  program, the Shadow Foreign Minister, Tanya Plibersek. It’s another disturbing  reminder of the level of this threat at the moment, of course as if we needed it  after December.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well it’s  reassuring of course to know that our security and intelligence and policing  forces are able to protect us in this way. We are of course expecting further  briefings on the two men who have been arrested and the information that led to  their arrest.

GILBERT: Sure, let’s, I want to discuss a number of issues with you this  morning. The submarine issue, what is Labor concerned about here in terms of  the process? Yesterday David Feeney asked the Prime Minister had he done a  deal, or anyone on his behalf, with the Japanese leadership. Is that your  suspicion as to what’s going on here?

PLIBERSEK: So there’s two things. It’s important to remember that the  Government promised to build twelve submarines in Adelaide, before the election  they said very clearly they’d build all twelve subs in Adelaide. What’s happened  since then is a great deal of confusion about whether a deal has already been  made with Japan, to buy the submarines in Japan. The proper thing to do when  you’re spending tens of billions of taxpayers’ money is do a properly funded  evaluation of what we need in our future submarines, the exact capacity that we  need in those submarines, and then to go out to a competitive tender process  where companies that believe they could supply that sort of capacity in  submarines are able to tender. It was extraordinary that the Australian  Submarine Corporation seemed locked out of the ability to bid for tens of billions  of dollars of work to be done in South Australia.

GILBERT: Well they’re now back in though, they’re back into the process

PLIBERSEK: Here’s the thing. What a shambles of a process. It looks like, as  Senator Edwards has said, it looks like on Friday, last Friday, they weren’t  allowed to bid, and by Monday they were allowed to bid. How did that decision  get made over the weekend when all these phone calls were going around about  leadership challenges? It looks like the Prime Minister may have made a  commitment to the Japanese but because his job was under threat in the  leadership challenge he’s made a commitment to Senator Edwards. He’s now  broken that commitment to Senator Edwards it seems. This kind of confusion is  unacceptable when we’re talking about tens of billions of dollars of taxpayer  funds and even more importantly, the defence of our nation.

GILBERT: And my understanding is from the National Security Committee,  sources within the Government told me that no decision has been made on this  so while the Prime Minister might have had a hand shake with the Japanese  Prime Minister, no final decision from the NSC has been made on the submarine  acquisition, any part of it.

PLIBERSEK: Is that how we make decisions about our defence equipment now?  We do handshake deals at the side of international meetings? If it is the case  that there is a handshake deal, that’s appalling. You actually need a proper,  methodical process. We’ve got a defence white paper underway, you need to do  a funded study that looks at exactly what we need from our submarines. The  sort of distances they need to go, speeds, noise profiles, how they are able to  operate with submarines and other defence equipment from other nations that  are our allies - and none of that is being done. It is just an extraordinary  shambles of a process.

GILBERT: Have you heard any, obviously you have connections with the  diplomatic corps in Canberra, have you heard concerns from the Japanese,

Germans, French or anyone else personally about the way that this is being  managed?

PLIBERSEK: Absolutely.

GILBERT: Or is Labor whipping this up?

PLIBERSEK: No. Absolutely, I’ve had a number of representations by other  nations that believe that they could make submarines that would meet our  requirements. But none of this should be decided on the basis of lobbying or our  diplomatic relations with other nations - or hope that we will make friends with  other nations because we’re buying their submarines-

GILBERT: Have the Japanese been in touch?

PLIBERSEK: I’m not going to talk about individual approaches or discussions  I’ve had, but what I would say is that when you’re making a decision about the  defence of our nation worth tens of billions of dollars that these submarines will  be one of our most important defences for the next three or four decades, you  don’t just make it up as you go along.

GILBERT: The Bali Nine, this looks like a terrible situation, Jokowi, the  Indonesian President, has again said he’s not going to show any clemency, he’s  taken a very hard line. He’s in a very difficult position politically early on in his  presidency, it looks like sadly this is inevitable, that the two young men will be  put to death.

PLIBERSEK: I don’t accept that it’s inevitable. I think it’s very important that we  continue to use all of our connections and all of our diplomatic efforts to plead  for clemency for these two young men. Nobody thinks that they don’t deserve to  be punished for what they did, what they did is very wrong and very serious. But  we always oppose the death penalty and it’s been very important that Australia  opposes the death penalty, not just for our citizens in other nations, but that we  say in a principled way that we speak to our allies about the death penalty and  say that it’s never right. We also of course want to give all our support to the  two young men and their families. It looks like they’ve made efforts to reform  themselves and we urge the Indonesian Government to take that into account.

GILBERT: It looks like hypocrisy from the Indonesia authorities as well given  they lobby other countries to declare clemency, or give clemency, to their  citizens when they’re on death row, and yet there’s no such clemency here.

PLIBERSEK: I think it shows that it’s important that Australia has a principled  opposition to the death penalty wherever and for whoever it’s applied to.



GILBERT: Let’s finish up on the immigration detention report. Well, actually I  want to ask you about aid as well. But on the immigration issue, this Human  Rights Commission report has found some really concerning findings here, and  largely around the time that Labor was in office, some 2000 children were in  detention, now the Government’s got that number under 200, so that’s a good  outcome isn’t it? The humanitarian dividend from their tough line on boats.

PLIBERSEK: There should be as few children or no children in detention. I think  unfortunately we haven’t had an opportunity to read the report in its entirety.  We’ve only just received it. The Government’s had it for several months but  we’ve only just received it. But from the reports that I’ve read, and from my own  understanding on this issue, I know that children shouldn’t be in detention, it’s  bad for them and we should in the first instance make sure that we process  people as quickly as possible, to determine their refugee status as quickly as  possible. But I don’t think you need a report to tell you it’s not good for kids to  be in detention.

GILBERT: But I guess the question is, the Government cops a lot of flak from  some quarters for their hard lines, but when you look at the end result, there are  less than 200 children in detention now, there was nearly 2000 in detention in  July 2013 under Labor.

PLIBERSEK: And one of the very difficult decisions we made to reduce to  number of adults and children in detention was the arrangement that we sought  with Malaysia where people could live in the community, they could work, their  children could go to school, they could receive medical treatment. Can you  understand why the Liberals blocked that arrangement? I have never had it  explained to me in any credible way why the Liberals stopped that arrangement  with Malaysia that would have let kids live in the community and go to school.

GILBERT: Today you’re going to be giving a speech on the issue of foreign aid.  Will Labor commit to reinstate the aid cuts that have been made over the last  couple of years?

PLIBERSEK: There’s no way that we can replace everything that’s been cut in  the short term. We’ll have to look at the medium term to repair the aid budget.  This Government’s cut $11.2 billion now from the aid budget. At every mid-year  economic update and the Budget last May, more cuts were made. In the Budget  last May, $1 of every $5 of all the cuts that were made came from this one  program, the aid budget. This means, say 2 million kids who won’t get to go to  school, or 3 ¾ million kids who won’t be vaccinated. These are cuts beyond the-  the magnitude of the cuts are really beyond imagining. So $11.2 billion in one  go? That’s going to be next to impossible-



GILBERT: But didn’t Kevin Rudd give the Government political cover by delaying  the increase when Labor was in government? You delayed the trajectory to meet  the millennium development goals and that’s given the Government political  cover?

PLIBERSEK: So while we were in government we doubled the aid budget and  the growth slowed slightly during the Global Financial Crisis. We would’ve  reached 0.5 per cent, the target, the bipartisan target that John Howard started,  of 0.5 per cent of our Gross National Income going to the aid budget. We  would’ve reached that in 2017/18, so very shortly we would’ve gotten to 0.5 per  cent of GNI. Under the growth projections for the Liberal Government, we will  never get to 0.5 per cent and in fact the share of our national income is the  lowest that it’s been since records were kept.

GILBERT: But some of the goals that Labor had set were unrealistic, weren’t  they? Because our aid spend was not the quality, how do you sustain the quality  and our apparatus to shovel out the money, it was growing at that big of a rate?

PLIBERSEK: I think that’s a problem that our non-government organisations  would be very happy to help with. The fact that we were putting money into aid  and it was growing quickly is a much better problem to have than the problem  they’ve got at the moment where they’ve contracted with partners on the ground  and they’re having to cancel programs. Kids aren’t going to go to school, kids  aren’t being vaccinated, babies will be born without skilled birth attendants, girls  won’t be going to school because of these cuts. They will have a very serious  impact on the real lives of people. I think that’s the bigger problem.

GILBERT: Tanya Plibersek, thanks very much for your time.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

