

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION  MEMBER FOR FRASER  E&OE TRANSCRIPT  ONLINE INTERVIEW  FAIRFAX BREAKING POLITICS  MONDAY, 15 JUNE 2015

SUBJECT/S: Government paying people smugglers; Citizenship changes;  Marriage equality; Tony Abbott’s Royal Commission

CHRIS HAMMER: Andrew Leigh is the federal MP from Fraser here in the ACT  and he's also the Shadow Assistant Treasurer. Good morning, Andrew.

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER ANDREW LEIGH: Good morning Chris,  how are you?

HAMMER: Now what answers do you want to hear from the Government about  what has been happening with people smugglers?

LEIGH: Chris, we really need to know whether or not Australia has been paying  people smugglers. This goes to the very heart of the Government's competence  on asylum seeker policy and their willingness to be honest with the Australian  people. What more important issues could there be in public policy than whether  you're doing your job well and whether you're being honest about it?

HAMMER: But the Government has said they want to stop the boats; they have  been successful in doing it. They've said they'll do whatever it takes - what's the  problem?

LEIGH: Three-word slogans are no substitute, Chris, for public accountability.  Australians have a right to clear and direct answers. After all, if payments are  being made then they're not the personal funds of Liberal ministers, but  Australian taxpayer resources. So taxpayers have a right to know how their  money is being spent.

HAMMER: And if taxpayers are happy that they are stopping the boats, it is a big  issue, what's the problem?

LEIGH: Australians have a right to accountable government. That's not just a  Labor notion. It's fundamental to who we are as Australians and to our  constitutional framework that ministers front up and honestly say how taxpayer  resources are being used. I'm deeply troubled about - as Richard Marles has  outlined over the weekend - the opaque nature of how the Government has  approached this really important area of public policy. We want to know that they  are making the problem better not worse.

HAMMER: Is it a concern that when these reports emerge both the Immigration  Minister Peter Dutton and the Foreign Minister Julie Bishop denied them  outright?

LEIGH: Well we've got a Government that is at sixes and sevens with itself and  that's been occurring quite frequently in this area. We've seen, on the citizenship  changes, an unprecedented leak from Cabinet, clearly exposing the division and  backbiting within the Abbott Government.

HAMMER: Well on citizenship since you mentioned that: will Labor have the  courage to stand up in Parliament and oppose any legislation that is likely to fail  before the High Court?

LEIGH: Chris, we usually prefer to see legislation before we announce a position  on it. I know that's an old-fashioned view, but when the Government brings the  legislation forward, we'll make a decision on that.

HAMMER: You don't need to see the legislation to answer the question: will  Labor oppose legislation that is likely to fail High Court? It's a statement of  principle rather than dissecting a piece of legislation.

LEIGH: Chris, the fundamental question on this is when the Government is  actually going to bring its legislation forward. Bill Shorten, in the last sitting week,  asked directly when Labor would be provided with a briefing on these changes.  When would we be told how the Government plans to make this scheme operate,  whether it's a court that’s making the decision or the Minister, under what  standard of proof and with what appeal rights? We know none of that at the  moment and it would be irresponsible of me to state a position on legislation we  haven’t seen.

HAMMER: So what do you think the motivation of the Government is here? Is it  to fight terrorism or is it to wedge Labor?

LEIGH: Well I think the Government needs to be focused on the challenge of  global terrorism. We've seen a significant challenge in the Middle East, I

recommend to people David Kilcullen's Quarterly Essay as a very thoughtful  statement of the challenges that Australia faces in that area. So the threat is live,  but we need to deal with it in ways that are appropriate and reasonable and will  succeed in their goals rather than making the problem worse.

HAMMER: Speaking of politicians answering questions, allegations have arisen  of what happened in the AWU back when Bill Shorten was heading the union.  Now, he's said he's happy to appear before the Royal Commission but doesn't  want to talk about these allegations until then. That could be August or  September - why doesn't he do what Julia Gillard did when she had allegations  from her past, simply hold a press conference and say 'okay all questions, I’m  happy to take them.' Because the Government is going to hit the Opposition  Leader with this in Parliament this fortnight isn't it?

LEIGH: It's clear that the Government would like to use their Royal Commission  as a political witch hunt, that's been obvious from the outset and Bill Shorten will  calmly and confidently stand behind his record of arguing for better pay and  conditions for Australian workers. That stands in stark contrast to an Abbott  Government whose ministers have said there's a wages breakout - despite the  fact that wages growth is the lowest in more than a decade - and which has  argued for cutting wages.

HAMMER: Okay let's put wages growth to one side, just say he's happy to  defend his role, we'll why not do it in, say, a press conference.

LEIGH: He has been doing it in a press conference, Chris. I think I've read three  transcripts of Bill Shorten's press conferences over recent days, in each of which  he has been asked questions on these issues. Bill has a proud record of  advocating for workers. You just have to see him in a workplace - I've been with  him in building sites and kitchens, talking with workers and engaging in their  needs, and that's what he did during his time in the union movement.

HAMMER: Just finally, the Fairfax-IPSOS poll, I know you don't like commenting  on polls but there are two areas there: same sex marriage and housing  affordability, you must be delighted the Government appears to be on the wrong  side of both of these issues?

LEIGH: Well let me do the poll dance for once, Chris. I think these are important  results which do show, once again, that on the issue of same sex marriage  Australians are where the Irish, the British, the New Zealanders, the Americans  are, very much feeling this is a change whose time has come. I was chatting with  a church minister last week who said that he supports same sex marriage not  despite being a clergyman but because of being a clergyman. When he asks  himself the question: what would Jesus do? he feels very comfortable supporting  same-sex marriage. Strong results like this reflect that many Australians of

diverse faiths are comfortable with the notion that same-sex couples shouldn't be  excluded the right to wed.

HAMMER: Okay Andrew Leigh, thanks for your time.

LEIGH: Thank you, Chris.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  JENNIFER RAYNER 0428 214 856

