

E&OE T RADIO  ABC RA WEDNE

SUBJEC

FRAN K of count the Shad

TANYA

PRESEN a single  the cam

TANYA  reality is governm they’ve a less dam internati course it it’s got Ir directed of the ot

DE

SHAD AN

TRANSCRI INTERVIEW ADIO NATI ESDAY 18 N

CTS: Natio

KELLY, PR tries targeti dow Foreig

PLIBERSE

NTER: Maj coalition of paign to de

PLIBERSE s that the R ment up unt also been f

maging or h onal coaliti t’s not just  ran, Saudi A

internation ther particu

THE HO EPUTY L DOW MI ND INTE

M

PT

W  ONAL BRE NOVEMBE

onal securi

ESENTER ng ISIS, inc gn Minister,

EK, DEPUT

or efforts a f countries  efeat ISIS, t

EK, DEPUT ussian milit til now, and fighting a nu harmful grou

on to targe the Russia-Arabia, and nal effort wi

larly brutal

ON TAN LEADER NISTER ERNATIO

EMBER

EAKFAST ER 2015

ity; Syrian

: The focus cluding imp Tanya Plib

TY LEADER

are underwa taking the f to have Rus

TY LEADER tary effort h  so of cours umber of ot ups than IS

t IS in parti -US compe d other cou th one goa

organisatio

YA PLIB R OF TH R FOR FO ONAL D R FOR SY

refugees;

s now shifts portantly, Ru bersek.

R OF THE

ay now to in fight up to I ssian firepo

R OF THE  has been ai se they hav ther groups S. I think ha

cular is a v etition that’s ntries in the l which is ta

ons on the g

BERSEK E OPPO OREIGN EVELOP YDNEY

Polls; GST

s to what’s c ussia. A sh

OPPOSITI

nclude Rus ISIS. Is this ower within

OPPOSITI med at pro ve been fig s, that we w

ving Russia very importa s been stym e region tha

argeting IS  ground in S

K MP  OSITION N AFFAIR PMENT

T increase

called a “sin ort time ag

ON: Good

sia in what s really the  the fold?

ON: Well I  otecting Ass hting IS in  would think

a as part of ant step forw mying the ef at need to b

and al-Nus Syria.



RS



ngle coalitio o I spoke w

morning Fr

’s being ca only hope f

think the s sad and his part, but  of as much

f an  rward. Of  fforts in Syr be part of a

sra and som



on”  with

ran.

lled  for

ad  s

h

ria,  a

me

PRESENTER: Vladimir Putin may now be more imbued to attack ISIS rather than attack  those forces, those groups critical of Bashar al-Assad. Overnight, he’s vowed to go after  the perpetrators who blew up the Russian passenger jet after now receiving the  evidence it’s a homemade bomb on board. Russia’s already intensified its bombing  raids. Is this the best hope for actually getting Russia more focused on the fight against  ISIS?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s important for us to take a step back and say, just as we  acknowledge the tragedy of these attacks in Paris, we need to acknowledge that  Russians would be shocked and grieving about the loss of 200 lives on the passenger  jet that went down over the Sinai desert. I think it is, of course, a strong motivator for  Vladimir Putin to really now focus his efforts on IS. They were, of course, fighting IS in

the past but it was a relatively slender part of their military, as the greater effort was in  protecting Assad.

PRESENTER: The US Secretary of State John Kerry is in Paris but he’s been in Vienna  earlier in the week. He says a ceasefire between the Syrian government and the  opposition could be just weeks away, which seems very optimistic given the state of  things. Do you know what their optimism is based upon?

PLIBERSEK: Well I hope he’s right, I mean, particularly as we go into the northern  winter, if you think of the people who are fleeing to Europe, they’re fleeing because they  fear that they will starve to death or freeze to death and that’s a pretty reasonable

assumption given that the international organisations that have been feeding and  sheltering the 11 million displaced Syrians are frankly running out of money; the World  Food Programme has cut its assistance to Syrian refugees, so I hope his optimism is  well placed. I can’t tell you on what basis he’s made that assessment.

PRESENTER: Following the talks with Malcom Turnbull, the US President Barack  Obama spoke of the need to quote, “ramp up pressure” on Islamic State. There’s no call  for extra forces on the ground or extra planes at this stage; what role could Australia  play in ramping up the pressure? How do you understand that?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s important that we acknowledge that Australia is already  playing a very substantial role. Our presence in Iraq at the request of the Iraqi  government makes us the second-largest contributor to the military effort there, and in  fact, if you think of it on a per-capita basis, we are the largest contributor, so I’m not  sure that would be an expectation that Australia would increase any military presence  there. I think that the more important thing for the United States and other partners in  this coalition to do is to ensure that there is a wide number of countries participating,  and that their efforts are being coordinated.

PRESENTER: But there is general agreement, it would seem, between the US  President and our Prime Minister that they don’t support the deployment of ground  forces. That’s Labor’s position still too. Do you believe that air strikes alone though can

degrade and destroy ISIS, because there’s really no sign of that so far?



PLIBERSEK: I think that our role should be limited, in the way that it has been up to  now, to support for air strikes and our role has been, with a clear legal basis, as part of  an international coalition, I think it’s important to retain that. As for any other change to  the military approach I think that there is -

PRESENTER: Like a frigate?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think there’s a greater role for countries in the region, and we really  do need to ensure that countries in the region are participating appropriately. I think  there’s a greater chance of success when you have coordination between all of the  players but a greater role for countries in the region.

PRESENTER: We heard the US President earlier; he said that more needs to be done  to reach out to Muslim communities, whether they’re in Australia or the United States or  anywhere. There are some though, in this country and in other places, who want to  rethink about intake of Syrian refugees. We’re going to settle 12,000 Syrian refugees  here over the next year. Tasmanian Senator Jacqui Lambie, has posed the question on  her Facebook page “Should Australia be proceeding with this resettlement?” in the  wake of the Paris attacks, and in less than a day she’s attracted more than 10 thousand  comments. Are you concerned about a backlash against Syrian refugees?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think that the reporting of the Paris attacks including this  suggestion that one of the attackers came through Greece to France from Syria has  made people nervous, but we have very careful checking of the background of refugees  before they come here, and people do need to remember that the greatest victims of  this conflict are the Syrians themselves. 300,000 Syrians at least have lost their lives in  this conflict; many of them have fled their homes - 11 million have fled their homes. The  idea that we would turn our backs on these people because of the suspicion that one  amongst millions might be a problem, I don’t think that really is in line with our values.  Of course we need to be careful, of course we need to do background checks, of course  we need to be confident of the identity of the people coming to Australia, but the  greatest victims of this conflict are the Syrians, particularly the ethnic and religious  minorities, particularly women and children, and I think that most Australians would  understand that and welcome these people.

PRESENTER: Do you share some of the criticisms of the Grand Mufti here in Australia,  that he didn’t go further in condemning the Paris attacks, in fact he expressed sorrow at  the loss of innocent lives but went on to speak immediately about what he called the  causative factors of the attack, he included racism there and he included the Western  military intervention in Muslim countries which we’ve just been talking about, in your  view, should the Grand Mufti had more strongly and clearly condemned the Paris  attacks?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I noticed that there’s a clarifying press release that came out this  morning making it clear that describing those causative factors was in no way an effort

to minimise the seriousness of the attacks. I think it is very important to be absolutely  straight down the line that there is no explanation, no justification, certainly no excuse  ever for this kind of violence, and you can’t state that too plainly, particularly when  you’re talking about issues like racism, where there has been generations of people  who have come to Australia, settled here, experienced racism in there early days and  they haven’t gone on to be violent or radicalised. You can’t begin to draw links between  these things and give people the ability to say that you’re making excuses for this type  of behaviour.

PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, finally can I just ask you very much in the domestic  politics world; the polls.  This week’s Fairfax Ipsos poll puts Labor’s primary vote at just  29%, that’s four and a half points lower than you were at the last election, and on these  figures the Coalition and Malcom Turnbull would win 100 seats in the parliament. How  can Labor go into an election with such a low primary vote and a leader who is more  than 50 points behind Malcom Turnbull as preferred Prime Minister?

PLIBERSEK: We always knew that Malcom Turnbull would have a bounce after  becoming Prime Minister; there was basically a sigh of relief across the country when  Tony Abbott was no longer Prime Minister.

PRESENTER: Is that all this is, a bounce, do you think?

PLIBERSEK: I think it’s a bounce and that when people realise that the policies haven’t  changed, the same policies that people hated - cuts to health, cuts to education, cuts to  the ABC and SBS, cuts to TAFE, $100,000 university degrees, lack of ambition on  climate change, the divisive plebiscite on marriage equality - none of these things have  changed. So, Malcom Turnbull, you know, shiny new guy, in a shiny new suit, will have  a bounce for a time. When people come to think about which party would make a better  government for them, I think you’ll see the numbers come back substantially.

PRESENTER: Labor seems to be putting all of its eggs in the anti-GST increase basket.  This same poll showed that 52 per cent of the people support a 15 per cent GST if  there’s adequate compensation, so that’s more than half the country. Does that indicate  to you that the voters are open to tax reform, if it’s fair?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think voters are open to tax reform if it’s fair, for sure.

PRESENTER: Or open to an increased GST?

PLIBERSEK: But I think an increase in the GST is a different proposition altogether. We  know that an increase in the GST means that the bottom 20 per cent of earners pay 7  per cent more of their income in tax, and the top 20 per cent of earners pay just 3 per  cent more. We know that an increase in the GST can’t be fair, and the Government has  promised compensation, they’ve promised the states and territories, or at least, the  states and territories have an expectation that there would be more funding for health  and education systems. Business think that they’re going to get company tax cut, wage

and salary earners think that they’re going to get an income tax cut - you can’t actually  compensate low income earners, cut taxes, give more money to the states, all from a 15  per cent GST increase, so somebody’s going to be disappointed as soon as this  proposal become specific. I think that it’s impossible for the government to meet all of  the expectations they’ve raised about what they’d do with any extra revenue.

PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, thank you very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

