

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 29 JULY 2015

SUBJECTS: UN tribunal; women in Parliament; marriage equality; asylum  seeker policy; Bronwyn Bishop.

FRAN KELLY, PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, good morning.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hi Fran, how  are you?

KELLY: I’m good, thank you. Can I ask you first as Shadow Foreign Minister -  Julie Bishop, the Foreign Minister is at the UN lobbying for an international  tribunal to prosecute the culprits, the people who shot down MH17 over Ukraine.  We heard on AM, she said there’s a high level of support but she doesn’t sound  confident that Russia won’t exercise its veto which would put paid to the idea of a  tribunal. How can justice be achieved without it?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it would be disappointing if Russia exercised a veto. If  Russia decided to abstain that would be one matter, but exercising a veto, I’m  sure many people would be disappointed. 298 lives were lost, including 39  Australians. Australia and other nations that had citizens aboard MH17 are very  concerned to see the people responsible brought to justice.

KELLY: Can I go to other matters now around Labor’s National Conference on  the weekend. There’s a lot of talk about affirmative action rules for women at the

moment in the Parliament. Labor adopted a 50 per cent quota in ten years’ time.  Would you have any chance of getting to that number without quotas?

PLIBERSEK: I think quotas really focus the mind. I’m not sure that the quota that  we’ve had at each stage has been particularly useful because of interventions by  national executive or anything concrete like that. What it’s done is remind party  members and officials at every level that they need to consider making sure that  we have more women in our parliaments, and the proof’s in the pudding, Fran. In  1994 about 18 per cent of our MPs were women and in 2015 it’s more than 43  per cent -

KELLY: Well, Julie Bishop told AM the proof’s in the pudding in that these quotas  get abandoned every time a male union leader wants a seat.

PLIBERSEK: Well, I’m not sure that Julie Bishop’s in a great position to be  lecturing the Labor Party on affirmative action given that she’s one of only two  female Cabinet ministers in the Liberal Cabinet. And in fact, when the second  one was appointed it was a doubling of the number of female Cabinet ministers. I  think the Liberal Party itself, people like even Christopher Pyne, certainly  Sharman Stone, Teresa Gambaro, Kelly O’Dwyer, all of them have been  speaking out in recent days saying that the Liberal Party needs to do better. Look  at their -

KELLY: But not for quotas, they won’t support quotas, they all argue for it to be  merit based as Julie Bishop was again this morning, which implies that some of  the Labor women have got there not through merit.

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, I’d stack our women up against anyone. I think the simple  fact is there are a lot talented Liberal women sitting on the backbench because of  the current culture of their party. I can’t understand why Kelly O’Dwyer wasn’t  promoted before now. She’s a, you know, compared with many other MPs, very  talented person. And it was inexplicable to me that she was languishing there on  the backbench as long as she was. I think that quotas focus the mind, Fran, and  rather than actually having to intervene at any particular time, what it’s done is  introduce a culture into our Labor party of ensuring that we are increasing female  representation. I told you the numbers, 1994 to 2015, Fran, we’ve basically  doubled our proportion of female representation. In that same time, the Liberals  have gone from about 14 per cent to just under 23 per cent so they really have  increased their numbers much more slowly.

KELLY: Okay-

PLIBERSEK: Each time we’ve set the bar, we’ve achieved it, we’ve set it higher.  I think that’s the really good way to progress.

KELLY: A couple of other issues to get through. You were a main driver behind  the adoption of a binding vote on marriage equality, albeit not for two terms,  another four years. Senior Liberals are now claiming this lets Tony Abbott off the  hook, the prospect of a conscience vote in the Liberal Party has now diminished  because of the position you and others took at conference. Have you set back  the cause of marriage reform?

PLIBERSEK: It is the most ridiculous excuse I have ever heard. The fact that we  will have a binding vote sometime after 2019 doesn’t give Tony Abbott an excuse  to prevent a conscience vote in his Liberal Party in the next month. There’ll be  backbenchers like Warren Entsch proposing private members’ bills; of course the  Liberal Party should be allowed to debate it in their party room. Up til now, Tony  Abbott’s prevented that. We could have marriage equality by Christmas, Fran.  We can certainly have it in this term of Parliament. If not in this term of  Parliament, in the first 100 days of a newly elected Labor government. There is  no excuse now for Tony Abbott to further delay discussion in his party room. I  hear yesterday that he’s now talking about a plebiscite. He is grasping at any  excuse to prevent this change that the majority of Australians want. We know  that in recent surveys, well over 70 per cent of Australians support marriage  equality. I think a lot of people of faith support marriage equality, as long as their  own churches don’t need to marry people if they feel uncomfortable with that.  And our proposed legislation earlier this year certainly made sure there was a  very clear exemption for religious institutions.

KELLY: Okay, can I ask you, because your conference also controversially  within adopted boat turnbacks as policy. You sent a proxy vote against that  policy. Immigration Minister Peter Dutton lost no time saying that demonstrates  how fraught the situation would be if in government you were Foreign Minister,  you’d be at odds with the policy and that would weaken Labor’s resolve. What’s  your response to that?

PLIBERSEK: I think Peter Dutton doesn’t really understand the Labor Party or  me very well. I’m very pleased with where we’ve ended up on this policy -

KELLY: But you voted against turnbacks.

PLIBERSEK: Sorry, just let me finish this sentence. We are bringing more  people to Australia, more refugees, but we’re bringing them here safely. We are  doubling the number of refugees that will come to Australia. We are increasing  support for the UNHCR by $450 million both in our region and internationally.  We’ll get kids out of detention, end temporary protection visas, an independent  children’s advocate, mandatory reporting of child sexual abuse.  This is a very  healthy package because it balances the need to bring people here to Australia  safely, prevent deaths at sea by drowning -

KELLY: Yes, but Tanya Plibersek, to go to Peter Dutton’s point, if you were  Foreign Minister, would you be able to argue strongly to countries that don’t like  turnbacks that this is what Australia needs to do?

PLIBERSEK: Yes, I would. And I think that the $450 million that we’re  contributing to the UNHCR makes it much easier because countries in our region  want to work cooperatively with Australia to prevent boats departing from  Indonesia for example, and when we work through the UNHCR on a regional  processing agreement it makes that much easier.

KELLY: Can I just ask you very briefly because we’re running out of time but  Bronwyn Bishop, if she repaid the taxpayer money she has spent, it looks like  attending the weddings of two of her colleagues, would all be forgiven?

PLIBERSEK: I think it’s extraordinary Bronwyn Bishop and other members of the  Liberal Party for a moment thought that it was appropriate to bill the taxpayer to  attend a wedding -

KELLY: That’s in the past, most of them have repaid. If she repays, can she stay  in the Parliament, like the others have, as Speaker?

PLIBERSEK: Oh look, I think it’s absolutely vital that she does repay and I think  that the Australian Federal Police should have been empowered to look into this.  But I think the real problem with Bronwyn Bishop is the travel entitlements  scandal is just another manifestation of her attitude to the Parliament, which is  deeply partisan and certainly not above politics for one moment. I think that the  bigger problem with Bronwyn Bishop, as well as the travel entitlements  controversy is the fact that she has not risen above politics in the role of Speaker,  she’s become more partisan, a greater warrior for the Liberal Party than ever, I  think. People should be asking questions about the way she conducts herself as  Speaker, not just her travel entitlements.

KELLY: Tanya Plibersek, we’ll leave it there. Thank you very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

