Senator Mathias Cormann

MINISTER FOR FINANCE

Transcript

TRANSCRIPTION: PROOF COPY E & OE

DATE: 4/05/2015

TITLE: 2UE - Mornings with Stuart Bocking

TOPICS: Budget, Productivity Commission proposal on immigration



STUART BOCKING: The Federal Government hands down its second Budget tomorrow week  and after the difficulties that they have encountered with the first, keen for a better reception with  the second. One of those putting it all together is the Finance Minister Mathias Cormann and he  joins me, Senator good morning.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Good morning Stuart. Good morning to your listeners.

STUART BOCKING: Thank you very much for your time. We have got these figures out today  from Deloitte Access Economics. Commonwealth deficits to total $150 billion over the next four  years, almost $50 billion worse than official forecasts. Are they accurate?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The Treasurer will reveal the numbers in the Budget, the actual numbers  in the Budget next Tuesday. But let me just make the general point, Chris Richardson is certainly  right that the Government has faced some significant challenges since coming into Government  in September 2013. Namely, global economic headwinds, global commodity prices, the price in  particular for iron ore having fallen dramatically. That is not something that is in the Government’s  control. Our focus has been in the context of all of that to do the best we can to strengthen  economic growth, strengthen job creation and to have a sensible path back to surplus as soon as  possible.

STUART BOCKING: When you say as soon as possible, no one seems to want to put a date on  it now. Does it remain just a wish at some point into the future?

MATHIAS CORMANN: It would be irresponsible to put a date on it. Our commitment genuinely is  to get back to surplus as soon as possible, but to do so in a way that is economically responsible.  Over the past few months we have reviewed the progress that we have made when it comes to  Budget repair since last year’s Budget. We have focused on what to do with some of the  outstanding issues that are still around from last year’s Budget and the best way forward in  relation to those. But our overarching focus is on making sure that we do the best we can to  strengthen economic growth, strengthen job creation and to repair the Budget in a way that is  responsible.

STUART BOCKING: In the lead up to the last election, you, Joe Hockey, the now Prime Minister  were all saying that one of the things was to end the waste, we will stop the boats, we will pay

down the debt, turn the Budget to surplus. Generally, if you make a statement like that in the lead  up to the election, is it reasonable for people to think that your time frame there is a three year  time frame to try and turn the Budget around?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We have turned the Budget around. We did inherit a rapidly deteriorating  Budget position and certainly if you look at our first Budget, spending growth was reined in to just  one per cent above inflation compared to the 3.6/3.7 per cent above inflation under the previous  Government. Our debt growth trajectory has been significantly reined in. But yes, there is much  more work to be done. We can’t ignore though what happens in the wider global economy. We  have to make judgments that are responsible. If you look at the things that we promised to do  before the last election, scrap the carbon tax and the mining tax, they are both gone. Stop the  boats, well the boats have been stopped and a bit later today the Prime Minister and the  Immigration Minister will have something to say about the benefits to the Budget bottom line that  come from all of that. We are making pretty significant progress but we just have to keep at it.

STUART BOCKING: It is difficult and I accept the iron ore price, it wasn’t so long back that the  iron ore price in the Budget was upwards of $90-100 a tonne US. What can we expect in terms of  the forecast price in the Budget next Tuesday for iron ore?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I am going to leave it to the Treasurer to release the Budget, but let me  just say, the iron ore price actually peaked at $180 a tonne in the period of the previous  Government. When we came into Government it was at $120 a tonne and people would know, it  is a matter of public record that it went to below $50 a tonne. Now these sorts of falls do have  material implications for our economy and for our Budget. So the work that we have been doing is  to ensure that we are on the strongest possible foundation in the context of these challenges. To  make sure that we are as resilient as we can be to deal with those challenges and in the best  possible position to take advantage of opportunities coming our way.

STUART BOCKING: So do we talk about an iron ore price around $50 US a tonne, $40, $35?  What sort of number are we talking about?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I am not going to speculate about what the numbers in the  Budget...interrupted

STUART BOCKING: You don’t need to speculate, you would know. You’re the Finance Minister.  You don’t need to speculate, you can tell me.

MATHIAS CORMANN: These sorts of numbers are part of the Budget to be released next week.  In the meantime, it is a matter of public record where the iron ore price has been tracking. These  numbers are transparently available in the market.

STUART BOCKING: Okay, now when you look at this report from Deloitte’s, they describe the  upcoming Budget looking as if it has been written by Stephen King and painted by Edvard Munch.  Are you having nightmares?

MATHIAS CORMANN: No, not at all. We have a job to do and that is to ensure that Australia is  on the strongest possible foundation for the future. No Government controls what happens to  global commodity prices. No Government controls what happens in the global economy, but what  we do control is what we are doing with our own spending, what we are doing in terms of our own  expenditure growth into the future. Our focus very much has been to get expenditure under  control in order to ensure that we can protect our living standards, strengthen living standards  and improve living standards into the future.

STUART BOCKING: You would have seen though this report today does describe Budget repair  at a snail’s pace. You look at the upshot from that first Budget, a number of things which have  been now dumped. You knocked a bit off the States, some off the Foreign Aid, you’ve imposed  the Debt Levy for a couple of years on high income earners. Is it just too hard weening people off  Government support, particularly when you have an Opposition which is determined to play  things as hard in Opposition as you guys did when you were in Opposition?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We played things hard in Opposition where the previous Government  was making decisions against the national interest. Where they were making decisions that led to  massive increases in illegal boat arrivals. Decisions that would make us less competitive  internationally like the introduction of the carbon tax and the mining tax. We supported the  previous Government when they made decisions that were good for Australia. It is important for  Australia that we get our Budget under control. It is true to say that Bill Shorten and the Labor  party under Bill Shorten has been quite reckless and irresponsible, even more reckless and  irresponsible than the previous Labor Governments under Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard.

STUART BOCKING: Today you have seen now, he is saying, look the Government can’t afford a  dull Budget which is probably right. We have got to crack on with reform, but it is very difficult isn’t  it up against a whole group of vested interest parties not to mention of course a Labor Opposition  which is determined to make things as difficult as it can. We get some snippets of change in the  mix of child care and even without even seeing what is happening, they are up in arms saying  well this is no good, people will miss out. Someone has to miss out don’t they?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Bill Shorten is in no position to lecture the Government about the need for  economic reform. Bill Shorten is not even able to convince the Labor party to support their own  savings that they initiated and banked in their last Budget in Government. Now when it comes to  our decisions, we have made some judgments as we have already flagged that there is a need  for additional investment in some areas. For example, we are committed to helping families get  more affordable access to high quality child care. But what we have also said is that in order to be  able to be able to afford that, we need to make savings in other areas. Our message to the Labor  party and to the Parliament overall is that if you want us to help families access more affordable  childcare, then you have got to help us get some of these savings through the Parliament to pay  for it.

STUART BOCKING: The point is though, eventually if we are going to improve things, and that’s  almost marking time, if we find savings somewhere else though we can spend money on  something else. If we are to make genuine reforms to the Budget, some people have got to miss  out, they have these winners and losers when Budget time rolls around, the list of losers has to  be pretty long doesn’t it?

MATHIAS CORMANN: There are two aspects that are very important though when it comes to  Budget repair. Firstly, stronger economic growth will lead to, over time, to stronger revenue for  Government, and will help to lift living standards. So when we talk about making additional  investments in childcare for example, that is part of our broader economic plan to strengthen  growth which will in turn over time help with Budget repair. Having said that, we want to do that in  an economically and fiscally responsible way, by paying for it with savings in other areas. So we  want to replace lower quality spending with higher quality spending that delivers better outcomes.

STUART BOCKING: So are you planning now to dump these changes to the way pensions  would be indexed after the next election?

MATHIAS CORMANN: There has been some speculation over the weekend. I’m going to leave it  to Joe Hockey in the Budget and Scott Morrison as the Social Services Minister to make these  relevant announcements. But let me make the general point, we remain absolutely committed to

ensuring that the aged pension as a very important safety net for many, many Australians,  remains sustainable, remains affordable in the economy over the medium to long term. That has  very much been our focus as we have been putting this Budget together.

STUART BOCKING: Now of course there has been all sorts of talk about a snap poll post  Budget. Where’s that sort of talk coming from? Is it mere speculation, or is there something to it?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I’ve got no idea where it comes from. I did read those reports over the  weekend. Let me tell you unequivocally that we are committed to serving our full term. We were  elected to work for the Australian people for three years. There is much more work to be done  and we are focused on doing that job that needs doing.

STUART BOCKING: This story from the Productivity Commission today talking about plans to  sell the right to immigrate to Australia. Now you’re originally from Belgium many years ago. How  does that idea sit with you?

MATHIAS CORMANN: It is not Government policy. It’s not something that we’ve put forward, it is  something that they have put forward. I don’t think that that is something that we’ll be looking at  any time soon.

STUART BOCKING: You wouldn’t see the benefits, obviously there would be a very convenient  way of plugging some holes in the Budget, but you don’t think it’s a fair way to run an immigration  program, given you are someone who was part of it many years ago?

MATHIAS CORMANN: As a general comment, migrants to Australia have made a very  significant contribution to our country. Most of us, one way or another, in our past, have got a  migrant background. Australia as we know it today has been built by migrants and so I think we  are a great migrant success story as a country and I think that will continue to be the case into the  future.

STUART BOCKING: There are some economists suggesting a short sharp recession might be  the only way to focus the minds on some when it comes to Budget repair. What’s your take on  that? We wouldn’t have to get to that point, would we?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Our focus is on keeping the economy growing and in fact our focus is on  strengthening growth so that we can strengthen opportunity and job creation. That is not  something that we are entertaining in any way, shape or form.

STUART BOCKING: Are you worried about lifting taxes now given that goes against the grain of  a smaller taxing Government? Talk today that you may scrap plans for a new charge on internet  shopping.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Without going into the specifics about Budget speculation, it is very  important that we keep our taxes as a share of the economy at a competitive level. The  conversation ought to be about how we can raise the necessary revenue for Government in the  most efficient way possible, not about increasing taxes overall. Because if you increase taxes  overall by too much, essentially you start hurting economic growth, you start hurting jobs growth,  in fact you start creating drivers for additional unemployment and that is not what we want to do.  We want to strengthen growth and that means that we’ve got to focus on lower, simpler, more  efficient taxes in order to facilitate stronger growth.

STUART BOCKING: In light of what happened last week, are there plans to cut aid to Indonesia?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We have made all of the announcements in relation to the overall aid  budget in last year’s Budget and in the half-yearly update before Christmas last year. There will  be some announcements at Budget time this year about how some of these broader cuts to the  aid budget will be applied to individual countries and that will be a matter for the Foreign Minister  to announce next week.

STUART BOCKING: But nothing specifically in relation to Indonesia before then?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The Foreign Minister will be announcing the specific allocation of the aid  Budget to specific countries.

STUART BOCKING: I appreciate your time this morning Minister, thank you.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Always good to talk to you.

STUART BOCKING: All the best to you, thank you. The Finance Minister, Senator Mathias  Cormann.

[ENDS]



