





THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC AM  THURSDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2015

SUBJECT/S:  Human Rights Commission Report into Children in Detention

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN: The most comprehensive inquiry in a decade into the  detention of asylum seeker children has found it causes such 'significant mental and  physical illness' that a royal commission should be called.

The Human Rights Commission says the long-term health effects on children should be  investigated.

It's one of 16 recommendations in a report which details hundreds of cases of self-harm,  and finds detainee children as young as three are suffering depression.

The Government has already rejected the commission's findings that it's in breach of  Australia's international obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child and  has questioned the motivation of the commissioner.

From Canberra, Naomi Woodley reports.

NAOMI WOODLEY: The Human Rights Commission has called its report "The  Forgotten Children" and it makes for grim reading. Children interviewed describe  detention as "prison-like, depressing and crazy making". Others felt they would die  before being released.



In the 15 months from January 2013, there were 233 assaults in detention involving  children, and 128 harmed themselves.

RICHARD MARLES: Those stories contained in the report are obviously horrific, and  it's important that we understand them as deeply as we possibly can to make sure that  nothing like this ever happens again.

NAOMI WOODLEY: Labor's Immigration spokesman Richard Marles concedes the  report raises difficult questions for his party, as well as the current government.

RICHARD MARLES: But I think what comes from this report is a sense that the system  can be improved, it needs to be improved. Obviously things need to be done better so  that kids can be taken out of this situation as quickly as is practicable.

NAOMI WOODLEY: The report makes 16 recommendations, including that all children  and families in Australia and on Nauru should be released into the community within  four weeks; that the detention facilities on Christmas Island should be shut down, and  that an independent person replace the Immigration Minister as the guardian for  unaccompanied children.

It also says there should be a royal commission to look at the long term health effects of  the detention policy, and the conditions which have led to the 33 reported sexual  assaults listed in the report.

SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: I think this report really unveils an awful culture of  institutionalised child abuse.

NAOMI WOODLEY: The Greens Senator Sarah Hanson Young backs the call for a  further inquiry.

SARAH HANSON-YOUNG: I mean, there are 105 children, I note, on suicide watch,  ten of those children under the age of 10. These statistics come from medical reports,  it's all documented.

The Government knows this has been going on - this government and the previous  government. A royal commission is absolutely warranted.

NAOMI WOODLEY: Labor's spokesman Richard Marles says they'll consider the report  before responding to the recommendations, but he says Labor will maintain a policy of  sending asylum seekers offshore.

RICHARD MARLES: We do believe that offshore processing is playing an important  role.

Now, in saying that, offshore processing needs to be done in a way which is providing  people with safe, dignified and humane refuge and we do have concerns about whether  the current situation meets that description. And I'd make the point that in the report  itself it says that children should only be processed offshore where their human rights  are being respected.

NAOMI WOODLEY: A statement from the Attorney-General was tabled alongside the  report. George Brandis says the Government is disappointed and surprised the inquiry  wasn't conducted when the number of children in detention was close to two thousand  under the previous Labor government.

He rejects that Australia is breaching its international obligations, and says many of the  recommendations have already been addressed by the Government.

But his response doesn't specifically address the call for a royal commission.

MICHAEL BRISSENDEN: Naomi Woodley reporting.



Ends

MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563

