

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RN BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 29 APRIL 2015

SUBJECT/ S: Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran

ELLEN FANNING: First of all, your thoughts this morning following the execution of  Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well our first  thoughts of course are with the families and friends of these two young men. For them  it’s been a decade of dashed hopes and their worst fears realised. The legal teams that  have worked so hard on behalf of these young men, the consular staff and Australian  officials that have tried to help them, all of them this morning would be absolutely  devastated by this outcome, particularly as there are still legal processes underway that  should have been allowed to be completed. We support the Government in their  decision to recall our Ambassador. We support the Government in their decision to  continue to suspend high level ministerial visits in both directions. I think anything  beyond that is a discussion for another day.

FANNING: How incredible is it that the Government has yet to be formally notified of  these executions as we watch coffins come off in ambulances?

PLIBERSEK: Look I think the treatment of the families of these young men and indeed  the refusal of the Indonesian Government to deal, I think fairly, with the Australian  Government in terms of informing them this morning but over the course of this terrible

time has been quite reprehensible. If you saw the footage of the families of these  young men being jostled yesterday and pushed around through a crowd, it is  completely unacceptable. And of course we’ve had a long and close relationship with  Indonesia and we hope our relationship will continue to be a good one in the future but  we are deeply saddened and deeply troubled and I understand that many Australians  are deeply angered.

FANNING: You added your voice in a very personal way to the pleas, not demands,  but pleas for the lives of these young men to be spared and you cited the example of  your own husband who spent time in gaol on drugs charges and is a shining example of  a life rehabilitated. That was very much the tone, of pleading, how hard is it to watch  what we’ve seen in response?

PLIBERSEK: We were pleading for mercy because we knew that the Indonesia  President had the ability, or we believed he had the ability to grant clemency in this  case and we didn’t want to make this a test of strength for him. We believe that a  strong person can show their strength by granting mercy. It is devastating because of  course the death penalty robs a person of their ability to repay their debt to society.  And in fact the death of these two young men robs the Indonesian justice system of an  example of successful rehabilitation within its justice system. It also, frankly, robs  Indonesia of an ability to plead for their own citizens, 230 of them on death row in  countries around the world. How can it be that Indonesia would expect the  governments of other nations to listen to their pleas for their own citizens when they  have ignored our pleas for clemency?

FANNING: The Foreign Minister Julie Bishop has declared herself dismayed at  Indonesia’s response, not just in pushing ahead with the executions but all the rest of  it; the announcement of the timing of this on Anzac Day, a series of what seem to be,  or could be interpreted as deliberate slights, calculated to offend. How do you interpret  them?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think at the very least, the handling of this has been chaotic and  insensitive.

FANNING: That’s a generous description of it. Do you think it has been calculated to  cause offence to Australia?

PLIBERSEK: I don’t think today is the day to talk about these things. Today our focus  must be on the families and friends of these young men, their supporters and the  principled position that wherever Australia can, we should speak up against the death  penalty, wherever it is applied, to whomever it is applied. This is not just about our  sadness of these young men, although that is the centre of our feeling and our effort  today; it is about the principled position that the death penalty is wrong. Mistakes have

been made before, if you apply the death penalty, a person can never repay their debt  to society.

FANNING: The action we’ve taken today to recall Paul Grigson for consultation, I  mean it could prompt a tit for tat response from Jakarta. Do you anticipate that?

PLIBERSEK: Well it is frankly very difficult to predict what the response might be from  Jakarta.

FANNING: That’s an extraordinary statement to make after all these decades of  relations with Indonesia, that we don’t know how this President and this administration  are likely to respond. Do you find that extraordinary?

PLIBERSEK: I find it difficult to comprehend that not only have our pleas for clemency  been ignored, that’s one thing certainly, but the examples of insensitivity that you’ve  described before are very difficult to understand.

FANNING: All of this has to be weighed against a significant relationship with a  significant neighbour, our efforts to combat terrorism, the discussions we have with  Indonesia about refugees coming by boat to Australia. Within that context, how  significant is this rupture today and how significant can it be allowed to be?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s certainly a time that many Australians feel deeply  saddened and angered by the actions of the Indonesian Government but not only do  we have a significant strategic relationship with Indonesia as you’ve described, we’ve  also got other Australians in prison in Indonesia. We need to consider their interests  too. So we will of course work to restore a better understanding between our nations.  We have to do that.

FANNING: On the question of President Joko Widodo, and clearly this is perhaps not a  conversation for today but how difficult is it going to be during this president’s  administration to achieve that rapprochement?

PLIBERSEK: I don’t think it’s a day to personalise any of the sadness that we’re  feeling. Our plea to the President was for mercy and our plea was to say to him ‘You  can show strength by being merciful’ and of course we’re terribly saddened that he  didn’t accept that argument from Australia.

FANNING: I can look into your face now and see how hard it’s hit you and we saw  Julie Bishop on television, a woman who’d been up all night very clearly. How hard has  it hit you and has it hit your colleagues because Julie Bishop is your colleague very  much today?

PLIBERSEK: I think it’s hit all of us very hard and hit many, many Australians very  hard too. The people that I’ve been speaking to in recent days and weeks feel so  strongly the injustice of two young men spending ten years in gaol, putting so much  effort into reforming themselves, putting so much effort into supporting other prisoners  including it’s reported in the last hours offering comfort to the other prisoners who were  facing the firing squad with them. It seems particularly cruel to spend ten years in gaol  and then to have this sentence applied. In our prison system of course they would have  expected of course to be seriously punished, but to one day leave prison and have the  opportunity of repaying their debt to society. To have that taken from them is I think  very difficult for their families and friends to see. I think this aspect of - they are  success stories of the Indonesian justice system because they have been able to  reform. The prison governor has said so, other prisoners have spoken about the  positive influence that they had in turning the lives around of other prisoners. It seems  particularly cruel given all of those changes that these men have made in their lives. No  one minimises their crime, their crime was a very serious crime. And no one I think  disrespects the rights of the Indonesian legal system to take strong action against drug  trafficking in their nation. Of course we respect that. But to spend ten years in gaol and  then to have this sentence applied does seem like a double punishment.

FANNING: Thank you so much for coming up this morning and speaking to us.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

