

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TV INTERVIEW

ABC CAPITAL HILL

WEDNESDAY, 11 MAY 2016

SUBJECTS: Labor’s investment in schools, immigration policy, Anthony Albanese, Greens-Liberals’

deal, election of new President of the Philippines.

GREG JENNETT, ABC CAPITAL HILL: Bill Shorten's deputy Tanya Plibersek today is campaigning in the

marginal seat of Corangamite in Victoria held by the Liberal's Sarah Henderson. We spoke to her about the

GDP benefits of extra spending on education just a moment ago.

JENNETT: Tanya Plibersek, you're campaigning in Corangamite there and Labor's been making a lot

wherever it goes about the economic benefits that come from extra investment in education. Bill Shorten

today said that a 2.8 per cent growth in GDP would come straight away from this sort of investment. What

does Labor mean by straight away - as soon as the next group of Year 12 students leave school?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE LABOR PARTY: Well, I think you're kind of missing the

point by being caught up in the semantics of today's discussion. Common sense tells you, and international

evidence shows, that investment in education has an immediate and a long-term pay off. The immediate

payoff is in the lifetime of the children as they're leaving school - getting better jobs, higher-paid jobs,

engaging more in the economy. You've got more kids completing school and going into higher-paid jobs

when they do. But the long-term benefits for our economy are obvious also. I think there is pretty general

agreement that our economy's changing, that there are jobs that we haven't even thought of yet that our kids

will be doing in ten and twenty years' time and the best way of making the most of those changes, taking

advantage of them, is having a highly-skilled, highly-educated workforce. I'm, as you said, in Geelong today

in...

JENNETT: So the immediate benefit when you measure it, is more like three or four decades of work by the

next group of school leavers is it?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think every parent knows that their own kid, when they get a great education starts to

benefit from that right through their childhood - but it's when they leave school that the economic benefit for

our nation is most obvious. One of the outcomes that we are attaching to the extra funding, which in an

electorate like Corangamite that I'm visiting today for example, means an extra $17 million for schools over

the next two years, the immediate benefits are - in more kids graduating, finishing Year 12. We know children

who finish Year 12 are more likely to have better long-term educational and employment outcomes. We have

an expectation that more of those young people will go on to further study through vocational education or

university, and they'll be able to do the jobs of this changing economy that we're hearing so much about. One

of the expectations of the Gonski....

JENNETT: It's just that where you measure off those benefits in GDP, it's where you measure them off in

GDP it gets a bit confusing - is it a 2.8% in the short term or over decades?

PLIBERSEK: Well, it's an immediate benefit that will grow over time as more children graduate with higher

skills.

JENNETT: Alright, let's change tack now to another policy front - on boat turn backs. Yet another Labor

figure, this time Lisa Singh in Tasmania has said, 'of course I don't want turnbacks to happen if that's what

you are asking me - I don't think anyone in our party does'. But that is precisely Labor policy, do you think

turnbacks should happen?

PLIBERSEK: Well, our policy was very vigorously debated at our National Conference and we concluded as

a group that turnbacks need to be one of the policy options available to us, to stop people drowning at sea.

We absolutely don't want to see thousands of people coming to Australia - ripped off, exploited by criminals

who don't care whether these people make it or not. They don't care whether this dangerous journey ends

the life of an asylum seeker. Nobody wants to see that start again - so we've said that turnbacks have to be

one of the policy options available to us.

JENNETT: And you support that?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it's plain that it has to be one of the policy options available to us - of course I

support it.

JENNETT: Alright, back on your home front - a colleague in Sydney, Anthony Albanese has the Daily

Telegraph there - a News Corporation paper - shouting out today 'save our Albo'. Do you think as an astute

watcher of these things that that is helpful to have that particular publication campaigning in his corner or

even counterproductive?

PLIBERSEK: I'm sure it's not counterproductive, he's a very popular figure and I'm sure the Daily Telegraph

are expressing the views of many Australians - particularly many Sydney-siders in wanting to see Anthony

Albanese returned. I guess what it does draw attention to is the...

JENNETT: You face a similar contest in your own electorate though. Do you look forward to a 'save our

Tanya' headline?

PLIBERSEK: I'm looking forward to a ringing endorsement from the ABC and Fairfax Media and News

Limited - if they'll give it to me that'll be fantastic. But what it does draw attention to is the deal that the

Greens have done with the Liberals that's spilled over from Michael Kroger's Victorian arrangement to, now it

seems the Liberals will be preferencing the Greens, in Anthony's seat and mine. You've got to ask yourself

why Michael Kroger would rather see a Green elected in Sydney and Grayndler than a Labor person. A

simple answer is for every seat that goes to the Greens, Labor is one seat further from forming government

and Malcolm Turnbull is one seat closer.

JENNETT: And were it to succeed, the nation would be potentially one step closer towards yet another hung

parliament. In that event, do you think a deal with the Greens, like we had back in Julia Gillard's time, or a re-run election, would be more preferable?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I thought Bill's comment yesterday about telling the Greens “they're dreaming” if they

think that we're going to go into a coalition with them was pretty astute actually and then Adam Bandt

replying that “dreams sometimes come true”. I don't know about his dreams but that's more of a nightmare

for the average Australian. I think we achieved an enormous amount during the years of the minority

government and I'm really proud of the things that we achieved - like the National Disability Insurance

Scheme - but it was a torturous process. It was a very difficult time and it gave Tony Abbott the opportunity to

make hay. Now, I should put out actually that Tony Abbott was very keen to form a coalition government with

the Greens and the independents and wasn't able to. So it is a little bit rich for the Liberals now to be

pretending that they never would have gone into an arrangement with the Greens and the crossbenchers.

We're playing to win - we don't want to return to that time.

JENNETT: Alright, just finally in your own portfolio area Tanya, the Philippines has a new president in

Rodrigo Duterte and he has had some things to say - joking about the rape of an Australian missionary - do

you welcome or condemn him on this occasion?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think the comments that you're pointing to were obviously appalling, and I'd also say that

the people of the Philippines fought very hard for their democracy and for human rights in the Philippines and

it's very important to protect and defend that democracy and those human rights. The President obviously

has won an election and we hope this will be a period of stability, of growth, of democracy and of human

rights for the people of the Philippines.

JENNETT: Alright Tanya Plibersek we'll leave it there on that score and let you get back to campaigning in

Victoria. Thanks for your time.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS





