1







The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer





TRANSCRIPT

CHANNEL 9, WEEKEND TODAY  SUNDAY 1 MAY 2016



E&OE

Subjects:  Budget  2016;  Turnbull  Government’s  quality  reforms  needed  to  get  all Australian  students  ahead;  Turnbull  Government  says  no  to  Labor’s  housing  tax;  Turnbull Government’s  actions  on  Multinational  Tax  Avoidance;  Labor’s  decision  to  vote  against  the Turnbull  Government’s Combating Multinational Tax Avoidance legislation; future submarine program.

LAURIE OAKES: Treasurer, welcome to the traditional pre-budget interview.

TREASURER: Great to be here with you, Laurie.

OAKES: There's a lot riding on this Budget. People say in fact the election result could ride on it. Are  you nervous?

TREASURER:  What  is  riding  on  it  is  the  successful  transition  of  our  economy  from  the mining  investment boom through to a more broad, diversified, stronger new economy. That is what the  Budget needs to address. It needs to have an economic plan to manage that transition successfully  and we are managing it successfully. I mean, we have got 3 per cent growth from last year, around  300,000 jobs. So the Budget is actually about the economy. It is about jobs and it is about growth.  There will be plenty of talk about politics and all of that sort of thing, but for me, it's about us  ensuring that we can manage that transition and continue to do it well.

OAKES: Within a week of this Budget speech, Malcolm Turnbull will go to the Governor-General,  both Houses dissolved so they can have a July 2 election. Isn't this effectively the Coalition's election  manifesto?

TREASURER: What it is is the Government's national economic plan for jobs and growth and a strong  new economy. That is what it is. That is what we will be saying to the Australian people is needed to  ensure that we can continue to do well. There is a lot riding on ensuring that we get this plan right.  And that we stick to this plan, as we will, and we get an endorsement for this plan because that is  what is going to be there to support the jobs and the growth in the future. We will do that by not  spending  more  than  we  save.  We  are  going  to  do  it  by  ensuring  that  we  don't  increase  the tax  burden  on  the  Australian  economy  at  this  very  critical  time  over  and  above  what  the current  projections are. These are things that you have to get right and that is the plan that we are putting  to the Australian people.

OAKES:  Ok  but  it  is  still  the  start of  an  election  campaign.  Will  you  have  money  for election  sweeteners, election goodies?

TREASURER: This is not a Budget and not a time for Governments to be throwing money around or  for others to be throwing money around. What you have to do is you have to spend wisely and you  have to spend carefully. You have to spend in a very targeted way. And you don't spend more than

2

you save and you don't increase your spending based on a higher and higher tax burden on the  Australian  economy.  Our  economic  plan  is  all  about  ensuring  that  we  live  within  our means.  Australians are living within their means. They are living within their means in their business. They  are ensuring that they're spending goes further with what they are doing. And the Government has  to do the same and that's what this Budget will do.

OAKES:  Are  you  saying  this  will  be  the  first  budget  in  living  memory  that  won't  have election  sweeteners in it? Your first re-election Budget?

TREASURER: This Budget is about an economic plan. It is not a typical Budget, Laurie. I'm really up-  front about that. It is not a typical Budget. It is a Budget that has to be responsible and focussed on  the economic plan that the country needs.

OAKES: What about yesterday's leak about tax cuts for people earning $80,000 and above starting  the day after the election, that will certainly be seen as an attempt to win votes, won't it?

TREASURER: Well, I'm not going to comment on the speculation in the papers. The announcements  will be made on Tuesday night.

OAKES: Christopher Pyne virtually confirmed it yesterday.

TREASURER: I'm not going to comment on that speculation other than to say this - we have to clear  the  way  for  people  in  this  economy.  The  people  are  actually  making  this  economy  work  at the  moment  Laurie,  the  ones  that  are  successively  making  this  transition  work  are  small  and medium  sized businesses. They are people out there earning average wages. We need to ensure that we are  clearing the way for them to continue to do that because they are the hope of the side. They are the  ones that actually will see all of us, the whole economy, go through this transition. So, in focussing  on those who we think you need to absolutely back in to make the economy work, well, that's a  good plan.

OAKES: Ok, you are playing down the suggestion of election sweeteners. What about nasties? Will  there be much in this Budget that will alienate voters?

TREASURER:  We  will  continue  to  ensure  Government  expenditure  as  a  share  of  the economy  reduces. It must. The way that you fix your Budget, the way that you fix the problems in the Budget  and return the Budget to balance is by getting your expenditure under control and by growing the  economy  so  revenues  can  lift  with  that  growing  economy.  Now,  that  is  how  you  get  back  to a  sustainable  Budget  balance.  You  don't  get  there  by  whacking  up  a  massive  tax  burden  on the  Australian economy. Not only is that not a sustainable position to be in for the long-term but it is just  hurting the Australian economy at the most sensitive time in this transition. Taxing and just throwing  money around to try to spend all of those taxes is not a good plan for jobs and growth.

OAKES: But will there be big cuts in this Budget?

TREASURER: There will be continued discipline. Continued discipline, Laurie.

OAKES: Is that a yes?

TREASURER:  It  is  continued  discipline  which  we  have  been  showing.  There  are  always difficult  decisions in all Budgets because, for example, in health and education, we have got commitments in  this Budget. We have already outlined the commitments on health of $2.9 billion and I can confirm  also the $1.2 billion additional that will be in the Budget and Forward Estimates which gives, I think,  families assurances about critical things. But we pay for those additional commitments through real  targeting of our expenditure in other areas and that is how you make these commitments. That is

3

why our commitments in health and education are affordable. We are not spending money we don't  have. We are not spending money we haven't saved. We are not increasing the deficit to do it. We  are not increasing taxes to do it. It's affordable. It's real money. Unlike what we saw from the Gillard  Government throwing money around, making promises on health and education, and the ultimate  outcome of that is people are either left disappointed or they pay more tax for it.

OAKES:  You  mentioned  the  $1.2  billion  that  we  read  this  morning  will  be  in  the  Budget for  disadvantaged schools…

TREASURER:  More  than  that,  $1.2billion  for  schools  funding  and  that  would  mean  that  over the  Budget and Forward Estimates...

OAKES: Not just disadvantaged.

TREASURER: That's right. I can tell you today that in addition to that $1.2 billion, there will be $118  million over two years, particularly to support disabled children in schools. That's another important  program and that's on top of the $1.2 billion. But it's all paid for. It's all real money. It's all money  that Australian families can rely on because we have done the work to be able to pay for it.

OAKES: Now, there are tight conditions on this $1.2 billion. What are they?

TREASURER: That’s right. Those conditions, well, Minister Birmingham and the Prime Minister will  make  further  announcements  about  this  but  when  you  are  spending  money,  you've  got  to   make  sure it goes further in this economy. Families understand that. Businesses understand that. So you  just don't throw money around. You make sure that there are real conditions and outcomes that we  want from this. So we do want our children to be able to be doing better in math and in English and  in their reading and all the basics. We want to make sure they are doing that and we also want to  make sure that it is focussed on lifting the performance of our teachers as well. We have got great  teachers in this country. I was taught by public school teachers all the way through my life, as was  my wife. So, I'm a big believer in the public education system. We have got to make sure that the  teacher quality is there to support our children.

OAKES: But this is basically Gonski chop back, isn't it?

TREASURER: What this is is an affordable plan for growth in education expenditure. Our education  expenditure will increase by more than 25 per cent over the Budget and forward estimates and will  come close to $20 billion at the end of that period. Now, that is a significant increase in investment  in education.

OAKES: It's also a lot less than Gonski wanted and a lot less than Labor is promising?

TREASURER: Well, Labor is promising higher taxes. That's what they are promising. And what they  are promising is an unfunded plan over the longer period of time. What I'm saying is we will spend  the money that is affordable. We will spend it in a way which is disciplined. And we will spend it in a  way which gets outcomes. We have had a growth in spending in education over the last 10 years by  both sides of politics. But we haven't been getting the outcomes in education at the same time. So  throwing money around isn't the answer. Spending money wisely and making that dollar go further  is what you will see in this Budget for our children and education.

OAKES: With a lot of help though from Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey, your Government now has the  reputation of being cutters when it comes to health and education. Now, doesn't sound as though  the Budget is going to turn that around.  Health and education will be big election issues.

4

TREASURER: And we are increasing education spending by over 25 per cent over the next four years.  So I mean, I'm not suggesting that that can do everything that everyone would like in education but  it's affordable, Laurie. I mean, you just can't go and spend money you don't have. That's what the  Labor Party do.

OAKES: Will the states accept that? The NSW Coalition Government has been one of the leading  critics of the federal Government’s education cutbacks and health.

TREASURER: The Commonwealth Government accounts for more than half of all education spending  done by the states, once you take account of all the special purpose payments and other payments  and transfers that are made to the states. More than half of all funding of education paid for by  states is actually as a result of the funds they get from the Commonwealth Government. So we are  more than an equal partner in the investment in schools and particularly public schools around the  country. We will continue to invest in that. The funding for public schools alone under this plan  increases by a third over the Budget and Forward Estimates. Now, we will spend responsibly at our  level and states need to spend responsibly at their level and their there need to be ties otherwise it  will just be spent on higher and higher wages and blow outs and other expenditures which we have  seen from the states...

OAKES: But the states say they can't afford any more.

TREASURER: Well, the states have to manage their budgets well as well and they are making their  own decisions about their own priorities. Whether it is in the infrastructure they are spending or in  Victoria’s case they are spending over a billion dollars on actually not building the East West Link.  They have got to be accountable for their expenditure. We will be accountable for ours. What we  are  doing  on  education  and  health,  because  on  health  there  is  also  $2.9  billion  extra  that we  announced at the COAG meeting which they all agreed to and accepted. So we have a clear plan to  affordably fund what you need to do in health and education and that's what the Budget will do.  Why? Because we have got our expenditure under control, Laurie - that is the key. That is how you  can make these commitments.

OAKES: You say that but expenditure has increased since Malcolm Turnbull became Prime Minister.

TREASURER:  That's  actually  not  true,  Laurie.  Expenditure  as  a  share  of  the  economy  has not  increased. In the MYEFO statement released last December, it showed that our policy decisions on  spending meant they were more than covered off by the savings we made. That will be the same  again in this Budget. So, where there are additional commitments, like for the additional refugees  that we have taken in under the plan regarding Syria, these were things that we found the savings  for to be able to pay for. We don't do it by putting up taxes.

OAKES: But you are going to introduce the seniors tax, as Tony Abbott calls it, at the high end of  super.

TREASURER:  We  will  deal  with  integrity  in  the  tax  system.  We  will  ensure  that  what  are   very  generous tax concessions for superannuation for those on very, very high incomes, we have made  no  secret  about  the  fact  that  we  will  be  looking  at  those  measures  and  those  things  will be  announced in the Budget. We have also made no secret about the fact that we will be cracking down  further  on  multinationals.  We  put  legislation  in  the  Parliament  last  year  to  crack  down on  multinational tax avoidance and the Labor Party voted against it. They actually voted against making  it illegal for multinationals to avoid tax.

OAKES: A few quick questions. The Reserve Bank board meets on Tuesday to consider an interest  rate cut. Will the Governor Glenn Stevens be briefed on the Budget before that meeting so they can  take into account what you will be doing?

5

TREASURER: Look, the Secretary of the Treasury is a member of the Reserve Bank board. I'm not  going to go into the sort of discussions that I would have with the Reserve Bank Governor. I don't  think that would be very appropriate at all. But he has an important job to do that day, as do I…

OAKES: But he won't be able to take the Budget into account?

TREASURER: That is a matter between the Reserve Bank, Treasury and ourselves but what I'm saying  is I have absolute faith in Glenn Stevens. He has been an extraordinary Governor of our Reserve  Bank...

OAKES: Why can't the public know whether you are telling the Reserve Bank what you are up to?

TREASURER: These matters are market sensitive, Laurie and I am not about to...

OAKES: But the fact that you have discussions.

TREASURER: We talk all the time. I talk to Glenn regularly and you can be quite assured that Glenn  Stevens will be in a very good position to be informed for the decisions he has to make on that day.

OAKES: I can't quite see how it affects the markets if you say you will tell Glenn what's in the Budget.

TREASURER: We’ll have to have a different view on that.

OAKES: I suppose that’s right. Will the Budget make any meaningful inroads into debt?

TREASURER: Debt, as long as we have got a deficit, debt will obviously continue to increase and that  is why we have to reduce the deficit and the deficit will fall over the Budget and Forward Estimates  in the statement I release on Tuesday night.

OAKES: Will it fall in the Budget?

TREASURER: There is still a deficit. So debt will increase so long as you have a deficit by definition.

OAKES: But what about the deficit itself, will that improve?

TREASURER: The deficit will decrease over the Budget and Forward Estimates and we will see both  gross and net debt peak over about the next five or six years and then it will start to fall. That is  consistent with the projections we put forward in earlier statements. But to start reducing the debt,  you've got to get the deficit down. To get the deficit down, you've got to keep your spending down  and you don't do that, you don’t get a sustainable path back to Budget balance by increasing the tax  burden on the Australian economy. That just retards growth over the longer term and it punishes  the economy at a time when we need it to perform at its best.

OAKES: You were saying a few months ago that there were excesses in the way negative gearing  works. Have those excesses suddenly disappeared? If not why aren’t you acting on it?

TREASURER: The first thing you've got to do is when you are looking at tax changes is you have got to  do no harm. You have got to make changes that do no harm to the Australian economy. Our systems  are  never  perfect  but  when  you  look  across  the  negative  gearing  in  particular,  which is  predominantly used by mum and dad investors, it is police officers, its teachers, its nurses, its train  drivers - they are the people who actually do negative gearing. At the upper end, there are people  who use it as well. But if you were to make changes there, you have got to think about what will be  the impact on the housing market itself and what will it do to the confidence of people and the value

6

of their own home. One of the reasons why our economy has done so well has been the confidence  of householders to be out there and participating in this economy. Now, if you want to crack the  confidence and crush the confidence of Australians, then start playing around with the value of their  family home, which is what Labor is proposing to do with their quite reckless proposal. We won't be  doing that. For those reasons.

OAKES: Now you keep saying that Australia, the Government, has to live within its means. So how do  you reconcile that with the submarine decision the other day where the Government has agreed to  pay $35 billion in today's dollars for 12 French submarines when they could have got 12 Germany  submarines for maximum of 20 billion?

TREASURER: Well, you're not on the National Security Committee, Laurie. I am and I am aware of  what are the numbers...

OAKES: I know that. You're on the committee and you pay the bills.

TREASURER: I tell you what this defence decision does, of course it provides for our long-term  defence needs and interests. But economically, as the Treasurer, what it means is by building these  submarines in Australia, we are enabling a transformation of our defence industry...

OAKES: The German submarines would have been built here as well. In fact the Germans want to  build all 12 here. The French want to build two in France.

TREASURER: That is not what will happen.

OAKES: But why pick the vastly more expensive one if we are living within our means?

TREASURER:  That  was  the  unequivocal  recommendation  of  those  who  ran  a  meticulous process  which was overseen not just by those peer reviewed here in Australia but some of the best defence  minds in the world. So there will be lots of commentators, Laurie…

OAKES:  Shock  horror,  bureaucrats  want  to  spend  a  lot  of  money.  You  are  saying  we   should live  within our means.

TREASURER:  What  I'm  saying  is  we  are  going  to  invest  in  Australian  jobs,  we’re  going  to  invest in  Australia...

OAKES: Australian jobs either way.

TREASURER: No, no, not necessarily. Not necessarily.

OAKES: Under the German bid it would all have been done here.

TREASURER:  Not  necessarily.  This  bid  that  we  have  entered  into  a  negotiation  on,  so  it's a  negotiations now, designs have not even been drawn up yet in terms of what the submarine might  be but the point about the defence decision, it is an investment in the transformative power in the  manufacturing industries - that is what we want to see happen. High-tech jobs in Australia will come  from this decision.

OAKES: Would the Germans not have provided high-tech jobs?

TREASURER: If it was the best bid Laurie then the defence chiefs…

OAKES: You are paying nearly twice as much.

7

TREASURER: No, that’s not true.

OAKES: Where are we living within our means?

TREASURER: Laurie, you have got to build the thing that the country needs. Step number one…

OAKES: The country needs, you say, conventional diesel electric submarines. The French specialise in  nuclear submarines. The Germans specialise in conventional diesel electric submarines. Where is the  logic?

TREASURER:  Laurie,  the  decision  we  have  taken  is  completely  in  accord  with  the  strong and  unambiguous recommendation who know far more about this than frankly you and I put together  multiplied by 20…

OAKES: The French don't make many conventional subs, made you an offer for subs that are twice as  good, do you think?

TREASURER: It meets the requirements more than any other bid.

OAKES: And it is vastly expensive.

TREASURER: And it invests in Australian jobs, high-tech jobs for decades to come…

OAKES: So does the German bid.

TREASURER: …and that is what we are investing in. If the other bid was a better bid, then that would  be the bid they recommended but it wasn't, Laurie. You’re suggesting that we should have gone  against the advice...

OAKES: What I'm saying to you is people in the field...

TREASURER: …of people who have gone through this from top to bottom, over months and months  and  months  and  they  have  come  up  with  a  clear  recommendation  which  is  understood and  supported by peers, both here and overseas, and it is the right decision but more importantly, it is  the right decision for the Australian economy. This decision will produce jobs right across the supply  chain in Australia. And help us further in this transitioning economy...

OAKES: But so would the Germany bid. So...

TREASURER:  Laurie,  you're  making  that  assertion  on  the  basis  of  information  that,  frankly, is  questionable.

OAKES: Well, it is the bid that the Germans provided you.

TREASURER: Which was not assessed as the best bid by people who know what they are doing,  Laurie.

OAKES: People I have spoken to since you made the decision are, quite frankly, bamboozled. Some  of them say it will be another fiasco and there is a suspicion now that people in defence ultimately  want to transfer to nuclear subs, which is why they have gone with the French model.

8

TREASURER: Well, that is not the decision of the Government. The bid that the Government has  agreed to now negotiate on was the unequivocal recommendation, daylight second, when it came to  the needs and what we needed for our defence industries...

OAKES: [Inaudible]

TREASURER: The bid that was put to us was the bid that was universally recommended by those who  were tasked to do the technical work on working out what the best submarine was for Australia. As  Treasurer, the best decision was to have those built here in Australia. So, that decision is about high-  tech jobs, not just in South Australia, but right across the supply chain. You add that to what we have  done on the frigates, you add that to what we have done on the Pacific patrol boats. What this  means is it is not just about the shipyards in Perth and in Adelaide, it is about jobs right across the  country. I think Australians understand that. This is a wise investment. It is a calibrated investment  and it is a decision based on the best possible advice the Government could get on this issue.

OAKES: OK, let's hope it is not a fiasco. We thank you.

TREASURER: Thanks a lot, Laurie. Good to be with you.

(ENDS)

Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253, Kate Williams 0429 584 675

