THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC GIPPSLAND  MONDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECT/S:

HOST: The Opposition Leader Bill Shorten is visiting the Latrobe Valley today, good  morning.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning.

HOST: Now, why are you here two weeks after the announcement?

SHORTEN: Well I wanted to come down myself, I don't think Mr Turnbull's been down, I  think it's important to see some of the success stories in the Valley. That's why I'm  visiting SafeTech. It's also important to talk to the workforce who have hard hit by the  closure.

HOST: If you were Prime Minister at the moment how would you be supporting the  people of the Latrobe Valley?

SHORTEN: Well, frankly I think the State Government's doing more than the Federal  Government in terms of the size of the package, so you'd have a look at that, what are  you doing to help with replacement jobs. I think there's another conversation to be had  and I'm certainly going to listen to the workforce where they've put forward the view that  perhaps volunteers for redundancies should be called across the power industry rather  than just from Hazelwood and some of those who want to keep working in the power  industry at Hazelwood could go and fill those vacancies in those other plants.

HOST: We've had groups like the ACTU, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, calling  for a national body with federal funding to manage the transition away from coal power  so that people don't get such a short timeframe to deal with decisions like this. Do you  back that idea?

SHORTEN: Well I think there's a couple of issues in what you just said. First of all, there  should always be planning to help people displaced by change. So that’s the first thing,  this Government doesn't pay much attention, in my opinion, to blue collar workers and  what happens to them. Coal’s still going to be part of our energy mix going forward, the  decision to close Hazelwood got a lot to do with the age of the plant and the willingness

of the existing owners to reinvest in the plant. But I do think medium term this country  needs to do better when economic change happens, not to leave people behind. That's  why I want to talk to the workforce directly and I'd encourage Malcolm Turnbull to do  exactly what I'm doing today.

HOST: Is there an ETA which the ACTU is saying that an ETA, something like the  energy transition Australia authority would help that transition go a little smoother, do  you agree or do you support an idea for an ETA?

SHORTEN: Well, in the last election we put forward a policy which said that if you're  going to have change as we modernise our power generation industry then you've got  to have a just transition for the workforce. So, we would certainly be open to what the  representatives of workers are saying.

HOST: And you also mentioned the possibility for some of the Hazelwood workers to go  and work at other power stations in the Latrobe Valley, how realistic do you think that  opportunity is?

SHORTEN: Well this is where Government comes in, you've gotta lead, not follow. I  think they Government needs to sit down and talk to the generators, I mean, there’s an  obvious question here. If you are operating a power generator and you've got someone  you know who is probably approaching retirement, who wants to put their hand up and  finish up and you know that down the road there is another bloke or another woman  who is perhaps a bit younger, got a younger family, got a mortgage, very committed to  working the industry. Why wouldn't you want to try and have a system which allocates  the people who want to do another couple of decades in the industry, keep working and  someone who is coming to the skinny end of their career put their hand up and perhaps  finish up.

HOST: But is that a negotiation that needs to happen between private companies, not  necessarily government?

SHORTEN: No doubt private companies have to be involved. But I don't buy this sort of  right wing economic textbook which says that governments collect the taxes off workers  but when people and industry and small business and regions are hit by economic  change the Government says ‘that's not our business, let's just leave it to the market’. I  do think Government has a role to get involved to help smooth transitions.

HOST: What will you be saying to Hazelwood workers today? How will you..

SHORTEN: I'll be doing a lot of listening.

HOST: Yeah?

SHORTEN: Yep. Exactly. I mean the best ideas are always at the local level. You got to  get out of your ivory tower and get out and talk to people.

HOST: Well onto other issues of the day, the United States and Australia have agreed  to a one-off refugee resettlement deal for people on Manus Island and Nauru. You’ve  had some time to think about that deal now, do you support it?

SHORTEN: Well the Government hasn't briefed us, which is a bit disappointing. I've got  my representatives talking to the Government today. But the principle of it we welcome.  I remember when Labor proposed to get some of these people who were genuine  refugees resettled in Malaysia, the Green political party and the Liberals voted against  it. But I'm not going to take that sort of politics at all costs approach. We're committed to  stopping the people smugglers, Liberal and Labor working together, that’s the right way  to go. That shouldn't mean that genuine refugees are kept in indefinite detention  forever. If the Government's continued the work of Labor in terms of regional  resettlement, in principle we're really open to supporting it. But of course we need to see  the detail.

HOST: Well the ABC understands the offer will be made to the vast majority of people  still in offshore detention centres as well as those processed offshore but currently in  Australia due to medical reasons and the offer won't be made to those who have  accepted resettlement elsewhere. And those who don't accept the resettlement deal  with the US are set to be sent to Nauru and provided a 20 year visa to stay on the island  or return to their country of origin. So just on that level of detail, does that sound like a  good idea?

SHORTEN: Well, we would be foolish to just sign up to something without seeing all of  the detail, but in terms of the principles of what you enunciated, giving people the  chance to resettle in another country, that does make sense. That's consistent with our  policy. Labor's policy is that the people smugglers do the wrong thing. They put people  in jeopardy and as a result people drown at sea. We don't want them selling this false  hope that you can just live in Australia if you come by people smuggler. So we are  committed, and Liberal and Labor are on the same page, of stopping the people  smugglers and if some of the people who've been sent by people smugglers who are  now on Manus and Nauru are genuine refugees and can be resettled elsewhere, well,  that's exactly what should be done.

As for the precise detail, we reserve the right to read the measures ourselves.

HOST: Opposition Leader Bill Shorten is with us today, he will be in the Latrobe Valley  speaking with Hazelwood workers who will be out of a job after the end of March next  year. Another issue of the day is the first quarterly report from the National Disability  Insurance Scheme transition phase showing that the scheme came nowhere near  hitting its original estimates for enrolees. So why don't you think people are signing up  to the NDIS?

SHORTEN: This Government I don't think, having said I can work with them about the  people smugglers, on the National Disability Insurance Scheme, this Governments been  delinquent. I don't think their heart’s in it, I think they've interfered with the management  of the authority over seeing the National Disability Insurance Scheme. What the  National Disability Insurance Scheme is, perhaps some listeners are not aware, is it’s

the idea that if you give packages of support to people with disability and their carers  they will actually get greater control over their lives and be more efficient in terms of  how they use scarce money, but the roll out of the scheme has been marred with  problems. It's had IT problems, it's had the issues that have just been raised that you  just went to, but also the Government’s interfered with the apolitical board who were  oversighting the rollout of this marvellous new scheme so, no I think the Government’s  implementation of this is pretty poor.

HOST: We've got one text here from Joe, saying can Mr Shorten spell out his parties  response to climate change. Can you give us a short outline around that?

SHORTEN: Sure, we think that you can't delay dealing with climate change to future  generations. So we think you need to modernise our electricity generation, we need to  make sure that we've got a focus on renewable energy so we diversify the sources of  energy. We think that there's a great opportunity to invest in new technology which will  also generate new jobs, including solar power. We also believe that we need to work  with other parts of the world in terms of how we tackle climate change.

HOST: Well speaking of working with other parts of the world, US President-elect  Donald Trump has said before that he thinks climate change is a Chinese hoax. How  will you go working with him on that?

SHORTEN: Well, fingers crossed that what he said before the election isn't what he  does after the election. We'll just see how we go. The Australian/American alliance is  longer and deeper than individuals on either side of the Pacific. But in terms of climate  change, I just hope that the Federal Government doesn't totally backflip on acting on  climate change. It's not good leaving problems for future generations. So you've got to  start thinking now of what'll happen in the future, is you're gonna have to make more  drastic consequences. I mean some of the consequences of climate change include  extreme weather events, include pressure on our food supply, include increasing  insurance costs, and of course there's health costs. So not acting on climate change is  a false economy, ignoring the problem or hoping it goes away isn't a way to cure a  problem.

HOST: Bill Shorten, thank you for your time this morning. Good to see you in the  Latrobe Valley.

SHORTEN: Good to be back here, thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

