ABC774 Mornings, Melbourne, interview with Jon  Faine  Transcript, E&OE

Melbourne

31 October 2016





JOURNALIST: Julie Bishop is the Foreign Minister in Malcolm Turnbull’s Coalition Federal Government. She is also Deputy  Leader of the Liberal Party and has been for a number of different leaders in her time, I might say.  Julie Bishop, welcome back     to Melbourne.



JULIE BISHOP:  Good morning, good to be with   you.



JOURNALIST:  I will be running a Cup sweep throughout the course of today and each guest  will be asked to pick a horse or    two but we’ll come to that in a moment. First up, is Pauline Hanson calling the shots now for the Liberal Party on immigration  policy?



JULIE BISHOP:   Absolutely not.  The announcement  the Prime Minister made in relation to changes to the Migration Actis     one of the final steps that we have to take to clean up the mess that we inherited from Labor when they abandoned the       Howard Government strong border protection policies,  and we saw 50,000 people try to come to Australia, 1200 deaths at sea,   an $11 billion blow out in our border protection costs, and detention centres set up across Australia and in PNG and Nauru. So  what we have now done is ensured that all 2000 children that were in detention are now out of detention…



JOURNALIST:   Even though at the time you  said…



JULIE BISHOP: …hang on, we’ve closed 17 detention centres and this final piece is to send a very powerful message to the  criminal people smuggling syndicates that they cannot  market  an illegal pathway to  Australia.



JOURNALIST:  You are trying to shut  what’s called the ‘backdoor’ to Australia in preparation for what seems to be some sort    of a resettlement deal with the United States, Sky News are reporting this morning, can you confirm that?



JULIE BISHOP: We have constantly been looking for resettlement options and,  no I’m not confirming which countries,  but we   are talking with a number of countries about resettlement options and that will    mean…



JOURNALIST:   Is the United States one of  them?



JULIE BISHOP:  The United States is one of a number of countries that take resettlement from places like Manus and Nauru   but I’m not in a position to confirm or deny which countries are involved because that is…



JOURNALIST: We’re taking people from Costa Rica and Central America who have been stranded there, some of them for  years;  they’re going to take the people from Manus and Nauru,  that’s the  swap.



JULIE BISHOP: That is not my understanding. That is not my understanding at all, but we are working with a number of   countries, particularly countries who are part of the Bali Process, and there are 50 countries involved in the Bali Process.      Source countries, transit countries and destination countries, all working together to resettle those who have been found to be  refugees, and those who are found not    to be afforded protection then they should return home.



JOURNALIST: What part of our international treaties do we opt out of? What part of international treaties…we’re cherry  picking. What part of international treaties do we say don’t apply to us? How do you do that?

JULIE BISHOP: That is not what we’ve said at all and we have had advice that we are abiding by our international  obligations.



JOURNALIST: Our international obligations are to assist with the resettlement of people who have a well-founded fear of  persecution by reason of race discrimination based on their religion or whatever else it might be under the UN Treaty  Convention. To say, ‘oh but if you came here or tried to come here by boat the Convention doesn’t apply’, how can that be  complying with our international obligations?



JULIE BISHOP: There are people on Nauru who are living in Nauru as a result of being found to be refugees, about 300 are   living in Nauru in an open and free   society…



JOURNALIST:   Free?



JULIE BISHOP: Yes. There are others who are seeking to be resettled in third countries, those who are not refugees are  encouraged to go home. In Manus they can, if they are found to be genuine refugees, live in Papua New Guinea; if they are       not found to be refugees, they should go home and Australia is assisting them in travelling back to their home country. What is  happening…



JOURNALIST: All of that is interesting; it doesn’t deal with my question. My question is how do you cherry pick an  international  treaty obligation?



JULIE BISHOP: We are meeting our international treaty obligations. What is happening…

JOURNALIST:   Not  if they’ve come by boat  seeking asylum.

JULIE BISHOP: What is happening is that there are so called refugee advocates who are giving false hope to people that  they can come and resettle in Australia, that   immediately…



JOURNALIST: That’s what advocates do, they’re advocates. You are an advocate,  that’s what  you do, you put the best  case   you can for your  client.



JULIE BISHOP: …that would immediately start up the criminal people smuggling trades and you know that that leads to  deaths at sea. We know of 1200 people who died at sea, there are others that would have died at sea - we don’t have the       details but there are boats that disappeared between Sri Lanka and Australia and elsewhere - and on our watch we will not be   part of a government that supports the people smuggling trade to lure people to their deaths.



JOURNALIST: Are you embarrassed at Andrew Robb using what effectively is inside information as a Cabinet  Minister for   such a now, presumably, lucrative post-political career? He’s accepted an advisory role with Landbridge Group who, amongst  other assets,  control  the Darwin Port.



JULIE BISHOP: I reject that absolutely. The Federal Government had nothing to do with the sale of or the lease of Darwin   Port,  that  was a matter for the Northern  Territory…



JOURNALIST: I didn’t say they did. He’s using the information he’s obtained around the Cabinet table…

JULIE BISHOP:   What  information has he obtained? You are making an assertion not backed up by   facts.

JOURNALIST: He was the Trade Minister; he negotiated the Free Trade Agreement with the Chinese leadership, now he’s  taking on advisory roles with key Chinese companies dealing back with   Australia.



JULIE BISHOP:  There is a Ministerial Code of Conduct. Andrew Robb has said he is aware of the Code of Conduct  and he       will abide by it, and that provides constraints and restrictions on what Cabinet Ministers can do in their post-political life. But we  shouldn’t  get into a situation where a former Trade Minister is not    allowed to take up post-parliamentary careers…

JOURNALIST:   Why not?



JULIE BISHOP:   What, so  that…



JOURNALIST: Using the same information. Are you intending…post-politics would you go into a career where you use the  intellectual property,  so to speak,  of being a senior  minister?



JULIE BISHOP:  He’s not using the same information. I would not use any information that I obtained in my position as a    Cabinet Minister that was confidential to the Cabinet. But if something is in the public domain, well it is a nonsense to suggest  that he can’t be a director of a company. Andrew has said he is aware of the Ministerial Code of Conduct and he’ll abide by it.



JOURNALIST: Are the employees of Crown, and I think you have now confirmed yesterday on Insiders there’s a fourth  Australian who’s now in detention, are they getting special treatment because they work for the Packer organisation? They  work for Crown?



JULIE BISHOP: Special treatment by whom?

JOURNALIST:   By the Australian Government.

JULIE BISHOP: No they are receiving the same level of consular support as any Australian in trouble overseas. I spend a   great deal of my time working on consular cases. Not all of them - in fact, few of them - make the media but we provide a   level of consular support. Our consular staff seek to visit them under the terms of a consular agreement that applies to all  Australians who would be detained in China. They are all subject to the same consular agreement between Australia and  China.



JOURNALIST:  Have you taken any advice about  advising other Australian companies that might be tempted to skirt  around   the edges of the new anticorruption laws in China? A country notorious for corruption in the past  but the current  government     are determined to try and stamp it  out.



JULIE BISHOP: Australian companies often seek advice from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, particularly from   the trade side,  about  doing business in China.



JOURNALIST: Particularly though about corruption. Is there any communique between the Australian and Chinese   Government about guidance for Australian companies? What may have been a nod and a wink and something you got away  with in the past  will get you into trouble  now.



JULIE BISHOP: Not a guidance between the Australian Government and the Chinese Government but of course we are well  aware of President Xi Jinping’s campaign on anticorruption, particularly targeting government    officials.



JOURNALIST: It’s clearly, as former ANZ boss Mike Smith said in an interview on the weekend, the landscape in China is  dramatically different suddenly,  perilously,  dangerously different to how it was even a few years    ago.



JULIE BISHOP: Well in terms of being “dangerously different”, President Xi Jinping has made it quite clear that he is on an  anticorruption campaign and has targeted a number of individuals including government officials, and the Australian    Government  is aware of that. It’s public information, but companies do seek our advice from time to time about  doing business    in China and elsewhere, and our message of course is to know the landscape - political, economic, social - and try and work   within the constraints of the laws and the regulations and the restrictions that apply from    time to time.



JOURNALIST:   Trouble is they keep  changing.



JULIE BISHOP:      So it is a matter of being constantly aware and doing one’s due diligence on a constant basis.



JOURNALIST:  Seventeen minutes, sixteen minutes to nine really now.  Julie Bishop, Foreign Minister and Deputy Leader of   the Liberal Party, my guest in the studio this morning. It seems there are war crimes being committed at the moment, many of

them, in the country that used to function as Syria. The latest news,  the reports on the weekend of human shields being used    by ISIS, Daesh, call them what you will, fighters suggest that maybe the West and countries like Australia need to be doing  more.



JULIE BISHOP:  That is another example of the appalling behaviour of this terrorist organisation. They have no regard for   human life, no regard for governments, for borders;  they are utterly amoral, and we have seen it in Syria and in Iraq. That’s       why Australia is part of the Coalition to protect Iraqi people from Daesh or ISIL and the collective self-defence of Iraq includes  taking part  in the airstrikes over  Syria…



JOURNALIST:   Should we be doing more though, with this latest   news?



JULIE BISHOP:   The challenge in Syria is that the United States is leading a Coalition; Russia,  Iran are also involved backing    the Assad regime. I do not see a military solution in Syria. While ever the Assad regime believes that it can win militarily over        the opposition forces and the opposition believes it can win militarily over the Assad regime, the humanitarian crisis will      continue, the conflict will continue. What we need to do is find solutions - political solutions, humanitarian solutions - and hope  that the ceasefire,  that from time to time is in place,  can   hold.



JOURNALIST: It’s almost…I was in tears watching the television news the other day, kids being carried out of hospitals and  schools,  utterly innocent victims caught  not just in the crossfire but even maybe being deliberately targeted, depending on   whose  news report  you believe.



JULIE BISHOP:      It is truly appalling; it is one of the most appalling humanitarian crises we have seen…



JOURNALIST: So how do we sit by and, even though you’ve described what we’re doing now, it’s clearly not enough to keep  these people from harm. Should we be doing  more?



JULIE BISHOP: We’re not sitting by. I’ve attended a number of International Syria Support Group meetings where the parties  around the table have sought  to find solutions:  ceasefires,  safe havens…



JOURNALIST:    Which last a day at the  most.



JULIE BISHOP: Well that’s my point. While ever both sides think that they can win, they will break the ceasefire, they will not  abide by the requirements of the United Nations, they will not respond to entreaties that this conflict end. And while the two    sides are warring, of course ISIL, the terrorist organisation, is taking land in Syria, although the Coalition is making ground     against ISIL in Iraq. The Mosul Offensive is in its fourteenth day. So in Iraq the Iraqi security forces are fighting back, they are  seeking to liberate the city of Mosul and while that in itself will have humanitarian consequences, the Coalition and the Iraqi  Government have bene planning to support those who will be leaving Mosul as a result of the Offensive.



JOURNALIST:   Is Julian Assange being fed material by the   Russians?



JULIE BISHOP: It is hard to know what Julian Assange’s motives are. He seems to release material without any regard for its  consequences and that is deeply concerning. This is not an issue about whether he is a whistle blower or not, this is about  releasing information that has the potential to do great  harm without    any regard for its consequences.



JOURNALIST: Does the Australian Government have any information whatsoever about the latest developments in his  ongoing exile in the Embassy in  London?



JULIE BISHOP:      If I had such information I wouldn’t be in a position to share it with you.



JOURNALIST:   Oh it’s a world of  intrigue within intrigue.  Speaking of  which,  the Senate and the activities of  your colleague    the Attorney General, Senator Brandis, have exercised a lot of us over the last week or two. You used to be a senior lawyer in  Perth, how do you feel if your request for advice, legal advice as the Foreign Minister and Deputy Leader of the Party has to be  approved by someone who is junior to you in the Cabinet  and in the Party before you can get advice from the Solicitor        General?

JULIE BISHOP: I don’t see it that way at all, I see it as an appropriate management of a very complex situation when many  different departments, different Ministers are seeking legal advice and there has to be a management system in place to     ensure that there is not duplication, there are not people acting at cross purposes…



JOURNALIST: Well you would have managed a busy practice, you did manage a busy practice. I’m sure Justin Gleeson   could have managed a busy practice without George Brandis telling him what  to   do.



JULIE BISHOP:  I didn’t manage a practice the size of the Australian Government, and I think it was an appropriate    requirement  that the Attorney General be notified that we were seeking advice.  I didn’t see it as seeking his approval,  I saw it    as notifying what was going on and I think that    was a very sensible thing to do.



JOURNALIST:  A couple of other quick things if we may,  I’ll get to you tip for the Cup as well and I’m running a sweep here,   I’ve got  the sweep cards from the newspaper  and…



JULIE  BISHOP:   You’re very organised!



JOURNALIST: Oh look, it’s not that hard actually quite frankly, Minister, it’s not that hard. [Laughter]

JULIE BISHOP:   You’re organising a sweep in the ABC,  I’m   impressed.

JOURNALIST: We’re agile and nimble in here as well, I might say. You mentioned that Melbourne during Cup Week is a great  networking opportunity, is Tony Abbott going to be at the races working the room as well as all the rest of the movers and     shakers?



JULIE BISHOP: I’m not sure, I haven’t spoken to Tony for a couple of days so I’m not sure where he is, but if he’s at  Melbourne Cup that would be  great.



JOURNALIST:    Is he still networking furiously?



JULIE BISHOP: Tony is the Member for Warringah. As a Member of Parliament we all maintain contacts with friends,  associates,  voters,  the public. He’s a former Prime Minister of the country,  I’m sure people seek him out   as well.



JOURNALIST:        I’m sure they do, for what sort  of advice though? Advice about a revival of his fortunes perhaps?



JULIE BISHOP: You’re just trying to be cheeky now, aren’t you, you’re just trying to stir me up. I am sure the former Prime  Minister is very much in demand in his electorate of   Warringah.



JOURNALIST:   Fullstop? That’s where he should  stay?



JULIE BISHOP: Well he is the Member for Warringah, we are all focused on ensuring that our electorates receive the best  possible support  and advice from their local  Member of  Parliament.



JOURNALIST: Are you an enthusiast for horses or just when it comes to the Cup and the party attached to it?

JULIE BISHOP:  Mildly enthusiastic but I wouldn’t say I’m    an expert.

JOURNALIST: But you’re very good at networking so you’re very good at getting other people’s inside information on what’s  going on.



JULIE BISHOP:   You make that sound  sinister!



JOURNALIST: You get to go first, Julie Bishop, on the Cup sweep…

JULIE BISHOP:   Thank you.

JOURNALIST: And rather than drawing out of a hat you can choose. What’s your tip?

JULIE BISHOP:   Well can I have one each   way?

JOURNALIST:   Yep.



JULIE BISHOP: Jameka and Assign.

JOURNALIST:    Jameka?

JULIE  BISHOP:  Jameka.



JOURNALIST:   Jameka…



JULIE BISHOP: Now I’m told that they wanted to call the horse ‘Serena Williams’ and they couldn’t, so they called her by her  middle name Jameka.



JOURNALIST:   Right.



JULIE BISHOP:      And then Assign has a female jockey and I thought we might be able to do another Michelle Payne.



JOURNALIST: Ok, alright, alright. Well strike a blow there. Julie Bishop, thank you very much. Enjoy Melbourne on what  hopefully, well the weather won’t get too much in the way if you’re indoors but if you do go wandering around the marquees I  hope your hat doesn’t  get blown  off.



JULIE BISHOP:   Thank you Jon for your  concern.



JOURNALIST: Oh deep concern about the hat! Julie Bishop, Foreign Minister, Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party, thank you  indeed for joining us this morning. We’ve covered a lot of ground and I’ve got you down for Jameka and Assign and we’ll see     who is the best  tipster amongst  the guests on the radio this  morning.



JULIE BISHOP:   Good to be with you.



Media enquiries



Minister's office: (02) 6277  7500

DFAT  Media Liaison:  (02) 6261 1555

