



BRENDAN O’CONNOR

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS TO THE POINT  MONDAY, 15 AUGUST 2016

SUBJECT/S: Royal Commission into Banks; Census; Nauru.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Shadow Employment spokesperson for the Labor Party.  Thanks so much for your company as well as your patience, as your somewhat tardy  Leader finally got to the microphone, 45 minutes late. But we won’t attack him on  that!

I want to ask you though about the banks. And this is me actually nodding my cap to  Bill Shorten - you guys are killing the Government on this! You’re absolutely killing  the Government. They look terrible in the context of the way this has become an us  and them thing between the banks and the people, and I can’t see where Malcolm  Turnbull goes on this. Here’s my question though Brendan O’Connor. Yesterday, on  Sunday Agenda Stephen Conroy said he would like to see when Government  returns or when Parliament returns I should say, you guys in the lower House move  for a Parliamentary motion in support of, or legislation in support of, a Royal  Commission. I know it’s normally an Executive decision, but a parliamentary-induced  if I can put it that way, Royal Commission into the banks. You just might get there  because all of those Coalition individuals on the backbench who have had their own  concerns about the banks, and expressed their support for a Royal Commission.  What do you reckon? Are you up for that? Is momentum building for Labor to do  exactly that when Parliament returns?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR: Well good afternoon to both of you. Look, you said  Malcolm is on the wrong side of this or at least seems to be having difficulty  defending his position. That’s because his position is wrong. All he has to do in order  to have this matter be dealt with properly and for him I guess to get some support for  his position, is to accept Labor’s proposition. That is, there are some serious  scandals that go back now many years in our financial services industry. There are  questions about the culture. There are questions about the efficacy and capability of  our regulators to deal with the sector. This is a Government that has had two Royal

Commissions. It’s now called a third. I can’t see why it can’t have a fourth Royal  Commission into such an important matter. That would be the best way for Malcolm  Turnbull to have this matter move forward.

KRISTINA KENEALLY: It sounds like you’re saying Brendan O’Connor that the  Prime Minister has until Parliament resumes to get his act together and call a Royal  Commission himself. Or face perhaps a motion on the floor of the Parliament.  Looking at the numbers, it does seem like it would be a real test of the  backbencher’s confidence in Turnbull and also their determination to stand up for  their publicly stated positions in support of a Royal Commission.

VAN ONSELEN: And Turnbull would be dead, buried and cremated if he lost,  politically speaking, if he lost a vote in the lower House on this issue and Labor  pushed it. Would you push it? Do you think you should push it as a parliamentary  vote, Brendan O’Connor, even though it is normally the Executive that does Royal  Commissions?

O’CONNOR: Well I think we should test it in the Parliament. I certainly think this is a  matter of national importance. It’s in the public interest. It’s something we  campaigned on. And I don’t really believe that the public are behind Malcolm  Turnbull or his Government in stopping a Commission, an Executive inquiry if you  like, into this sector. We do know there are some very forceful advocates in the  Coalition, in particular, the Nationals - Senator ‘Wacka’ Williams and others have  been advocating for a Royal Commission for some time. So we know there are very  sympathetic members of the Government who support Labor’s view. We do believe  that Malcolm Turnbull is doing himself no favours standing in the way of this request.  Standing in the way of a proper examination, an inquiry, into the sector. The easiest  thing for him to do now is instead of just defending the indefensible, is to come on  board and support Labor. If he doesn’t, then I guess the Parliament is there to test  our proposition.

KENEALLY: Ok Brendan O’Connor, we’ve only got a few minutes left in the program  thanks to Bill Shorten’s long winded and late arrival!

O’CONNOR: Can’t blame you for that! (Laughs).

KENEALLY: You were also on time and we do acknowledge that. Let me ask you  this though. Your portfolio, workplace relations, depends heavily on good data, the  ABS. Looking at the Census debacle, what do you reckon? Do you think the  Government should re-do the Census?

O’CONNOR: Well let’s see if they can have people adequately participate over the  next couple of weeks. I mean, clearly his has been a disaster for the Government  and a disaster for government agencies that rely so heavily upon information collated  every five years. Now of course, it does matter the extent to which people do  participate from this point on. I’m not aware of the proportion of people that have  decided to fill their Census in online, Kristina. I don’t know the results of that. But it  would be a terrible thing to think that we’ve wasted hundreds of millions of dollars  and not got any proper analysis on the current state of a number of areas of the  nation. I mean, that’s why it’s so important. So much money, billions of dollars of

taxpayers’ money is dedicated quite often, predicated upon information gathered  through the Census. So I would hope they could do something with this. But there  needs to be an examination of the ABS generally, and the role of the ministers, and  that’s why I think it’s important that they are examined in any Senate inquiry that we  might have to investigate what happened.

KENEALLY: Look, I have no doubt there will be that type of Senate inquiry. There  will be that close look. And you’re right about participation. But participation isn’t the  only issue here. There is also the accuracy of the data. This is a circumstance where  for the day we were supposed to be recording the snapshot of the day, the Census  website was down. You couldn’t fill the form in online. People have died. People  have had babies. People have moved overseas. The amount of things that  happened in those 48 hours. Will people accurately remember, recall and report on  the data when they finally do fill that form in? I just wonder, are there going to be  statisticians who are willing to rely on this data going forward?

O’CONNOR: That’s a very important point. To what extent has the process now  been tainted by this delay? I’d like to hear more about what adverse effect has arisen  as a result of the problems. And whether in fact the extent and nature of the  problems are so great as to trash the results. That would be an awful thing. A waste  of taxpayer’s money. And a lack of confidence I believe in not only the agency but in  the Government by the people of Australia. Not a good start for this Government.

VAN ONSELEN: What do you think about the ABS’s panicked decision to take down  the website, prematurely and in panic? And also, from what I’ve read on this, trying  to cover that fact up by suggesting there was a cyber-attack which actually ended up  not being the case? Surely heads have to roll at the ABS over that?

O’CONNOR: Again, we need a proper examination of this Peter. I have to say if, as  has been reported, that there has been some invention, some contrivance of attacks  by foreign states or others overseas as the reason for why things crashed and that  was a complete contrivance, then that is very serious and I think the consequences  would be dire for anyone who was involved in that betrayal of trust. So I agree with  you, that is a very significant matter. That is why it’s important we examine and  understand exactly what happened here. It seems to me that they were not prepared  because of the inundation of people going online, it couldn’t carry the weight of that  and there are people that have to be held responsible. Not just public servants there  are Minister too who made decisions both in terms of funding and other  arrangements who at least have to front up and explain their role in this. Ultimately  politicians are accountable for the conduct of agencies.

KENEALLY: Well let me ask you this then as we look down the barrel of Parliament  in a weeks and a bit time. We’ve got an inquiry potentially into the census, we’ll have  potentially a motion on a Royal Commission on banking. What about Nauru? We’ve  seen Senator Dastyari out there, your Labor colleague, firmly arguing that we need  to have a very good look at what is happening in Nauru, that Australia is not, he  believes, the type of nation where we accept that cruelty to children is an appropriate  measure for us to take in terms of protecting our borders. With the data that has  come in to the public real, do you believe we need to have some type of inquiry into  Nauru?

O’CONNOR: I think we do have to look at this Kristina. However strong and firm we  are in relation to these matters, we need to have public confidence that these  matters are being dealt with in a humane way, treating people with dignity, however  little that sometimes can seem to be. There are such serious allegations and the  scale of the allegations are so great, we do need to examine this to determine  whether these allegations are entirely true or not. Even if a proportion of them are  true then that is serious. It is correct too that when Labor was involved in supporting,  which was subsequently endorsed at national conference, the process of having  offshore processing, we always envisaged, and this is at the tail end of our last time  in government when I was Minister for Immigration, we always knew we had to  dedicate our efforts to establish settlement opportunities for these people if they  were not going to settle in Australia. In the last three years, very little if anything has  been done successfully to cater for that because the true mental anguish that occurs  even when people are being treated at least reasonably and adequately is the  anguish that accompanies a person that is in detention indefinitely. I think that has  been a major problem in the last three years. If we were re-elected in 2013 and had  failed to attend to that, we would have been criticised and rightly so.

What Bill Shorten is saying to the government is, ‘Look I don’t want anyone to come  to this issue with righteousness, because it’s such a difficult area, but let’s then  examine this matter together and see if we can get past the partisan nature, the  nature Tony Abbott just recently talked about in his failure to support the Malaysian  arrangement, and let’s see whether we can firstly examine the allegations here but  also work together to try and find settlement solutions for people who appear to have  been detained indefinitely in offshore  centres. That has to happen.

We can’t go back to the idea that Tony Abbott confessed about in the last two days.  My fear back then was he didn’t oppose the Malaysian arrangement because he  thought it wouldn’t work. He opposed it because he was scared that it would. That’s  a terrible indictment on an Opposition that was so partisan and were willing to have  the stakes so high that they were willing to risk the lives of people to score political  points. He’s made a very serious admission that maybe that was the wrong thing to  do. Let’s use that example and say this is not a place where we should be scoring  political points but also working together to look after the people that are in our care  but also work to resolve the longer term issues of finding destination countries for  people who are genuinely determined to be refugees, who should not be left to  languish indefinitely in any centre.

VAN ONSELEN: Brendan O’Connor, we appreciate you finding the time to join us  today, thanks for being on To The Point.

O’CONNOR: Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

