



THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY







E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2016

SUBJECTS: Backpacker tax; ABCC; Protests at Parliament House.



VIRGINIA TRIOLI, PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, good morning. Thanks for joining  us.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hi Virginia, how are  you?

TRIOLI: You heard there from Fiona Simson, she represents the farmers. They're  desperate to get some certainty, they really fear that the pickers will "stay away in  droves", as she said, by January if that 32 percent kicks in. What’s the compromise  position here?

PLIBERSEK: Well farmers do deserve certainty and we're being contacted by farmers  all the time urging Labor to stick with the compromise position we've already offered  which is 10.5 percent. That's the same rate as New Zealand - we are competing with  New Zealand for workers in this area. If people are making a decision to fly a long way  from Europe, or from the US, the UK, and they're choosing between Australia and New  Zealand, why wouldn't they go to the place with the lower tax rate? I just wanted to pick  up on something that the head of the Farmers’ Federation said. She talked about the  tax rate that Australian workers pay - people have to remember that Australia workers  pay zero up to the first $18,200 of earnings - when Labor was in government we tripled  the tax free threshold. And what we've got is a government who has actually taken the  rate for backpackers from zero in the 2015 Budget to 32.5 percent, without any  modelling, without any consultation. The National Farmers' Federation themselves have  said they were blindsided by this move. So yes we have been willing to compromise on

the rate of 10.5 percent - despite the fact there has been no modelling and no  compelling case made by the Government. We think that's a sensible compromise  because it keeps us competitive in the region and we can sort this out today.

TRIOLI: Alright well it clearly does have to be sorted out today, so I think most people  are anticipating there'll be a figure struck somewhere, Derryn Hinch is talking 13  percent. But the National Farmers' Federation, Fiona Simson, was clear on this - and  yes she acknowledged being blindsided by the 32 percent legislation introduction in the  Budget. Between 15 and 19 percent is what she says most farmers want to see and can  live with. 15 to 19. If you move on that, then the antics of the crossbench actually can be  removed from the equation.

PLIBERSEK: Well that's not what farmers are contacting us to say -

TRIOLI: We're talking here about their peak body.

PLIBERSEK: And I'm sure that the peak body is getting quite a lot of calls from growers  as well saying, "you're dreaming - we can't compete at 15 to 19 percent". Don't forget  the Farmers' Federation originally said 19 percent. Then 15 percent came into play, they  were prepared to live with 15 percent. I don't understand why the National Farmers'  Federation don't want the same rate as growers in New Zealand - we'll be undercutting  them at if they don't go to 10.5 percent. We think that this whole 18 months of  uncertainty could have been avoided if the Government had made a decent case, had  done some modelling, had looked at the rate in New Zealand when they were making  this decision during the 2015 Budget. It's been dragging on far too long. They've said  that they can't have a Senate inquiry because this is too urgent now; we have been  talking about this for 18 months. Why have they left it so late?

TRIOLI: Alright well we're just hearing right now that the crossbenchers are saying at  this moment they've struck a deal with the Government for a 12 percent tax. So I guess  that kind of sidelines with the Labor Opposition, unless you choose to support that?

PLIBERSEK: We think 10.5 percent is a sensible compromise because it makes us  competitive.

TRIOLI: Will you come to 12 percent so that the growers have certainty and avoid 32  percent in January?

PLIBERSEK: We have compromised to 10.5 percent. That is our position.

TRIOLI: Will you compromise on this?

PLIBERSEK: We have compromised to 10.5 percent. This is a silly debate that could  have been sorted out 18 months ago instead of the way the Government has -

TRIOLI: The only debate that matters is the debate today, Tanya Plibersek. 12 percent:  yes or no?

PLIBERSEK: Well if they've got the crossbench, they don't need Labor. 10.5 percent is  our position.

TRIOLI: Well let's move on then, if you're not getting involved in that one. On what  happened yesterday in relation to the ABCC and the restoration of that body. The win is  being described as pretty much a "toothless tiger" by those who were eager to see that  body restored. So is there really much for Labor to be concerned about here?

PLIBERSEK: Well we still think that the principle is wrong that a million Australian  workers are guilty until proven innocent. We know that when the ABCC was last in place  workplace deaths went up and productivity went down. We are very concerned that  once again we'll see workplace deaths go up, and productivity go down on our building  sites. This is an absolutely critical part of our economy. We have no truck with bad  behaviour or lawlessness on building sites. But this is the wrong way to approach any  problems. This approach treats a million workers as though they're guilty until proven  innocent. But what I'd say, Virginia, is that you're quite right that there have been so  many concessions made that this isn't the legislation that we went to a double  dissolution on. It's up to the Government to explain how this actually improves  productivity or safety on our work sites. I think it's a long way from what they originally  proposed, and they've been so desperate to get crossbench support they've been giving  away all sorts of things - it's like the crossbenchers come in and say, "I'd like a side deal  on this" and the Government says, "would you like fries with that?". It's been an absurd  process where the Government has put politics and their desperation to get through this  piece of legislation ahead of any good government.

TRIOLI: Tanya Plibersek, do you feel in any way shamed by the protesters in  Parliament yesterday? Does there remain in you, inside you, some small part that has  sympathy with the horror of those people, as they see people locked up indefinitely in  offshore detention?

PLIBERSEK: I absolutely believe that the people on Manus Island and Nauru have  been there for too long. I don't have any qualms in saying that, I've been saying it for  some time. I think it's been one of the greatest failures of this Government, that they've  been unable to resettle people from those islands. It should have happened long ago.  But -

TRIOLI: Excuse me for jumping in, Tanya Plibersek but it includes your government too  -

PLIBERSEK: Excuse me Virginia, you asked me a question about the protesters. Can I  just finish the first question you asked me? And then I'm happy to answer the second  question. What I would say about disrupting Parliament is I don't think that's the right  way to make a point. Protests outside Parliament, outside my office, in the streets: all of  that is absolutely part of our democracy. But, so too is the proper running of our  Parliament. If people want to make a point by speaking in the House of  Representatives, they should get themselves elected to the House of Representatives.  It is not okay to shut down Parliament to make a point.

TRIOLI: My question was about shame, and whether you felt any shame, and the  shame your government might feel in being part of a process that maintained offshore  detention.

PLIBERSEK: I feel a great deal of anger that those people have been there for much  too long, and I direct that at a government that has completely dropped the ball on

resettlement for people on Manus Island and Nauru. There is absolutely no excuse for  the delays in resettlement. Just as there is no excuse for the blowouts in processing  asylum seekers who are already in Australia. Just as there is no excuse for the  extraordinary length of time it's taken to bring people from Syria - the Government made  a lot of bringing 12,000 extra Syrian refugees to Australia when there was public  sympathy for the horror that Syrians are experiencing. I've got no sympathy for the  massive cuts to the aid budget which have made it impossible to look after people in  countries of first asylum. We know that Jordan and Turkey and Lebanon have a million  refugees each, and we have cut our assistance to those countries. So yes, I've got a lot  of issues with the way the Government is handling the asylum seekers who are on  Manus Island and Nauru, and a lot criticisms of their broader policies in this area.

TRIOLI: Tanya Plibersek, we'll leave it there. Thanks for joining us today.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

