

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURALISM  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





WHERE ARE THEY? TURNBULL GOVERNMENT FAILS NEW MIGRANTS

Last August, Tony Abbott said Australia would accept an additional 12,000 Syrian and  Iraqi refugees fleeing violence in their homelands.

Today, we see evidence the Turnbull Government is incapable of welcoming these new  migrants.

In MYEFO last year, the Turnbull Government forecast a revised $221 million in  settlement support for 2015-16 to assist new humanitarian migrants, including the  additional Syrians and Iraqis.

Yet actual expenditure in 2015-16, as detailed in the Budget, is just $141 million. This is  lower than even the Budget forecast from 12 months earlier, which did not account for  an additional 12,000 people.

What is going on? This $80 million shortfall in settlement support represents thousands  of lives stuck on hold. The Turnbull Government is unable to settle these new  humanitarian arrivals in a timely manner.

At last count, a mere 187 people have arrived and only 1600 visas have been issued. In  Canada, the Trudeau Government was elected in October 2015 and within six months  had accepted 20,000 new migrants.

This is not good enough. Australia has a proud record of humanitarian settlement but  the Turnbull Government’s inaction is undermining this.

The Australian community - from big and small businesses, to civil society, state and  local governments - is waiting with open arms to help Syrians and Iraqis settle in  Australia. However this patience will not last forever. Jobs and accommodation being  held for new arrivals will eventually disappear, making a new life in Australia more  difficult than it already is.



The settlement journey for a new humanitarian migrant can be daunting. Governments  should seek to make this easier instead of adding delay and confusion.

Labor welcomes a larger humanitarian program. A permanent humanitarian program of  27,000 reflects Australia’s capacity to help. We will ensure humanitarian migrants are  settled in a timely manner.

WEDNESDAY, 4 MAY 2016

MEDIA: HENRY SHERRELL 0423 315 250

