





THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

TELEVISION INTERVIEW  NINE NETWORK - TODAY SHOW   FRIDAY, 11 NOVEMBER, 2016

Subjects: Asylum seekers, US Presidential Election

LISA WILKINSON: Welcome back to the show. Reports this morning that the  Government is close to sealing a deal to send the asylum seekers stuck on Nauru  and Manus Island to the United States. The Australian newspaper claims an  announcement is expected within days with the Obama Administration agreeing to take  the 1800 boat people, effectively ending Australia's offshore detention program.

We are joined now by Defence Industry Minister, Christopher Pyne, and  Shadow Transport and Infrastructure Minister, Anthony Albanese. Good morning to you  gentlemen. Christopher, I'll start with you, are these reports correct?

PYNE: The Minister for Immigration, Peter Dutton, will make the announcements about  Government policy in this area, obviously we already have a resettlement program for  people on Manus to stay in PNG, for people on Nauru to go to Cambodia or return  home. Many hundreds have. Our number one objective is to close another two of  Labor's offshore detention centres, we have already closed 17. When Manus and Nauru  are empty and closed that will be 19, that will basically be the end of Labor's legacy of  50,000 unauthorised arrivals and that will be good news.

WILKINSON: So we’ll take it that this is probably true, I mean a leak like this doesn’t  happen to a paper like The Australian without it having some sort of concrete evidence.  But the timing is really interesting on this. We’re about to have a change of leadership in  the US, you’ve got a tiny window of opportunity before the inauguration and everything  changes, all bets will be off at the end of January. Can this happen in time, if we take it  as true?

PYNE: Well if it's a true story then there is two months, over two months, two and a half  months...

WILKINSON: But it's 1800 people you've got to get there.

PYNE: Well, Peter Dutton and the Prime Minister will make the necessary  announcements about Government policy in this area, but there certainly is time, two

and a half months is plenty of time and if it's the case it will be another great  achievement from the Turnbull Government.

WILKINSON: Does it sound like a great result to you Albo?

ALBANESE: Well indefinite detention has been bad for the people on Manus and on  Nauru. Labor has been calling for these people to be settled in a third country. If  this occurs that will be a good thing.

WILKINSON: Do you think the US is a good place for people who are known as  asylum seekers?

ALBANESE: These are people who are refugees, who have been found to  be refugees, who, if they are settled in a country like the United States, that will be a  good thing.

WILKINSON: All right, let's move on. Of course this week will go down in  political history with the election of a political outsider and reality TV star, Donald Trump  becoming the President of the United States. Some are describing it as a complete  political earthquake that no one saw coming.

Let's take a look at what you two had to say last week:

WILKINSON: Trump or Clinton?

ALBANESE: Clinton.

PYNE: I think Clinton will win easily.



WILKINSON: So, as political forecasters you two; big fail.

ALBANESE: No, no, to be fair he was a bigger fail. He said easily.

PYNE: I was trying to lull them into a false sense of security.

WILKINSON: So you are trying to say you saw this coming?

PYNE: Secret Republican supporter.

WILKINSON: Now Christopher, You've also described Donald Trump as terrifying, but  you weren't alone. Bill Shorten has described him as barking mad. Josh Frydenberg  called him a drop kick and the Prime Minister used the word loathsome. This does make  diplomatic relationships difficult.

PYNE: We have got off to a very good start, let’s face it. One of the very first  phone calls Donald Trump has had as President-elect was with the Prime Minister of  Australia, which only underlines the strength and the closeness of our relationship. We  have very deep ties with the US, as the Defence Industry Minister I can tell you just this  week we announced Australia as the regional hub for the maintenance of the joint  strike fighter.

Three thousand joint strike fighters  throughout the world; a big part of our defence  establishment. I've only ever talked about the policies of Donald Trump. Bill  Shorten denigrated him personally, I think that was foolish and shows a lack of  judgment on Bill Shorten’s part. It's one thing to say we don't like someone's policies, it’s  another thing to denigrate them personally, especially now they are leader of the free  world.

WILKINSON: Certainly is. Albo, unfortunately we’re going to have to leave it there, we  have run out of time. Here is good news.

ALBANESE: I don't even get a crack.

WILKINSON: Here is the good news; we have got four years to talk about  Donald Trump.

ALBANESE: Four years, it's going to be an interesting ride.

WILKINSON: Certainly is. Gentlemen, we will have to leave it there, I'm sorry, we are a  bit tight for time. Good to see you both. A good win that you are both here in the studio.

FRIDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2016   MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868









