

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  OPPOSITION LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Q&A   NATIONAL PRESS CLUB  TUESDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: Free trade agreements; Pauline Hanson’s One Nation Party; Climate  Change and Paris Agreement; Colombo Plan; Energy Security; Asylum  Legislation; Marriage Equality; Australia-Indonesia relations; Foreign Aid cuts;  US Presidential elections; China; TPP; Asian language teaching; South China  Sea.

KATHARINE MURPHY: Well. So much in that speech it's really hard to know where to  start but I'll give it a crack. Senator Wong, one of the themes in your speech is that  obviously it is very important for Australia's national interests that we maintain open  markets and, I suppose, the policies that reflect the economic consensus of the last 30  years. But one of the biggest stakeholders in the Labor Party is the Labor movement  and it seems to me that, in recent times, the Labor movement has been less inclined to  accept the trade-off between economic reform and social fairness that has  characterised Labor policy over the last 20 years. We have seen the union movement  arc up on the China Free Trade Agreement. We are seeing the union movement arc up  potentially on the Trans-Pacific Partnership. How difficult is that for Labor? Also, why do  you think it is happening because at one point in our history, trade unions accepted that  trade-off but they seem reluctant to do it in the present context?

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: It is  obviously not for me to speak for all of the Labor movement but I think many unions are  responding to some of the issues that I raised in the speech. There is a sense that the  benefits of growth have not been shared fairly. We know we have seen sluggish wages  growth. I think part of the response to the broader community is to ensure we have clear  policies which are about ensuring that we don't leave people behind, whether they are  investment in education, whether they are investment in regions, investment in  displaced workers. All of those policies which go fundamentally to ensuring the benefits  of economic growth are better shared fairly. Inclusive growth as the Labor Party has  been talking about for some time are critical to maintaining support for openness. I think  that is the key.

I would make the point, though, it is important, and I think I've done so again today and  others have done so - I think Chris Bowen has been speaking about these matters as

have others -, to keep reminding us all that the very economic reform that has  generated some concern is the economic reform over the last decades which has  generated over the last decades - rising living standards and increased prosperity for all  Australians.

PETER HARTCHER: Thanks for that address, Senator Wong and for that statement of  Australian values. As a practising politician and as a practical matter, should the major  political parties in Australia accept the votes in Parliament of the parties and politicians  that are based on directly undermining those values of openness, of tolerance, that  preach division, protectionism and discrimination?

WONG: I'm less worried about people accepting votes than about chasing votes. I think  that's what I am concerned about at the moment, what did Russell Broadbent say? The  cuddle up to One Nation some of his colleagues are engaged in. I want to say  something about Mr Broadbent because I thought his speech was a very important  speech, a very courageous speech, I congratulate him for making it.

We have taken a view about One Nation that we will explain our position to them but we  will not be trading away principle in any discussions around votes or the like. Certainly  my observation in the Senate Chamber is that the Government is certainly very keen to  engage very closely with One Nation.

I wish that a senior Cabinet minister had given the speech Russell Broadbent gave.  Because I think the key thing is not just your behaviour in the Chamber, the key thing is  what are you prepared to stand up and say? Are you prepared to stand up and say that  the views that One Nation puts forward are not good for Australia, they do not result in  economic benefit as I pointed out in the speech, zero net migration will make us poorer -  they are about dividing this country. I look forward to a speech being given by a senior  Cabinet Minister or the Prime Minister that was as Mr Broadbent's speech yesterday.

PAUL OSBORNE: Thank you very much for your speech. In your speech you  mentioned global problems and specifically mentioned climate change. Yesterday the  treaties committee tabled a report where they recommended ratifying the Paris  Agreement. Do you think it is vital that agreement be ratified this week ahead of  Morocco and what extra ambitions should Australia have in terms of climate change and  particular ahead of adjusting our settings next year?

WONG: I think the two problems with Australia's current policy settings is we don't have  a mechanism to meet the targets we are setting as well as the substantive issue which  is the targets themselves are not as ambitious as they will need to be. Mark Butler my  colleague has spoken about that.

On the issue of the treaty, yes, I think we would like to see this moved as quickly as  possible and we'll certainly be working with the Government to do so. It's very pleasing  as a former Climate Change Minister to see the Paris Agreement finally arrive. So some  aspects were first discussed at Copenhagen, that famous conference which turned  everybody grey but the world has got to the important framework agreement. What we  do need collectively to do is lift the level of ambition. Let's remember why we are doing  it. We are the last generation that has the capacity to influence this outcome. We know  that we are already on a trajectory to significant temperature rise. We know collectively

across the world we are the last generation that can actually have an influence on that  outcome for future generations and I think we have a responsibility to do so.

MURPHY: Picking up on Paul's question…

WONG: I thought I answered it! Didn't I answer it? (LAUGHTER) That's the problem  with having Katharine Murphy moderate, she is much harder.

MURPHY: I see a little room to move. You say we have to increase the level of ambition  but that requires something practical, that requires more consensus than we have seen  between the major parties on climate policy. It is a serious question.

WONG: It is. It was a rueful smile.

MURPHY: I'm sure. (LAUGHTER). I know there is post-traumatic stress from the  Copenhagen conference.

WONG: I was thinking about political consensus because you might recall that I actually  got an agreement with Malcolm Turnbull on a carbon price on the Emissions Trading  Scheme. Not everybody remembers that because it seems a long time ago. Which was  actually supported by, from memory, the Climate Institute and Business Council of  Australia. I think that was the last moment of consensus on climate. It would be good if  we could find that again. Have I interrupted you?

MURPHY: Of course it would be good if we could find that again but how do we find that  again?

WONG: I'm sure we are up for that discussion. We are not the party that has the people  who think climate change is a conspiracy to de-industrialise the Western World. That's a  Nick Minchin quote. Just so you’re clear.

TIM SHAW: Can I quote where you refer to foreign policy is axiomatically the protection  and advancement of the national interest. Many Australians watching this are open-hearted people. They've seen Brexit, though. They've seen Donald Trump statements  about building a wall between Mexico and the United States. In two parts, can we look  to the new Colombo Plan, which is as far as I can observe is bipartisan support, though  there was concern about cost from your predecessor Tanya Plibersek when she was  here at the National Press Club in July. Does part of your open Australia view being  articulated through the education within Asia that we so much develop with the new  Colombo Plan, particularly the protection of women and young girls in Asia and those  coming from the Middle East? Would you like to see a next stage of the new Colombo  Plan that supports the education of women and young girls from the Middle East and in  Asia?

Secondly on your point on climate change, we have heard that Victoria's coal-fired  power station is going to be shut down. This is going to put further risk on the security of  the energy of SA so I'd like some thoughts on that.

WONG:  That's a shopping list question! Firstly on the new Colombo Plan, my father,  who is probably watching this - hi dad - was a Colombo Plan scholar so I obviously  wouldn't be here but for the old Colombo Plan. I think there is merit in supporting

people-to-people links, to supporting educational opportunities for both people in the  region coming to Australia and vice versa - Australians going to the regions. That is a  very important part of deepening our relationships with the region and also  personalising, which we know can make such a difference.

Tanya was right to point to some issues about the cost. We'll certainly, prior to the next  election, have a look at that again, whether or not the design gives you best bang for  buck. But as a principle, supporting the increased engagement of Australians in our  region is a very good one. There are many reports we could point to about the gap  between the Asia capability Australia needs and the current Asia capability of our  population.

In terms of a focus on women, I think certainly our development and assistance  program should and does focus substantially on women. There may be scope to do  more in terms of education. The World Bank and other development experts will tell you  your return on investment, as it were, is substantial where you focus that on women and  girls.

The last question I think was about energy policy which is probably a matter for Mr  Butler, again. I’ve got two questions that he should have taken. We do need to look at  how we modernise the grid. That is an issue for South Australia, given where we are  geographically, but I think it is an issue for the whole of the electricity market, given the  change in generation mix.

Certainly if you think about when we were planning our electricity markets, we  envisaged a pattern of generation which is very different to the generation pattern we  have now and will increasingly have more distributed generation so we need to  modernise the electricity market. We went to the last election saying we would do so. I  hope the Government would do some of that work this term but certainly that will  continue to be something we will focus on.

MARIJA JOVANOVIC: Thank you for your address. Peter Dutton today has said  Labor's decision not to back its lifetime visa ban policy will result in an influx of boats  arriving to Australia from as far as Europe. Has Labor's decision not to back that policy  opened it up to that sort of criticism yet again on an issue that has been quite explosive  within the Labor Party both before, during and after the election?

WONG: Peter Dutton is styling himself as a Tony Abbott-light, isn't he? But he is a  lightweight, Abbott is a middleweight. He told us for many months the Government had  fixed it, he had fixed everything. Then there is suddenly a crisis simply because Labor  says we're not going to support a bill which, frankly, is a stunt. I don't think anybody  watching the way in which the Government has handled this, the shifting explanations  from Ministers, nor, frankly, the core of the Bill which enables ludicrous outcomes which  someone who is resettled in a third country, which we support, coming here on a tourist  visa in 20 or 30 or 40 years' time.

For all of those reasons, I don't agree with the premise of your question and I think Bill  outlined at his press conference shortly before I arrived here the reason for Labor's  opposition with that.

MURPHY: If the Government came to the Labor Party with concrete evidence as a  precursor to a third country deal, which I gather has not happened...

WONG: That's the point.

MUPRHY: ... In the event such evidence was presented to the Labor Party, would the  Labor Party reconsider its position on this legislation?

WONG: I take what you said - the Government has not said that. The Government have  not said "This is an important precursor to a third country resettlement arrangement".  That's not the basis on which they promulgated this. I find it very odd that a government  that has not resolved the issue of third country resettlement for this particular cohort  now suddenly says "but we've got to have this piece of legislation" which is the lifetime  ban. Why don't they focus on what really is an important policy component of this policy  which is to find third country resettlement options? And as you said in your question,  they have not put that us to.

MURPHY: They have intimated it.

WONG: There is lots of intimations about lots of things. Maybe they should be up-front  and tell people what they want to do.

MURPHY: I didn't hear an answer to if evidence was provided to the Labor Party what  the Labor Party would do?

WONG: We would cross that bridge if it were, but it hasn't been provided.

GEORGIE HITCH: Thank you for your address. On the previous question and a similar  topic, the Labor Caucus has voted against the lifelong ban for asylum seekers. What  does this say about the party's bipartisanship with the Coalition on border protection and  does this signal a shift in stance of the Labor Party?

WONG: We are not bipartisan on political stunts.

MARK KENNY: I didn't think I'd be up this early!

WONG: I will take a longer time to answer yours if you like.

KENNY: I was going to observe that you and I might well remember our 1:00am press  conference, a real Kevin Rudd classic in Copenhagen. We do all remember the  consensus around that time and note that, indeed, there is a similar consensus at the  moment about same-sex marriage between the major party leaders and yet, once  again, as there was on that occasion, the system has been unable to actually deliver up  an outcome. You can take that as a comment if you wish.

I'd like to get a little bit philosophical because you were in your speech. We hear a lot  about the sort of right wing attack on openness and liberalism, I guess. You describe  the terrorist project, for example, as being the desire to foment an attack on civilisation  or to create a clash of civilisations. What I'm wondering: Is there a valid left wing  critique, not that it's ever stated, but do you think there is room for a valid left wing

critique on religions, for example, which are fundamentally anti-feminist, anti-modern,  even anti-gay and what challenge that presents to multiculturalism?

WONG: First on Marriage Equality, the reason the Parliament did not support the Bill  that was put forward by the Government is that the majority of Members or Senators  didn't accept this was the right way forward. I outlined, as did many other Senators  yesterday, the reason for that.

My view is this: the majority of Australians do want Marriage Equality, in fact, the  majority of our Parliament do want it. This is a time where people can work together. I  am willing to work with any Liberal who is prepared to do the right thing and vote with  their conscience. We don't need that many of them. We need a few of them to vote in  accordance with their conscience and we can make this law. I think that would be a  unifying moment for the nation.

The one thing I get as a politician, more than anything else, is "Why can't you guys work  together? Why are you always wanting to have a fight?"  It would be good if we could  show people on some things we can work together. We actually work together on more  things than people realise but we don't talk about that. It's like a dirty secret. But this is a  divisive issue with some very hateful things being said. I think it would be a unifying  moment for the Australian community if politicians could work together.

I'm going to connect your two questions because one of the reasons I have put forward  for supporting Marriage Equality, apart from whatever personal position I'm in, there is a  philosophical one and one of the reasons is I think we have a separation of church and  state, we have the religious people practising particular faiths but we have a secular  state. I don't see why the views of some aspects of some faiths should be imposed on  the secular state in respect of civil marriage. I suppose that philosophical framework is  how I would answer the second part of your question which is we do accept that there  are different faiths and different faith practices in this country.

That does not mean, as a nation, we do not say we have certain values which we  expect you to adhere to. Those are set out both in our laws but also in a normative  framework. We believe in the equality of men and women. We don't believe gay people  are to be cast out. There are a whole range of views which we say, regardless of what  your faith teachings are, as a secular society, these are the values we do expect you to  adhere to.

OSBORNE: We were to have a visit this week by the Indonesian President but,  unfortunately, he has domestic problems to deal with. Where does Indonesia fit in in  terms of your vision for Australia's foreign policy and could greater ties with Indonesia  also feed into your thesis about being an open society and more tolerant and more  diverse?

WONG: I think Indonesia is essentially important to Australia's foreign policy. The very  first place I visited once being appointed to this portfolio was Indonesia and it was a  very interesting visit. I deliberately, it was important we went there early and we made a  decision to go there first but I also wanted to make sure the discussion and engagement  was not only on those issues which are important to us.

Obviously Australia has a particular interest in border protection, in cooperation against  terrorism on security and intelligence issues but Indonesia's focus, and certainly the  President's focus, has been very much on economic development and on the provision  of health and education, on his infrastructure plan.

We need to engage with Indonesia deeply. I think successive governments have said  that. You can always do more and the one takeout I would have is that our engagement  with Indonesia needs to be not only on the issues that are important to us, and there are  issues we will always want to engage with them about, but we also need to consider  what is it that Indonesia is doing that Australia can also substantively contribute to. For  example, a very large infrastructure program is planned. What can Australia do to better  engage on some of those economic policy imperatives?

STEVE LEWIS: On foreign aid, you refer to it in your speech, Labor's been critical of the  Government's cutbacks to foreign aid particularly as a percentage of GDP. If you're  Foreign Minister in the next Labor Government, would it be your aim to return foreign  aid to 0.5% of GDP? Is that a benchmark that is realistic given the focus on getting the  budget back?

WONG: Thanks for that question. It's an important one. First, some of the facts. Under  this Government, I think the cuts total around $11.3 billion to development assistance.

Let's remember why - I'm sure you understand why but let's reiterate again - we fund  development assistance as a nation, not just out of generosity, although that is  important, we also fund it because we have an interest in a world that is more secure.  We have an interest in alleviating poverty. We have an interest in trying to ensure  economies develop. Those are all things in our national interest.

There is a rational basis for development assistance over and above the obvious  rejoinder that we are a relatively wealthy nation and we should do what we can to assist  those who are in need. We have seen a cut of just over $11 billion. As importantly as  the numerical cut, the way in which the Government is now approaching how it will fund  development assistance is they'll link it to CPI which means, as our national income  increases, the proportion of that we are actually going to be providing for development  assistance will decrease. I think the figures are down to 0.17% over the next decade.  That is a very low contribution from Australia.

You're right. We have constrained fiscal circumstances. We have 0.5% GNI as a long-term goal. How you get there is obviously a matter of how you handle each forward  estimates period but I would say this: the thing that meant development assistance was  cut, that development assistance came to the position it is, which is a declining  trajectory in terms of a percentage, is because the Coalition walked away from its  bipartisan commitment. We really do need to encourage some bipartisanship in this  area. Otherwise it is very difficult to see how, over time, any government is going to be  able to get to that figure if it remains bitterly opposed or opposed by the other side.

SHAW: Within 24 hours we'll know the outcome, one would expect, of the US election.  Your commentary about our open Australia, do you feel you would have stronger  listening ears from President Clinton than you would have from President Trump and,  whilst it is 24 hours away, how are you feeling? Are you ready to call the US election?

WONG: I will leave that to commentators. I think Kim Beazley was on Lateline last night.  I think he was prepared to call it. Look, I didn't run the title of the speech - Bridges Not  Walls - past Candidate Trump, obviously.

What happens in the US election obviously ultimately is a matter for the American  people and I've said previously we'll work with whomever is elected. Obviously we have  certain views as the Labor Party about economic policy, about trade, about globalisation  and we don't resile from those views. But stepping back from the personalities; first, the  US alliance is a key pillar of Australia's foreign policy. Second, US engagement in this  region has underpinned not only peace and security but economic development in the  post-war period.

So regardless of who wins, what we will continue to assert - and I think this is  consistent with Julie's position and what she articulated in recent days - we will continue  to encourage and assert the importance of US engagement in this region.

MURPHY: Do you think that Donald Trump has the relevant qualifications to be the  President of the United States?

WONG: I don't have a vote.

MURPHY: No but you have an opinion.

WONG: And one that I don't know that I'm going to share with everybody at the Press  Club on this issue.

But I would say this, leaving aside the personalities and leaving aside the criticisms that  people in Australia have made of - we have seen people criticising Mrs Clinton, we have  seen people criticising Mr Trump, we have seen the Prime Minister even criticising Mr  Trump, but it is an historic election to have a woman running for President and as  someone who believes that our democracies across the world are better when they  represent our community, it is a great thing to see a woman running as the nominee of a  major party in the United States.

KENNY: We hear a lot about China's activities internationally in the South China Sea  and the like. I wonder if I could talk about China domestically. It appears to be  descending into a dictatorship really. In the guise of an anti-corruption drive, all manner  of crooks and critics alike are being rounded up. Internet freedoms are being curtailed,  other human rights are being curtailed under the presidency as it is at the moment. I'm  wondering could Australia say more about this? Should we be saying more about this  and exercising a stronger role as a major first world democracy in this region or is the  commercial economic tie between our nations just pre-eminent?

WONG: Well, you've set a dichotomy up which I'm not sure I agree with.

The first point is China is an extraordinarily important economic relationship for  Australia. China is an increasingly important global player and our interest is continued  engagement with China economically but also more broadly.

It is in the world's interests that China be as engaged as possible in the global system,  whether it's the multilateral system, whether it is the international trading arrangements

or plurilateral trade arrangements. Whether China or any other nation, obviously there  will be others where there are concerns, philosophical differences, it is a different  political system to Australia. Those ought be navigated but they don't undermine the  fundamental proposition that China will remain an important and key trading partner for  Australia and is increasingly important in terms of the global order.

MURPHY: But do you as Shadow Foreign Minister have any specific concerns because  conditions are clearly deteriorating, in terms of civic freedoms, such as they were, are  clearly deteriorating in China. It’s been widely covered. Do you have any concerns  about the deterioration of public life in China?

WONG: There are often philosophical differences that we have with different nations.  And China has a different political system from Australia. I think it is reasonable for  Australia, whether privately or publicly, to assert, when appropriate, our concerns about  human rights violations, and so forth,

As a minister there were occasions on which I did so, sometimes privately, sometimes  not. And I assume the Government is engaging in that sort of dialogue, where  appropriate.

TONY MELVILLE: Mr Trump and Ms Clinton are obviously opposed to the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, so do we give up on that? And is it a great loss to us?

And just on the Indonesian President’s visit, I was reading in The Guardian lately about  the loss of Bahasa Indonesia as a language in Australia. Chris Bowen has been fighting  back, as have some of our universities. Is that something on your list?

WONG: I think increasing Asian language proficiency is a key part of advancing our  Asia capabilities. It is disappointing that we see Bahasa Indonesia being less studied. It  is also disappointing we don’t see sufficient numbers of Australian students really  engaging in studies of other Asian languages, such as Mandarin. I think that is not the  only - there are a range of other capabilities we want to develop - but certainly  language capability is something we want to continue to focus on. That is sometimes  complex, but we do need to try to enhance that.

Having children who are younger, you do get a lot of parents talking to you about the  difficulties finding schools which offer the languages parents are seeking. So there is a  teacher supply problem as well as a demand issue.

The TPP - you’re right, the TPP fails if the US isn’t in and both Presidential candidates  have said no. If that’s the outcome, unless the World Trade Organisation becomes more  successful in this period than we’ve seen in the last period - I was trying to think of a  diplomatic way to say that. It’s not really the fault of the organisation I think, it’s a one-in,  all-in issue - I think we do need to think about what are the arrangements in our region  that are best, and will enhance engagement, economic engagement, and also deal with  some of the inefficiencies. We have a lot of different bilateral and some plurilateral  trading agreements. I think there is economic merit in thinking about, in the absence of  this TPP, what is the next architecture for trade in our region that enables some  harmonising of what occurs.

And then I’d make a geopolitical point that I made before - it is in our interest to engage  China in these arrangements. In fact, what I would argue is that it is in Australia’s  national interest to engage both the US and China engaged in the same trade regime

PETER PHILLIPS: Just coming back to the visit which had been foreshadowed by  Indonesian president Jokowi Widodo, one of the things which he had foreshadowed in  recent public announcements in Indonesia related to the possibility of a joint exercise  with units of the Indonesian Navy, and perhaps a unit of the Royal Australian Navy,  departing from the Natuna Islands, at the southernmost tip of the Chinese nine dash line  into waters of the South China Sea. What’s the position of the Opposition on that  prospect, and what’s your view of how the Government will respond when President  Widodo’s visit is rescheduled?

WONG: First, one of the issues that was discussed with me on my visit to Indonesia  was obviously the Natuna Islands. That was a present issue for the Indonesians.  Second, we are supportive of closer engagement with Indonesia, including on these  Naval and security matters with Indonesia.

I think in terms of the region, we obviously are in a state of flux within our region. The  components of ensuring we can continue stability and security include US engagement.  They include dialogue and engagement with China. They include engagement with the  region and ASEAN and Indonesia in particular within ASEAN and as a bilateral partner.

So, I don’t know what the Government was going to say, but I assume it was going to  say that was good idea. Certainly we haven’t been briefed on what was precisely  proposed, but we would be supportive of that kind of co-operation with Indonesia.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

