

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

ADDRESS TO FEDERATION OF ETHNIC COMMUNITIES’ COUNCILS OF  AUSTRALIA - NATIONAL MULTICULTURAL WOMEN’S CONFERENCE 2016  PARK ROYAL, PARRAMATTA  THURSDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2016



***CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY***



I acknowledge Indigenous elders past and present.

One of the most fantastic things about our nation is the fact that we have 60,000 years  of culture to draw on and I’ve seen in my lifetime the fact that we’ve become proud to  speak about that Indigenous heritage.

When I was at high school no-one in my high school, no-one in the local library could  tell me the name of the Indigenous people that lived on that land before my high school  was built there and I think if you went to every school in Australia today the children in  that school would know the name of the people who lived on that land.  So even in my  lifetime we have seen steps forward and I’m proud of that.

So thank you Matthew Doyle for his Welcome to Country earlier.  I’d also like to  acknowledge Joe Caputo the FECCA President. Emma Campbell is the new Director of  FECCA and she has until recently been a colleague of mine and so I’m particularly  proud of her new role.  She has been a terrific contributor in my office and I know she  will make a huge contribution as Director of FECCA.

I’m very sorry that I wasn’t able to hear Senator Zed Seselja speak this morning, I’ve  just come from the Blue Mountains where I was visiting a high school but I know that  Zed would have shared with you some very important insights.  Hina Durrani and Violet  Roumeliotis, thank you very much for your remarks, and Renata Kaldor.

In 1973 Labor Minister for Immigration Al Grassby released a paper in which he talked  about his vision for a multicultural Australia in the year 2000.

Al Grassby was a figure that inspired many people and I remember my own parents as  migrants to Australia, hearing Al for the first time speak about the sort of inclusive

nation he wanted to see in the future, and my parents really feeling part of this new  country that they had adopted as their home.

Al’s vision for a multicultural Australia went well beyond tolerating new Australians as  they arrived.

It was an extraordinary vision; the turn of the century must have seemed a long way off  when Al was talking about the year 2000.

But his vision for that year 2000 was a nation able to sustain growth and change without  disintegration, a society based on equal opportunity for all, he called it “A society with …  social complexity, dynamic interaction between diverse ethnic components, … and  strength in diversity.”

But he knew that wouldn’t happen just by imagining it.

It also demanded action from both community and government, including funding for  very important public policy initiatives.

Al said “by the year 2000 we would need to perfect ways of inducing equality for  all”.  What he really meant was we needed a framework, we needed the laws, policies  and programs which would allow every Australian to develop their personal potential no  matter how diverse their origins, their beliefs, their wealth, financial wealth, their ability.

He had a vision for a modern multicultural Australia - but that vision had to be backed in  by action, by investment.

The Whitlam Government introduced an official policy of multiculturalism and set targets  for action -  like reducing poverty amongst ethnic groups and addressing the  disproportionate number of migrants in labouring, unskilled and blue collar occupations;  and increasing the quality of education by investing in additional teachers, culturally and  linguistically relevant curriculum and specialised classes for new migrants at school.

The Whitlam Government knew that investment in education was the critical enabler for  participation in the economy  - and an enabler for ethnic communities in  particular.  Much like what we’ve sought to do with extra needs-based funding with the  Gonski school education reforms, making sure that every person can reach their full  potential.

We shaped better outcomes in those days by incorporating the policy of multiculturalism  into health and welfare policies and in our approach to social security. All of our policies  were developed and implemented with an understanding of what our multicultural  community needed.  We funded migrant resource centres, multicultural radio stations,  telephone translation services across Australia. And we also sought to use our  experience domestically to influence globally, and we signed at that time the  International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1972.

The Whitlam Government was prepared to envisage, aspire to, plan for and invest in the  society that they wanted to see and set the scene for decades to come.

There was vision and there was impact.



I want to talk about your conference title “Vision and Impact” in relation to the work that  we have seen more recently in the area of women’s policy.

I was the Minister for Women in 2007 in the newly elected Labor Government and I’ve  taken on that portfolio again as the Deputy Leader because I feel that this is one of the  most important portfolio areas for Government today. I know that this Conference  understands how important getting women’s policy right is.

Gender equality has always been one of the fundamental tenets of Labor activism.  Not  because the men in the early Labor days thought it was important, but because women  in the Labor Party demanded action on women’s policies.

Gender equality is complex; it requires sustained effort and sustained investment, there  are not switches that you flick on and off to achieve gender equality, this is a long-term  vision that requires sustained investment.  We need a plan; we need resources if we are  going to have real impact.

Labor understands this. In 1973 - I’m sorry about the history lesson but it’s important to  see this development over time - In 1973 we became the first country to appoint a  women’s advisor to a Prime Minister.

In 2008 as Minister for Women, I established a National Council to advise on ending  gender-based violence in Australia.  We are frighteningly close to a decade on from the  establishment of that Council and the pursuit of safety for women continues to be an  enormous challenge for Governments at all levels, as well as for the non-government  sector.

Of course violence against women occurs right across our Australian community.  It’s  not confined to one income group, to one geographic area, to one ethnicity, it occurs  right across our Australian society.  But we know that for women from culturally and  linguistically diverse backgrounds this challenge is even greater and the resources need  to be tailored to that greater challenge.

We know that CALD women are more likely to be harmed as a result of domestic and  family violence and, I think very significantly, are less likely to receive appropriate  assistance from services when they try and leave a violent relationship.  We can’t allow  that to continue.

For women in emerging communities with close-knit families and close-knit communities  this is an even greater challenge.  Women seeking to leave violent relationships are  often seen as breaking up the family, bringing the community into disrepute. They don’t  want other people in their close-knit community knowing of the challenges they are  facing at home.  And if they do turn outside the family for help, who is there to help  them?

We can’t accept an Australian community where women don’t feel safe on the street or  don’t feel safe in their own homes.  So when I set up the National Council I wanted it to  lead a national conversation, to dive deep into the research, to produce a plan that  would actually over time reduce the incidents of family violence and sexual assault in  the Australian community.



But it is not enough to have a vision for the future, you have to have a clear road map to  make that impact. At that time I said we needed to allocate responsibilities, set  timetables, have markers along the way to measure our progress - to know whether we  were actually going to achieve what we had set out to achieve.  That National Council  consulted extensively, I know that many of you were involved in that work, and in 2010  we launched that Time for Action national report.

What was fabulous about that is it had bipartisan support; I was delighted with the  support that we received from the Liberal and National Parties and other parties at that  time.  I think it was very important that we had not just the support across the political  spectrum, we had support of State and Territory Governments as well, we had  involvement from the NGO sector, we put a lot of work into getting an agreed vision on  violence against women, and we also agreed a road map to achieving what we wanted  to achieve.  And I was delighted when in 2011 COAG announced unanimous support  for the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.

Having the backing of all of the State and Territory governments was critical because of  course it is the State and Territory governments that have responsibility  for  implementation of many policies.  If we need to change the health system, if we  need to change the education system, if we need to change refuges, if we need to  change the on- the-ground delivery of services, of course we need the co-operation of  State and Territory governments.

So this was a comprehensive, inter-governmental, cross-sectoral twelve-year plan and it  included, as many of you know, successive implementation plans so we could regularly  review what we had achieved; where we were slipping; and on  what we needed to re-double our efforts. These periodic plans also meant that we could target emerging  issues, things that were changing, that our original plan didn’t anticipate.  One example  of that is the increasing use of electronic, on-line presence to harass and intimidate  women. We didn’t picture when we wrote this report how posting explicit images of an  ex-partner or stalking across the internet would play a role in the harassment and  intimidation of women.

Just as Al Grassby did in the 1970s we wanted to make changes beyond our borders as  well as within them.  So at the same time as working on this national plan extended our  international obligations under the UN Convention for the Elimination of all Forms of  Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).

So I am very pleased that we were able to work with community to develop that vision,  to develop the road map to get there and I am very pleased that so much of that work  has been bi-partisan.

That framework still exists, the implementation plans are ongoing and we’ve just seen  the launch of the third implementation plan last week. I know this organisation  welcomed that third implementation plan.

The area that we need to redouble our efforts is in resourcing. It is all very well to have  bi-partisanship on the vision, but if we don’t resource domestic violence services and  sexual assault services properly to do their work then the necessary work can’t be done.

Vision is important,  but actually backing people on the ground who are doing the hard  work is a really critical part of achieving success.

When you work in the field of domestic violence you hear often the question “why  doesn’t she leave?” National Shelter commented on this in the lead up to the COAG  meeting on domestic violence last Friday in Brisbane.  National Shelter said “we  shouldn’t be asking why doesn’t she leave, we should be asking where does she go?”  and this is at the heart of my message to you today.

We have seen in recent years $88 million cut from new building of homelessness  services and right now we are in a situation where the National Partnership Agreement  on Homelessness will expire in the middle of next year. There is no indication of  whether it will be re-signed or not.  That means that people who are running the  homelessness services today, the emergency accommodation for women and children  fleeing domestic violence, in some instances don't know whether they have been re-funded - or will have to close- next year.

About 80,000 people a year are helped by this National Partnership Agreement on  Homelessness; we don’t know whether those 80,000 people will still be helped next  year.  We know that the new building work isn’t going to happen, and we don’t know  whether the services that are funded by this National Partnership Agreement can  continue, and  that is a serious problem.

We know that the access to legal services can be an area where women are really  victimised and disadvantaged after experiencing sexual assault or domestic violence.  It  is absolutely critical that we give proper legal support to people who are leaving violent  relationships. We’ve seen $52 million cut from legal services by the Government. We  cannot have a system that is fair to victims of violence if we do not properly fund the  legal services that defend their rights.

I don’t doubt if you look across the Australian community, you could ask almost any  Australian do you think we need to do better in this area?  I think most people would say  yes, we agree with a vision for Australia where women are safe to walk on the street  and where women are safe in their own homes.  I don’t think there would be many  people who would disagree with that proposition. That vision is not a contested vision -  but we can’t have the impact to achieve that vision unless we resource the services that  will deliver it.

Labor went to the last election with a Safe Housing Policy that would have invested $88  million in new housing for women and their children escaping domestic violence.  We  pledged to restore the funding to those legal services that have had their funding cut  including family violence prevention legal services.  We said that we would continue to  offer funding certainty for 1800RESPECT, OurWATCH and ANROWS. These are three  organisations that we set up as a result of the National Plan to End Violence Against  Women. I’m not sure if you are going to hear from 1800RESPECT during this  Conference but you will know that the service is experiencing great uncertainty at the  moment because of changes to their funding arrangements.

Labor also believes that there should be five days of domestic violence leave in the  minimum National Employment Standards.  We know that only a tiny minority of people  would ever use this leave, but we believe it should be available to people who need

it.  The idea that you would lose your job at the same time as you are threatened with  losing your home, at the same time as you are going to court to defend yourself is just  unspeakable.  It’s not just the income you need to protect yourself and raise your family  it’s actually the human contact you need, the normality in your life you need, of keeping  your job.

We understand that you need to commit resources to achieve impact.  I say this to you  as well.  Governments work best when they are hearing the greatest diversity of voices  from our community and that’s why we set up the Women's Alliances in the way we did  when we were in Government. The Government is now going through a process of re-evaluating the Women’s Alliances, the organisations that represent the voices of  Australian women to Government. And we believe that the Australian Migrant and  Refugee Women’s Alliance , the peak advocacy body for migrant and refugee women  should have been a part of that conversation to make sure that Government is actually  hearing the voices of all Australian women.

There is a period of uncertainty now with how those voices will be heard. We will  participate with the Government in trying to come up a framework that allows that  political voice to be heard in the greatest possible way.  But there needs to be a strong  voice of migrant and refugee women coming into Government  - sometimes as  governments hear things that we don’t want to hear.  There were plenty of times when I  got messages I didn’t like as a Minister, “you’re not doing well enough, you should do  better in this area”. That's how we improve.

The idea that the women’s organisations should be a mouth-piece for the Government  into the community rather than the voice of the community coming into Government I  find really disturbing.  So we will see what the Government proposes for the Alliances,  but I can tell you we need a structure and we need a system that allows your voices to  go to the very heart of where decisions are being made.

I was in Lakemba two days ago with my colleague Tony Burke who organised a terrific  forum for women leaders in his community because he said he had no trouble hearing  from the men in his community, they were very happy to tell him what he wasn’t do well  enough and where he should be doing better - but he wasn’t hearing enough from the  women, so he had a women’s only meeting.  You know we were open to discussing  employment, childcare, TAFE, we talked about a whole range of issues, but I will tell  you the issue that came up most, the one that took up most time, the one that comes up  everywhere I go, with every group of women I speak to: that’s domestic violence,  violence against women.

We cannot be an equal society, we cannot be a just society until every Australian feels  safe in their everyday lives - no-one should live with that fear.  I am committed to  working with you to make sure that we not just have a vision for a multicultural society,  the safe society that we all want, but that we have impact, that we resource the things  we need to change so that we can reach that vision.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

