1

www.minister.border.gov.au









The Hon  Peter Dutton MP  Minister  for Immigration and  Border Protection

TRANSCRIPT



ABC Insiders



18 September 2016



Subjects: Refugee Programme, ANAO Report, Backpacker’s Tax.

E&EO…………………………………………………………………………………………..





BARRIE CASSIDY: Peter Dutton,  welcome to the programme.

PETER DUTTON: Good morning, Barrie.

BARRIE CASSIDY: You've said that Australia has a good story to tell on refugees;  in fact the Prime Minister has just described Australia's policy as the best in the  world. In  a nutshell,  what  is that story that you will be telling  the  world?

PETER DUTTON: Well the story is a contrast to what's happening in Europe at the  moment. The story is a contrast to what happened under the six years of the Rudd-  Gillard-Rudd period where 1200 people drowned at sea and 50,000 people came on  800 boats.

The Australian public will support an increase in the number of people we take under  the humanitarian and refugee programmes if we have an orderly process around  migration and this Government  has been able to restore integrity to our  borders.

We've been able to bring record numbers of people in under the refugee and  humanitarian programme. In fact, last year the biggest programme in 30 years in  terms of our offshore programme and I think  that's the  good story to  tell.

It's about keeping borders secure, but bringing in people the right way and providing  them with the settlement  services they need to start their new   life.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But when you draw the contrast with Europe, do you really think  that's what other countries  want to hear? Countries in Europe that face a problem  on  a much greater scale than Australia, is that what they want to hear from    us?

2

www.minister.border.gov.au



PETER DUTTON: Obviously the situation is different for Australia because we're not  landlocked and we don't have porous borders. We have a natural defence in terms of  our waters, but we do have  close proximity to some of our near neighbours  and   we  do have irregular movements of people as they do in Europe and people have seen  the scenes, horrific scenes of drownings on the Mediterranean.  As people have seen  in Australia, the  1200 people drowned at sea.

So we do need an orderly migration programme and many of the European countries  and other partners that we've spoken with over recent times are interested in what  Australia has done and at this occasion, in New York, we will be able to speak about  the very successful restoration of secure borders and as I say, an increase in the  number of refugees that we've brought to our country and I think Australians should  be proud of that.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But also surely they've noticed there are consequences to  Australia's policy, consequences that wouldn't be tolerated in a lot of other countries  and that is that the lives of up to 1000 people are being ruined in these offshore  detention centres?

PETER DUTTON: Well, Barrie, I've been to Zaatari in Jordan and I've seen the  devastation coming out of Syria and I've been to Lebanon seeing the situation there,  with many people who are living in desperate, desperate situations, having been  displaced. There are 6.5 million people from Syria alone.

The  UN predicts 65 million people are forcibly displaced and looking for a new home.

The conditions that we support the Nauruan Government to provide and the PNG  Government  to provide, are very different to that which I've  seen in other  camps.

BARRIE CASSIDY: That's not much of  a…….-

PETER DUTTON: …..we need to do all we can to help  people…..(inaudible)…..

BARRIE CASSIDY: ……Is that a fair comparison to make though, to compare Nauru  with the conditions in Syria?

PETER DUTTON: Well, that was the point you were trying to make, was not about  Syria, which I make no comparison to. I'm talking about people coming out of Syria  into camps run by the UN in places like Jordan and  Lebanon.

The situation on Nauru is very, very different.  We provide $26 million for the hospital  on Nauru, $11 million for the medical centre, kids are picked up by bus and go to  school each day, people are given financial  support. There  are 300 people working  in Nauru, 35 have started businesses and many people we will help to return back to  their country  of origin because they've  been found  not to be refugees.

So you have to have an orderly migration programme and if you do that, then you  can increase the number of refugees you bring in the regular way which is what we  do with the assistance of the UN and through referrals to the humanitarian  programme otherwise.

3

www.minister.border.gov.au



BARRIE CASSIDY: But most of them have been found to be genuine refugees and  while they languish on Nauru and Manus Island and you can't find a place for them,  then surely people are entitled to judge that your  policy fails at the  final  hurdle?

PETER DUTTON: No, I think people need to look at the situation we inherited, which  started with a terrible situation where people were drowning at   sea.

We've now not had one death at sea in over two years, we've not had a successful  people smuggling venture in over two years. We have presided over the biggest  offshore humanitarian programme in 30 years and the UN High Commissioner for  Refugees only last year told me that Australia, along with Canada, are the two best  countries in the  world at providing settlement  to people to start a new life.

So we will work with people both on Nauru,  in PNG and domestically as well.

BARRIE CASSIDY: But that's different, that comment that you just referred to is  different to finding places for the people who are now on Nauru and Manus Island  and you haven't  been able to solve that.

PETER DUTTON: Well Barrie, as I've said, we're in discussions with a number of  third countries, but we have to provide an arrangement that is not going to provide a  pull factor.

The people smugglers are still there, there are at least 14,000 people in Indonesia  alone waiting to get onto boats and we have to do it in such a way that the  vacancies that we create aren't filled by new arrivals and new deaths at sea. We're  not going to tolerate that.

But the agreement that Mr Rudd and Labor entered into in relation to Manus, for  example, meant that people who were found to be refugees could stay in  PNG,  which is a signatory to the convention and that's the situation that we inherited from  Labor.

Now we've cleaned up a lot of the mess, there is a long way to go, there was an $11  billion blowout and we're returning money back to the budget now because we've  closed 17 detention centres onshore and one of the proudest achievements of this  Government is having got children out of detention. There were 2,000 children at the  peak under Labor's time in Government  in detention and it was unacceptable.

BARRIE CASSIDY: You said in a speech this week that Australia's relationship with  Nauru, in terms of the processing centres will continue for decades. What do you  mean by that?  For decades?

PETER DUTTON: Well, I believe that there will be irregular movements of people  across the globe for as long as we don't have world peace and for as long as people  will seek a better economic outcome for their families.

I think we will always be tested in terms of people trying to come from Sri Lanka or  from Vietnam or from Indonesia  and therefore we will need a regional  processing

4

www.minister.border.gov.au



centre arrangement. I hope it's empty. I hope we never have  to use it, but we have  to  be very strong in our determination to stare down people smugglers because these  are organised criminals that are going nowhere.

They will take money from people and they couldn't care less whether those people  go to the bottom of the ocean or whether they make land in our country and that's  why we do need regional processing centres to remain, at least Nauru.We certainly  need Temporary Protection Visas and we need to be able to turn back boats where  it's safe to do so.

That's a trifecta of success in securing our borders. The dividend is we've got  children out of detention, we've had no drownings at sea and we're able to bring in  record numbers  of people through  the refugee programme.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I want to ask you about the audit office that criticised your  department for what they said was breaking public service guidelines and not  conducting  proper tenders.

Do you accept that this happened? It may have been in the rush to get things done,  but it happened?

PETER DUTTON: But Barrie, look back at the time. When I speak to the Border  Force staff and the sailors who were at sea, they were pulling 1000 people a week  off boats. They were pulling bodies out of the water of children that had been eaten

by sharks and the rest. It was a horrific, horrific scene. They are the circumstances  under which my Department was  operating.

Ms Gillard at the time made an announcement people would go to Nauru and things  had to be set up within a couple of weeks. So let's put it in context. So yes, I'm sure  mistakes were made and decisions were rushed. The decisions were taken because

they wanted to fulfil the  aims of the  Government  of the  day.

Now, Mr Marles, the former Shadow Minister in this area, made a heartfelt apology  to the Labor conference last year to say that Labor made a mistake and they  apologise for the  1200 deaths at sea.

We've been able to restore that integrity of our border process; we have been able to  put in place proper contestability around tendering  and contracts.

So yes, mistakes were made and I think the lessons have been learnt, but put it into  context what the Department was operating under  at the  time and I've  had no  criticism to make of the Department at all. But they will learn the lessons and I hope  that we never  ever have  to return  to those days of dysfunction.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I suppose people wonder why you are so defensive of the  department. The Audit Office is not criticising Scott Morrison or any previous minister  and they do say the records do not indicate that urgent or unforeseen circumstances  existed. They  don't accept that line that  there  were urgent circumstances.

5

www.minister.border.gov.au



PETER DUTTON: Well, Barrie, I mean you saw the scenes, you saw that Mr Rudd  essentially lost faith with the Australian people because he wasn't able to deliver on  his promise to keep borders safe and secure.

Ms Gillard promised it as one of her key outcomes of her leadership that she would  stop boats and deal with the drownings at sea and the numbers of arrivals. It never  happened and the Department acts at the urging  and the  direction of the government  or the Minister of the day, the  Prime Minister of the  day, all I can say is that in  relation to my experience with the Department, they are professional  operators.

They have an absolute determination to preside over a programme which is well run.  They do want to see the opportunity for people to start a new life. They don't want to  see drownings at sea and all of those sailors and Border Force officers that I've  spoken to plead with me that we don't change the policy settings because they don't  want to return to those days where boats were going to the  bottom of the    ocean.

That was a shameful period in our nation's history and we should recognise that and  we should  hope and pray that we never  return  to it.

BARRIE CASSIDY: I just want to refer you to one issue here back home, the  backpacker's tax and George Christensen has had something  to say about that.

Can we assume you won't be going ahead with that tax, certainly not in its present  form as proposed?

PETER DUTTON: Scott Morrison has indicated he's working through the issue at the  moment talking to people like George and other backbenchers, particularly   in  regional areas where agriculture is a big problem in terms of wanting to pick fruit and  get food to markets that's rotting on vines and on trees and they can't get young  Australians  to work in those jobs.

So there is a great demand for the labour and Scott Morrison has indicated that he's  working through that issue and if there's an announcement to make it will be made in  due course.

BARRIE CASSIDY: And you're a Queenslander, a fellow Queenslander like George  Christensen, do you think he's the  kind of person when  he says he  will put it on the  line that he will, that if there wasn't a breakthrough here that he would perhaps go off  and join Pauline Hanson?

PETER DUTTON: Look, I think George and others, as they’ve indicated through the  superannuation debate, want a better outcome for their community,  the best  outcome possible for their community and for their country. They should be admired  for that.

But I think George is a team player, our team is working well. I think we had a great  week in Parliament last week. I think the resignation of Sam Dastyari demonstrated  that Bill Shorten has real problems within his own ranks and I think our team will pull  together and demonstrate  to the Australian people, as we've done over the   last

6

www.minister.border.gov.au



couple of weeks, that we can make decisions that are in the best interests of our  nation.

If we do that then I think we will be on a good path over the course of this term of  Government.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Peter Dutton, we know you've only just arrived in New York, we  appreciate that you've  given us the time, thank  you.

[Ends]

