

SENATOR LISA SINGH

SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE  CHANGE AND WATER  LABOR SENATOR FOR TASMANIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

936 ABC STATEWIDE MORNINGS

WEDNESDAY, 11 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: CSIRO Cuts; Senate pre-selection / DD ticket; Tourism, Cadbury’s Money, Funding for

UTAS campus shift into Launceston, National Executive decision on Senate Ticket, Asylum Seeker

policy.

LEON COMPTON: We will welcome Labor Senator for Tasmania Lisa Singh into the studio in a moment as

well, in fact let’s do that now. Senator good morning to you.

SENATOR LISA SINGH, PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR ENVIRONMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE

AND WATER: Good morning Leon how are you?

LEON COMPTON: Good, excuse our technical issues this morning. Let’s start with one of the stories we’ve

been covering over the last couple of hours. We know that the Liberals and indeed Andrew Wilkie in Denison

are inviting people to register their postal vote and do it through their office. Does the Labor party intend to do

that this election too?

SENATOR LISA SINGH: We do and it’s something that happens at each election and happens for good

purpose. I mean the reason for doing it is that a number of people can’t get to a polling booth and in the

sense of enfranchisement we want to make sure everyone has the opportunity to vote. To assist the Electoral

Commission in this process we send out a postal vote application form, particularly to people that are elderly

or live far away from a polling booth as you’ve said Leon, so they can fill out that form and have that

opportunity to vote.

COMPTON: But really the major parties don’t need anything to do with it, I mean the Australian Electoral

Commission can take care of it. Is it reasonable that political parties are involved; we know it’s lawful, is it

fair?

SINGH: I think we all have a role to play in ensuring that our voters have that opportunity to get their postal

vote in and whether it’s any political party or an individual candidate I know it’s certainly lawful under our

electoral act to make that opportunity available to them. So it’s something, Leon, that’s happened for time in

memoriam I think and some candidates or sitting members have been very prepared, particularly perhaps

those in government that have known when the election date was going to be called and have already kind of

got it out there, but there is certainly a fair bit of time yet before those postal vote application forms and that

whole process needs to be submitted - I think it’s somewhere early June. So yes, I think it’s a good thing. It’s

something that ensures that the elderly and those who can’t get to a polling booth have the form and we help

them make that happen.

COMPTON: Liberal Senator for Tasmania Richard Colebeck, Senator good morning to you.

SENATOR RICHARD COLEBECK: Morning Leon, morning Lisa.

SENATOR LISA SINGH: Good morning Richard.

LEON COMPTON: My apologies for the technical issues there.

SENATOR RICHARD COLEBECK: I promise I didn’t touch anything.

COMPTON: It’s easy to lean on a button, I know. Richard, whose vote is still to be won in this election

campaign? It’s an eight-week campaign there will be enormous amounts of sound, fury, energy designed to

swing whomever is left to cast, to decide their vote, how many votes do you think are still out there to be

decided in the Tasmanian electorate?

COLEBECK: That’s a good question Leon. The job now is to make sure that we’re out there explaining our

perspectives letting Tasmanians know, Australians know what our policy is, that we are looking to build a

positive future for the country, jobs and growth, tax cuts for small business, so that we can ensure that we

harness every single vote possible. I’ve said this to you before, that’s my focus it has to be the focus right up

until election day.

COMPTON: Indeed, but clearly we can see that you have distilled your election pitch down into about eight

words; jobs and growth, tax cuts for small business, I mean that’s it, people will get that day one won’t they,

what are the next seven and a half weeks about?

COLEBECK: Well we’re obviously moving around the state we’re taking to people, sitting in coffee shops,

we’re sitting around boardroom tables, we’re knocking on doors, we’re doing all those sorts of things to

communicate with our people with our communities. We’re out at community events, Agfest for example, a

fantastic event last week run by Rural Youth. We’re all out there in force talking to people and I have to say I

was quite taken by the number of people who walked up to me to have a chat and express their views.

COMPTON: Lisa Singh, what’s left to be decided in this election campaign and most people have already

decided their vote, who’s left to be swung?

SINGH: Look I think there’s a lot of decisions to be made and once we dig a little bit deeper, Leon, then the

eight-word slogan or three-word slogan of jobs and growth we realise that there’s not much substance behind

what the Liberals are putting out there for the electorate. In fact, there is completely nothing for Tasmania

and that came clearly out from budget night. The fact that tax cuts go to those on $80,000 and above

completely leaves off 80 per cent of Tasmanians who earn less than that. Let alone all the small businesses,

I mean Tasmania’s a state made up of so many small businesses, I think more per head of capita than any

other state, but those are real small businesses. Small business is when we talk about the definition of being

$2 million turnover and under that’s what Labor regards as a small business, not giving tax cuts to small

business with a billion-dollar turnover and at the cost of education, health, dental care, all of those things that

the Liberals are cutting in this budget as well. So Tasmania has done really badly, lots of decisions there for

Tasmanians to make when they’re looking at the alternative, which of course is Labor, who will fully fund

Gonski, we will increase our funding to our health and our hospitals, of course introduce marriage equality in

the first 100 days of being in office, invest in renewables, which is really important for Tasmania, and ensure

that we reverse other unfair cuts, like those to the dental health scheme, to paid parental leave and the like,

lots of decisions.

COMPTON: Senator Richard Colebeck, has there been much criticism of, in inverted commas, “unfairness”

out of the budget when it comes to most Tasmanians who earn less than $80,000 a year?

COLEBECK: Well Leon the small businesses that I was talking to at Agfest at the weekend who turn over

between $2 and 10 million don’t think that they’re a big business I can promise you that and this line that

Labor is running about giving multi-million dollar businesses a tax break, I mean that’s a cycle of process of

ten years and by the time we get to the end of the ten year cycle all businesses will be paying a 25 per cent

tax rate. We are starting with small business we did that in the budget last year and small business

appreciate that. We’re extending that to small businesses between $2 and 10 million from the 1 st  of July and I

can tell you the small businesses I spoke to at Agfest, and there were plenty of them, they are very excited

about that, the fact that they are getting a bit of a go. One thing Lisa is right about is Tasmania’s a small

business state, so we are putting our faith in small business to grow the economy they’re the ones that

provide the jobs. And as far as some of the spending commitments that Labor are making they have to

explain where the money’s coming from, they’ve got a $20 billion black hole that they described as a

rounding error in their costings just on tobacco tax, and we know because we’ve been talking about it over

recent weeks that just throwing money for example at education isn’t the answer, it’s actually how you spend

it and we’re focusing on how you spend it to get results. We’ve spent more, we’re spending more money now

on education than we ever have and we’re not getting any better results we need to do it better and I’ve got

to say I’m really impressed by what the state guys are doing in respect of their improvements to teacher

training and all of those sorts of things and so we have put a plan on the table that fully funds our

commitments on education, health and roads. So that’s fully funded. Labor is going to be, who is Labor

before the election and who is Labor after the election. We already know that they’re going to have a mini

budget after the election, so they’re not really going to tell us what they’re economic plan is before the

election they’re going to wait until after the election and Chris Bowen confirmed that yesterday. So you’ll have

Labor before the election and Labor after.

SINGH: Richard, Tasmanian’s aren’t buying this scare tactic that you and your colleagues keep putting out

there. You know that we have identified $70 billion in savings, so we can fund our policies. Our policies have

been funded by the Parliamentary Budget Office and we had Richard once upon a time a unity ticket on

funding education, on funding Gonski and you know that in Tasmania needs based funding is needed more

than ever and if we aren’t going to educate our people then we are aren’t going to get them employed in the

jobs of tomorrow. So walking away from funding Gonski is a broken promise by your government, by you,

and it goes to the heart of so many other broken promises that the Tasmanian Liberals have made in this

time over the last two years. One of them of course, Leon, being in Richard’s portfolio, being in tourism. You

know the $16 million in Cadbury’s which was promised in the last election as an election pitch, to actually get

Tasmanian’s to vote for them has never been delivered. How can we trust the Liberals in Tasmania when

they continue to break promises and they continue to trot out these slogans that have absolutely no

substance behind them. Now Labor has been very brave and we have put forward our policies early. We put

forward policies that address affordable housing, that address the needs of our people and Tasmanian’s

have been duded by this government and they know it and they can see it in this budget. The fact that there

are no tax cuts for us, the fact that there is a mother perhaps with $65,000 a year salary that will be $4,700 a

year worse off because of cuts to Family Tax Benefit A.

COMPTON: Lisa Singh, we understand the lines from your party there.  Do you believe in your party’s

policies on asylum seekers?

SINGH: Look, I do. And I think though that …

COMPTON: Do you?  Do you? Do you believe in the offshore processing of asylum seekers; do you stand

(inaudible) -

COLBECK: That’s not what you said Lisa -

COMPTON: On the asylum seeker policies (inaudible)

SINGH: Leon, I actually helped develop our party’s change in policy that we brought to the national

conference, at the last national conference - increasing our humanitarian intake, funding the UNHCR. These

are the things that Labor put forward and endorsed at the last national conference and I was part -

COMPTON: Processing of asylum seekers -

SINGH: I do agree with the offshore processing of asylum seekers, but that’s not what’s been happening.

What’s been happening is the indefinite detention of asylum seekers and that is something I do not agree

with. That is why I’ve been very outspoken for a very long time on Australia’s treatment of refugees. I think

there is an ongoing conversation to be had to ensure we are playing our part as a nation, you know, dealing

with a refugee crisis which is a global phenomenon to ensure we settle refugees in our country. Now at the

moment -

COMPTON: Are you in lock step with your party on the issue of what happens to those people who’ve been

found as legitimate asylum seekers on Manus Island? Many people think if they’re legitimate asylum seekers

they should be allowed to come to Australia. Your party doesn’t think so, it seems.

SINGH: Well, I think what we set up with Manus Island is not what this government has implemented with

Manus Island -

COLBECK: That’s exactly what you implemented. It’s exactly what you implemented.

SINGH: It has been a humanitarian disaster. And to treat people that have been deemed genuine refugees in

this way, to lock them up in indefinite detention, longer terms than some prisoners experience in our own

country, is absolutely abhorrent.  The fact also that we have Peter Dutton saying on the one hand, we’ll settle

12,000 Syrian refugees when only 30 have come and using national security as the excuse.  Why is it that

Canada can settle 28,000 Syrian refugees, and yet Australia seems to be in this kind of state of inertia in

being able to do the same. I think we have to do so much better, but I do think Labor has a good policy on

refugees. Of course, I don’t want turnbacks to happen, if that’s what you’re asking me Leon, and I don’t think

anyone in our party does, but we do need to ensure that we do play our part in this global crisis, and we do

have an important part to play and that should be an humanitarian response to people who are seeking our

refuge.

COMPTON: Richard Colbeck, where is that $16 million that Lisa Singh mentioned earlier that was Cadbury

money and had to be reallocated elsewhere. So where is that $16 million dollars and will we see it in the

course of this campaign?

COLBECK: Well, it’s now $24 million, Leon, and we -

SINGH: It’s still not here though -

COLBECK: We will see it very very soon, I can assure you.

SINGH: Oh come on Richard, you’ve got to do better than that.  You’re the tourism minister, I mean -

COLBECK: It’s not tourism money -

SINGH:  This is a joke. It’s been nearly three years and there’s been not one cent delivered from that

promise -

COLBECK: Lisa. Lisa. Just watch this space.

SINGH: I mean, what came out of the budget Richard for tourism infrastructure, or tourism at all, our biggest

industry in this state, for Tasmania? Nothing. And yet, you’re the Tourism Minister.

COLBECK:  We said this wouldn’t be a fistful of dollars budget, Lisa, and we put record funding into Tourism

Australia and we are working very cooperatively with the states, with the tourism demand driving

Infrastructure Scheme Program which we put into place at the beginning of the program, at the beginning of

the term and we’re continuing to roll that out in cooperation with Liberal and Labor states across the country

and it’s working quite well -

SINGH: But what are you offering Tasmania?  What are you offering Tasmania?

COLBECK: I’m the Federal Tourism Minister, Lisa, and you will see our Federal tourism policy which will

benefit Tasmania and if you look at the tourism numbers and see how well they’re going, it’s quite clear that

our tourism marketing programs are working very well internationally, and Tasmania is the major beneficiary

of that, because Tasmania has the highest growth rates of tourism in the country.

COMPTON: Senator, will you commit to funding for the Cradle Mountain redevelopment that the tourism

industry body have put together and launched in the last couple of months?

COLBECK:  Well, we’ve been talking quite cooperatively with the state government about that. We need to

find a proponent for the project first, and he’s going to need about a hundred million dollars, at least, of

private sector money and I’ve already had a chat to Austrade about putting this project into their processes

and look for a potential investor into the project. It’s going to need a major private investor and I’ve already

spoken to both the Premier, Will Hodgman and the Treasurer, Peter Gutwein, about what we might do

cooperatively once we work out exactly what money is required by a private sector proponent, but we don’t

have a proponent yet, but we’ve started a process to see if we can help find one, because it is an important

project.  It is one of Tasmania’s icon destinations, we are very supportive of the concept, but we need to

properly and responsibly progress the concept.

COMPTON: It’s a small thing, but it matters to people around St. Helens, and on the east coast of Tasmania

- will you find financial support to bring the HMAS Tobruk to be sunk there, as a dive wreck off Skeleton Bay

near Binalong Bay?

COLBECK: Well it’s certainly a very live issue and I know my good friend and colleague Eric Hutchison has

been very persistent in working with the Defence Minister and I’ve had a couple of conversations with her

about it as well with my colleagues, other colleagues have too. So we recognise the value of that as a

potential project for Tasmania bearing in mind there is a bit of competition from Queensland so we’re working

to make sure we get the best result for Tassie in that context, and hopefully the Defence Minister will make

some sort of announcement around that.

SINGH:  I think that’s a very good project and I know that Brian Mitchell, our Labor candidate in Lyons has

been very much in favour and pushing the benefits for the East coast of Tasmania. I mean diving is another

kind of tourism that people come to Tasmania for, we’ve amazing kelp, amazing fish and sea life underneath

the water and I know that would be a fantastic project, but -

COLBECK: I agree Lisa, I think there’s pretty much bipartisan support for -

SINGH:  It kind of couples the idea of sea tourism and our waterways with the importance of climate change

and research, and that’s another area that Labor will ensure doesn’t get cut, and that is the CSIRO. CSIRO in

Tasmania is an important bedrock of ensuring climate science, that research, that monitoring like at the east

coast weather station at Cape Grim continues on -

COLBECK: It’s actually on the west coast, the northwest coast -

SINGH: That’s another fight we’ve had to deal with Leon and I know your listeners have been very interested

in this, that Tasmania was going to lose, and is still deemed to lose under this government is our scientific

expertise, our connection with the Antarctic and with those Southern Ocean waterways that makes us such

an important destination, as well, for scientists coming to live here.  So that’s something, that again, that we

need to address because these are the cuts that we’ve had to face under this Liberal Government.

COMPTON: Senator Richard Colbeck, I’m told out of his breakfast this morning in Launceston, Treasurer

Scott Morrison has said, and this is my understanding of what happened there, that there wouldn’t be support

this election campaign for the UTAS campus move into the heart of Launceston. Can you confirm that the

government will not be committing money to the UTAS campus move in Launceston?

COLBECK: I hadn’t heard that, Leon, and, that’s not what I’ve been working towards.

COMPTON: Do you think, is he potentially wrong on that?

COLBECK: I don’t know, I haven’t heard the comment, so having not heard the comments, I won’t be making

any commentary around them.

COMPTON: Is it still possible that the state government, rather the federal government, will come out in

support financially and make a financial commitment to the UTAS campus move in Launceston?

COLBECK:  Well, there’s still seven and a half weeks of the campaign to go, Leon.

SINGH: Well, Labor have made it very clear that we will fund those campuses, a $150 million investment to

that, to our state. We know the importance of our universities spread across the state because we have a

regionally diverse population and we want to ensure those in the north of the state have access to university

education as much as the south, so Labor will fund it.  You see, this is where we kind of go begging and

waiting for the Liberals to work out what they’re doing. I really don’t think they know, Leon, what it is they’re

doing, what they’re funding. We’ve been very clear because we know what Tasmania needs. I don’t

understand why Richard and his team don’t.

COLBECK: Well, we make election announcements and commitments in our own time, and not to somebody

else’s program. You know the commitment to the north is so strong that Bill Shorten made his announcement

in Hobart at four o’clock on a Thursday afternoon with hardly anybody knowing about it, so you know, let’s be

frank, Lisa, we will develop a very strong plan for the future of this state. We will be strategic about what we

do and we’ll make sure there are announcements about building a positive future for this state so that we can

take part in the economy we are building off the back of our free trade agreements. And the opportunities for

more cost competitive shipping across Tasmania. You say there’s been nothing for Tasmania - I mean we

provided $200 million for the freight equalisation scheme that we didn’t even promise at the last election. We

said we’d enhance the scheme and we have. And I was at a vegetable processor’s plant on Monday

morning, who has doubled their exports on the back of the freight equalisation scheme and I’ve spoken to

other vegetable growers and producers in the state who’ve done the same so we’re actually working to

strengthen the Tasmanian economy which is our job.

COMPTON: Lisa Singh, the Federal Labor secretariat have now said they’re taking control of Tasmania’s

Senate ticket and who goes where on it. Is that good for you if they decide to step in, in response to criticism

about where you were put on the Senate ticket the first time around?

SINGH:  I understand the double-dissolution means that the national executive does set the Senate tickets

for Labor Senators and candidates in the entire country. So this is not just for Tasmania, this happens across

the country. They’re yet to do that, and obviously I’ll wait and see where I end up.

COMPTON: So the Federal Labor Secretariat decides all, the whole country, what the whole country’s

senate ticket looks like?

SINGH: Because it’s a double dissolution Leon, obviously -

COMPTON: It’s not just because they don’t trust Tasmania and they think you should be somewhere

different?

SINGH: I think this is a process that happens. It’s very unique because we haven’t had a double-dissolution

for a very long time, where the national executive come together and work out what the order will be.

COMPTON: Interesting. To both of you, thank you for coming in and being part of Mornings this morning. We

appreciate your time. Richard Colbeck, good to talk to you.

COLBECK: Thanks Leon. Thanks Lisa.

COMPTON: And Lisa. Good to talk to you both.

SINGH: Thank you.

ENDS

Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111





