



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Education and Training  Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Weekend Sunrise  12 December 2016

Andrew O’Keefe: Teachers in three states will go ahead with a plan to wear t-shirts to  school, protesting Australia’s offshore detention policy. The planned campaign has been  organised by a group called Teachers for Refugees and is being backed by education  unions around the country.

[Excerpt]

Unidentified Speaker: Calling on all teachers in New South Wales public schools to stand  up and speak out.

[End of excerpt]

Monique Wright: Education ministers in Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland have  warned teachers who take part in the campaign they will face disciplinary action and  possibly dismissal.

Andrew O’Keefe: We’re joined by Federal Education Minister Simon Birmingham, Lucy  Honan from Teachers for Refugees, and social commentator Prue MacSween. Good  morning to you all.

Lucy, first of all, explain to us exactly what this campaign is aiming to do and how.

Lucy Honan: Well, today is Human Rights Day, International Human Rights Day, and next  week is obviously the week following Human Rights Day. We want to draw attention to the  human rights abuses going on in offshore detention camps, and to do that we’re going to be  wearing these t-shirts next week to draw attention to the fact that there are kids in offshore  detention who have been subject to abuse. They don’t have access to education, their  parents and other adults are being abused as well, so we want to draw attention to that and  we’re demanding that the Government close the camps and bring those refugees here.

Monique Wright: Right. Lucy, you’re getting slammed for the action; the Prime Minister  says the campaign is quote, absolutely inappropriate, critics are coming out of the  woodwork to say that the classroom is no place for the personal political beliefs of teachers.  How do you respond to that?

Lucy Honan: I think the Government is very scared of losing this debate. Doctors have  come out about what is happening in the offshore camps, unions have opposed what’s

happening to refugees and refugee policy in this country, churches, and now teachers, and  I think that’s why the Government is being very heavy-handed about this protest.

Andrew O’Keefe: Well, in terms of heavy-handedness then, if I could just go to the minister  on that. You wrote to your counterparts in Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland,  Minister, who are now threatening that teachers who take part might be disciplined or even  sacked. Given that the Government is so pro-free speech, and I look at, you know,  questions around 18C for example, does this Government really stand to gain much by  silencing the critics?

Simon Birmingham: We don’t want to silence anybody. If people want to go out and  protest, they’re free to protest in their own time. But teachers are employed to go into a  classroom and to teach our children, and to develop skills in those children and they are  not, though, employed to go into the classroom and proffer their own personal political  views and to use Australian school children as a type of tool for a political campaign.

Andrew O’Keefe: Well we try hard in our schools, Minister, of course, to impart values of  inclusion, community, duty, empathy towards others, good citizenship. Isn’t the point that  teachers are making is that these are precisely the values we’re not upholding when we  contravene our international obligation and wash our hands of the people who need our  help?

Simon Birmingham: No, Andrew. Look, there’s no reason at all as to why teachers, as  part of the relevant elements of the curriculum, can’t go in there and talk to school children  about border protection policies-

Andrew O’Keefe: Sure.

Simon Birmingham: -and indeed about the debate that may occur. But for teachers to  walk into the classroom wearing close the camp t-shirts as part of a nationwide political  campaign, is an abuse of the rights of those school children, is an abuse of the rights  teachers have in terms of being able to go into those classrooms and impart knowledge and

understanding, but not profess to impart their own political viewpoints, which is what’s  happening here.

Monique Wright: The teachers are saying that they are going to give both sides of the  argument, a lot of the teachers are saying this. Prue, you’ve been very vocal about it, what  is the problem with having teachers discussing an important social issue like this?

Prue MacSween: Well it’s one sided, that’s the point. And we send our children to school to  learn, to not be brainwashed, and this is the problem: we have political activists  masquerading as teachers and it is against the Code of Conduct of the Education  Department to do-preach these kinds of political statements.

Andrew O’Keefe: We also have a federally-funded chaplaincy program.

Prue MacSween: So?

Andrew O’Keefe: Well, I mean, is that not espousing an ideology or even a religion in that  case?

Prue MacSween: Andrew we all know your left leanings. The point is that we are talking  about-

Andrew O’Keefe: Well no, no. Answer the question: why is one more acceptable and one  not?

Prue MacSween: No, I’m not going to answer that question because it’s a stupid question.

Andrew O’Keefe: Only if you’re stupid enough not to realise it.

Prue MacSween: We actually imprison paedophiles for grooming children. As far as I’m  concerned, this is grooming children; brainwashing them- using brainwashing conversion  techniques to, I don’t know, swing these children to these really radical views. I mean we-

instead of staging political stunts like this, I think that teachers need to focus on improving  their skills. We have children who are failing, who are so behind standards in the rest of the  world because teachers are spending so much time espousing - some teachers I say, not  all of them because there are a lot of good ones, but some of them - espousing their  political statements and views

Andrew O’Keefe: Well Lucy, that’s a good point Lucy. That is a good point, yeah.

Monique Wright: Sorry Lucy, just your response to that. Do you plan to brainwash kids?

Lucy Honan: No, that’s not my plan at all and I think, you know, if this t-shirt was able to  brainwash kids, I think it’d be a very, very magical t-shirt.

Prue MacSween: You’re kidding me.

Lucy Honan: I think if people are concerned about the falling standards in education, you  could look at the billions of dollars spent imprisoning people in the offshore camps and  reinvest that into public education?

Prue MacSween: Are you kidding me? I hope you aren’t let loose in a school classroom  because you are seriously a dangerous person.

Monique Wright: Prue, I’m sorry-

Simon Birmingham: Let’s be clear. It would be just as unacceptable for people to walk into  classrooms wearing stop the boats t-shirts. The issue here is bringing a political campaign  into the classroom. Whether it’s close the camps, stop the boats, we expect teachers in  schools to focus on teaching to the curriculum, absolutely part of that - at an advanced age  - is talking about public policy issues, but it is not about bringing a political campaign into  the classroom.

Monique Wright: Minister, Lucy, Prue, I’m sorry to cut in there but we are out of time. It’s  obviously an issue you’re all passionate about and we really appreciate your contributions  today. Thank you so much.

Simon Birmingham: Thank you.

Andrew O’Keefe: Thanks everyone. And do let us know your thoughts, of course, viewing  this at home.



Minister Birmingham’s media contact: James Murphy 0478 333 974

Nick Creevey 0447 664 957

Department Media: media@education.gov.au

