THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  LATROBE VALLEY  MONDAY, 14 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECTS: Jobs in the Latrobe Valley; regional resettlement; 457 visas

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION:  Good morning everybody. It's great  for Brendan O'Connor and myself to be here at quite an inspirational Gippsland  company, Safetech. Safetech is competing with some of the best manufacturers in the  world and they're winning. They employ 100-plus people and they are a good news  story.

Part of the reason that we're in the Latrobe Valley today is to show some support and  interest in what's happening to the workers who are losing their jobs at Hazelwood. But  the other part of the reason we're here is to remind Australians that when we give  Australian manufacturing a level playing field they can compete and win against the  best in the world. This company employs Australian engineers, Australian apprentices,  Australian welders and boilermakers and they are providing innovative engineering  solutions for Australian industry.

The Latrobe Valley has a bright future so long as it has a government in Canberra  committed to supporting local industry. It is very timely, this visit in the light of Labor's  commitment yesterday, that we need to have government policies which prioritise  building Australian, buying Australian and employing Australian. Again, we say to Mr  Turnbull: please focus on the problems in the temporary visa system which see cheap  labour being imported from overseas undercutting Australian jobs.

We also ask the Federal Government, that in the light of the closure of Hazelwood next  March, please just don't throw a few million dollars at the problem and set up a  committee and then forget all about it. What we need to see here is a genuine effort to  find Australian jobs for people dislocated by change. But we also say to the  Government: don't try and blame renewable energy or scare people with power prices.  What we need here is a Government who will work alongside the workforce, small  businesses and families of the Latrobe Valley.

This is a resilient community, capable of producing a diversified economy that just need  a Government in Canberra to back the people of Gippsland. We're happy to take  questions on this or any other matters.

JOURNALIST: What do you attribute to the extremely high unemployment rate in the  region?

SHORTEN: Clearly there's a changing mix of our economic industries in the Latrobe  Valley. This valley has done very well depending upon paper and power. Of course it  was bitterly hit by the privatisations of the 1990s, but the community rebuilt but that did  lead to some basic social problems in unemployment.

Since then, we've seen a Government who thinks that industry policy is something  which they shouldn't be involved in. They leave it to the market. Labor will take a  different view. What we can do to help deal with the eight per cent plus unemployment  rate in the Latrobe Valley, is that when there are taxpayer funded contracts, we want to  maximise Australian content. Why on earth, when you've got a great company like  Safetech, would you just be buying overseas product which doesn't have the same  quality? And why on earth would you bypass Australian companies and employ  companies who are importing cheap labour under 457 and other work visas,  undercutting Australian wages and conditions?

It may come as a bit of a surprise to people but this very company has seen the unfair  competition, as reported in June of this year, where they're offering a Chinese based  company, not only bringing in Chinese product to Australia, but bringing in cheap labour  to help install and finish the product here, when you've got people in Gippsland able to  do the job for better quality and for Australian wages and conditions.

JOURNALIST: Have you received any details from the Government in relation to the  refugee resettlement deal in particular in regards to a timeline and just how many  refugees they intend to resettle?

SHORTEN: Labor will take a constructive attitude to this welcome news that there may  be a one-off regional resettlement of the people who are stuck on Manus and Nauru.  Labor and Liberal are equally committed to stopping the scourge of people smuggling.  But Labor has never taken the view that in order to stop the people smugglers, you  should keep people in semi-indefinite detention. It's been three years plus, this regional  resettlement deal in the making. But what I promise Australians is I won't be like Tony  Abbott and the Liberals and the Green political party in the last Labor Government  where they blocked the Malaysia solution. We will work with the Government, my  people are getting briefed today about this resettlement. We won't unreasonably  withhold our agreement.

This country works best when we work together, and where the case is made, where  the evidence is put forward, where there's something positive, well we'll be up for  making that work.

JOURNALIST: Will you vote for the Government's visa ban legislation?

SHORTEN: The Government hasn't made the case, it hasn't shown the evidence that  the visa ban legislation is automatically linked to what the Americans require for this  regional resettlement deal.



Our best information is that the Americans are not putting on the table a requirement  that you have this sort of lifetime visa ban. Now If the Government's got evidence to the  contrary, we'll sit down and look at it. In the meantime, let's not play politics with this  issue of regional resettlement. What really matters here is stopping the people  smugglers, making sure that people are not drowning at sea but also making sure that  after three plus years, we can resettle genuine refugees in the United States or other  countries and we look forward to more detail from the Government.

JOURNALIST: Do you accept the argument that leaving refugees could go to America  and then travel to Australia kind of undermines the efforts to deter people smugglers?

SHORTEN: I really think that it's up to America how they run their laws, isn't it? It's  really up to the Americans about the nature of the citizenship they bestow upon people.  I don't think Australia should start telling other countries what their citizens can and can't  do - that's  a matter for those countries. I wouldn't expect the Americans to tell us what  rights Australian citizens have and I think we should repay that compliment.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of Minister Frydenberg criticising the Victorian  Government for abandoning Hazelwood?

SHORTEN: Everyone knows that the Federal Government, if given the choice between  playing a big blame game or finding solutions, will always pick the blame game. What  has caused the closure of Hazelwood is a range of matters. Not the least of which that  the international or multinational owner has decided that it's cheaper and easier to close  the plant than keep it running.

Now, it's been on the cards that Hazelwood would close, but I think the workforce had a  reasonable expectation that the eight units would be closed two units at a time and that  it wouldn't all just happen in March of next year.

I'm certainly going to talk to Hazelwood workers today about their concerns. I do think  that the industry as a whole should look at a scheme where it invites the people who are  coming to the end of their working lives across all the power generators, not just  Hazelwood, to see if there are volunteers to put their hands up to finish up their careers  and keep the people at Hazelwood who want to keep working in the power generation  industry to take up opportunities created in the other power generating companies.

The Federal Government's not interested in sorting out the long-term issues of these  displaced workers. What we see here is a Government who's addicted to right wing  economics. They say leave it to the market. Well I have a different message for our  fellow Australians: if you've paid taxes your whole life, if the small businesses in the  communities have contributed to the building of those communities, contributed to the  upkeep of Canberra and the taxes Canberra gets, now is not the time for Canberra to  wash their hands of the power industry and say it's not our problem, it's the market.

I mean, how silly is it of this Government to blame the Opposition who is not in power  for policies that are not in place, instead of dealing with the issues? They're in charge.

They've been in charge for the last three years. They need to make the power  companies understand this should be a just transition for the workforce affected by  change.

I mean, haven't they learnt anything from the American election results? Where you  abandon hard working, working class communities and provide no support for them,  that's when people get really angry at mainstream politics. Well Labor's different. We're  here and I think Malcolm Turnbull should take a day out of his busy diary, leave the  Sydney harbourside and come and visit Latrobe Valley and Morwell and Moe, and  Traralgon and all the other communities.

JOURNALIST: Do you think there needs to be a national transition plan to, I guess,  transition the coal industry away from coal given that a lot of these mines are looking at  shutdowns in the future?

SHORTEN: Let's be very straight here: I'm not some rampant greenie who thinks that  there's no place for fossil fuel in our energy mix in the future. I certainly think it is part of  our energy mix.

But what I do think, going to the start of your question, is that we are seeing our  electricity and our power industries modernising. Some of the plants which operate are  fifty and sixty years old. Sooner or later the people operating the plants are going to say  ‘well we're going to eventually demobilise those plants’. So it shouldn't come as a  surprise to the people out of touch in their ivory castle in Canberra in the Government,  their ivory tower in Canberra, that they need to have a plan for blue collar workers, for  engineering workers, for the power industry as it modernises.

I truly believe that if we are to take action on climate change, we need to have greater  support for renewable energy. But what I also recognise is that fossil fuels are part of  our energy mix,  and where there is modernisation, inevitable modernisation, even if  there wasn't the debate about climate change, we need a Federal Government who, in  the good times, takes the taxes of people out of Gippsland and Morwell and Latrobe  Valley and Moe and in the bad times washes their hands of people. That's not good  enough, that's not leadership.

JOURNALIST: What can you say about your Labor colleagues in Victoria and their  response to Hazelwood's closure?

SHORTEN: I think their response is superior to Malcolm Turnbull's response.

JOURNALIST: In what way?

SHORTEN: Well they're providing more resource, more infrastructure funding. If you  look at the bill they’re willing to pick up, it is certainly much more significant than the  Federal Government.

JOURNALIST: How important is State and Federal cooperation on transition of the  Latrobe Valley, and are we seeing it now?

SHORTEN: The Federal Government just seems to want to play politics. They were  narrowly re-elected at the last election. They have no authority, no agenda and they just  respond to events. But this country in the next ten and fifteen years needs a  government in Canberra who doesn't just respond to events and lash out at people they  don't like.

The Latrobe Valley's got a bright future. You just have to look at Safetech. You can see  the buzz on the shop floor here. Everyone's committed to delivering a premium product  of Australian innovation and ingenuity and they want to do it in a way which secures  jobs in this community. This is a success story here. But what this company and the  people who work for this company, the investors, the leaders, the people who work in  this company need, is a Government in Canberra as willing to back Australia as these  people are.

That’s why it's long overdue to maximise Australian content in taxpayer-funded projects,  it's long overdue to help rescue our TAFE and apprenticeship system, it's long overdue  to make sure that we ensure that the visa system, the cheap labour coming in from  overseas isn't being rorted.

The fact of the matter is, that under this Government there is more demand now for  overseas workers, cooks, carpenters, this shouldn't be the case, not when you've got so  many of our fellow Australians doing it tough. I might get Brendan O'Connor to briefly  just conclude on the visa concerns we have and then we might take one more question  and finish up this press conference.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Thanks very much Bill. Well clearly, firstly, can I say thank  you to Safetech for this opportunity to see such positive signs when we really commit to  building Australian products and providing jobs for Australians.

But can I say, of course we are concerned about the misuse of temporary work visas.  And the Government has to respond to our concerns. What we've seen is that there are  a series of occupations that are still on the shortage list - so-called shortage list - and  are allowed to come in under that particular 457 visa.

At the same time, we're seeing unemployed carpenters, we're seeing unemployed  cooks, we're seeing unemployed Australians throughout the nation. And therefore, it is  absolutely critical that we focus on providing opportunities to employ locals first. We  have 1.1 million Australians that are looking for more work but cannot find it. We have  an additional 700,000 Australians who can't find any work at all and yet we've seen no  response to the rip-offs and the exploitation of temporary work visa workers and nor  have we seen any response to ensure that employers look local first.

When that doesn't happen, when that system breaks down, it means good employers

looking to employ locals are affected - they're adversely affected - they're not winning.  The young job seekers and job seekers across the country who are looking for work or  more work, they're not winning. And for that reason, we need to see a genuine and  sincere response by the Government.

Now at last in Government, Labor did start to restrict the use of such visas in order to  make sure we had in place a system that provided overseas temporary work when there  was a legitimate demand. But what we're seeing now, too often, is temporary work visas  being used when there is very significant unemployment. And we have some regions of  this nation where unemployment is double the national average and yet there is an  overabundance of temporary work visa use. This has to stop. And we're happy to work  with the Government on this but they cannot continue to disregard this issue and leave  too many Australians unable to find work.

JOURNALIST: What message would you give to unemployed workers at Hazelwood.  What's Shorten Labor doing for them?

SHORTEN: We are here because we want to lend our support to you. We will press the  Federal Government to support a scheme which would look at voluntary redundancies  across the power generators and let those workers at Hazelwood who want to continue  to work in the industry get a chance to fill those created positions at other power  generators. But we have to convince the Federal Government to help them.

What we understand is that the Hazelwood workers are losing their jobs through no fault  of their own. They're not losing the fault because of renewable energy, but what we are  seeing is, we're seeing change happen and the Federal Government has no plan to  help them. We're going to say to these workers, that if we're elected and every day  between now and the next election, we're going to push policies which say build  Australian, buy Australian, employ Australian. The Latrobe Valley's got a good future,  manufacturing and engineering has got a good future. And we're not going to give up on  the workers of the Latrobe Valley.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that the free trade pacts that have been struck over the last  ten years have been in the country's national interest?

SHORTEN: I think that trade agreements which generate greater exports and Australian  jobs are in the national interest. What I also recognise is that trade agreements need to  make sure that some people don't get left behind, that for people who lose their jobs  through free trade have got comparable quality jobs to go to.

If a government doesn't think about all Australians, if it doesn't stand up for the regions -  not just the cities - if it doesn't stand up for blue collar workers not just the bankers, if it  doesn't stand up for secure and well paid jobs - not just part-time jobs - then  government is not doing its job. I say to Mr Turnbull, don't be out of touch, stop worrying  about the divisions in your own party, start focusing on the tens of thousands of blue  collar and regional jobs that this country vitally needs.



Thank you everybody.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

