



BRENDAN O’CONNOR

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS

MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE

THURSDAY, 18 AUGUST 2016



SUBJECT/S: Labour Force Figures; CFA; Penalty Rates; Nauru.



BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS:  I’m just here to respond to the ABS figures for the month  of July, and firstly welcome the small decline in the unemployment rate to 5.7 per cent.  But I do think it’s important for us to look at some of the issues arising from the ABS  data. What’s clear is that we have a problem creating full time work. This year we have  seen a decline in full time jobs. In fact, the July figures show that there is a fall in full  time jobs of 45,400. Now, whilst that’s been more than extended by the growth in part  time work too many Australians are unable to find sufficient work to make ends meet.



We have the highest underemployment in our history. We have 1,067,000 Australians  looking for more work but cannot find it. This is the highest number in our history. It’s  almost one in ten workers in this country looking for more work, but cannot find it. And  these figures today show that whilst you are seeing growth in the part time jobs  numbers, you’re seeing a decline. Now this is something the Government needs to  attend to. It is not good enough to find work of one hour or more if you are seeking to

find sufficient employment to pay for the bills; to pay for the expenses to keep the home  running; to look after your family; to pay for the rent; to pay for the mortgage; to put  petrol in your car. These basic essentials of life that requires sufficient employment and  yet there are too many Australians unable to find that work.



I’d also like to again comment on the extraordinarily high unemployment rate of young  people in excess of 13 per cent. More than double the national unemployment rate is  not good enough. It is inexcusable that almost 300,000 young Australians find  themselves not in education and not in work. Languishing in this situation. More needs  to be done.



So I do actually invite the Government to take up Labor’s initiatives that we announced  during the election campaign to actually provide more opportunities for young people to  find work. That seems to be something we need to do. Again we welcome the very  small incline in the rate, we are very concerned about the very significant fall in the full  time jobs numbers and we need to see more effort to tackle underemployment in this  country; to tackle youth unemployment and also have a jobs plan. A jobs plan does not  mean a $50 billion tax giveaway to big banks, to big multinationals, to big business. That  is not the panacea for the ills that beset this nation.



I also want to talk about, if I can just briefly, the CFA matter that’s been of course going  on for too long in this state. Labor has always believed that this matter, this unfortunate  tension between volunteer firefighters and career firefighters has gone on too long. It is  something that needs to be resolved. Now what we found of course yesterday is that  the Supreme Court of Victoria firstly, has granted an injunction to the Volunteer Fire  Brigades Victoria, an injunction to stop the implementation of the Enterprise Agreement  that was to be voted on by the firefighters in the CFA, the professional career  firefighters. Now as a result of that, and as a result of Justice McDonald’s decision to  actually have a court hearing on the 22 of September, we believe this could be the  means by which we see an end to these matters. An end to the unnecessary indefinite  tension between two remarkable sets of people, career firefighters and volunteer  firefighters who too often have to endanger their lives to protect the public and indeed  protect buildings and property and the lives of many Victorians.



So what we say to the Abbott-Turnbull Government is in the event that there is now a  court hearing held in just over a month from now, let’s see whether through that matter  this conflict can end. We would say in order to disabuse people of the view that the  Government’s been politically motivated, ideologically predisposed to intervene in what  has been a State matter, we would say let’s allow this court hearing firstly happen and  see whether in fact there is a remedy that arises from these proceedings. There’s a  number of things that could happen firstly the plaintiff could find a remedy through this  process, the parties might indeed find a remedy through these proceedings, or indeed  the parties may settle the matter rather than allow the court to proceed. I think it’s  important therefore that we allow this state issue to be dealt with by the Supreme Court  of Victoria before the Federal Government seeks to impose itself by seeking to have  national legislation deal with what has been a matter that of course has been confined  to the state of Victoria. That I think is the better approach and if the Prime Minister and  the Minister for Employment are not just playing politics with this matter and if indeed  they show sufficient respect to the Supreme Court of Victoria and to the plaintiff and  defendant that will before them on the 22nd of September, they will allow that matter to  proceed before introducing any legislation that might only inflame the tensions between  the parties. I might also say this. Since the 25th of July, Labor has sought to get a  briefing from the Government in relation to the proposed legislation and we have been  denied a briefing. We do know today however, the Government is seeking to brief what  they see as affected parties to this matter, and yet will not tell the Federal Opposition  what they have planned for insofar as this legislation. Well, there will be no need for that  if the Government allows the Supreme Court of Victoria to deal with this matter and see  whether, through those proceedings, we can see an end to this dispute which has gone  on too long. We should be seeking a resolution, not the inflaming of tensions between  parties but indeed, an attempt to reconcile any outstanding differences so that we can  move forward. And so our two great sets of people - the career firefighters and the  volunteer firefighters - can get about doing their job, as they do so remarkably in this  State. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: If the Federal Government does intervene, this could drag on for  months. What are you concern if it does carry on?



O’CONNOR: Well we are concerned that the role of the Federal Government during the  election campaign was really to play politics with this issue. Now if they’re not wanting to  seek to play politics, clearly now there is a matter that is before the Supreme Court of  Victoria. Taken up, I might add by the Volunteer Fire Brigades Victoria. That matter has  already been scheduled for the 22nd of September. That’s only a month away. If indeed

the Government is sympathetic and sincere about wanting to see an end to this matter,  then they should allow that court matter to be dealt with. They can make all sorts of  decisions after the proceedings have finalised, but it would appear to be politically  motivated if they do not allow this matter to be dealt with before enacting or proposing  the enacting of legislation in Canberra.



JOURNALIST: Just on another issue. The Immigration Minister has flagged changes  that could mean that refugees could be blocked from travelling back to their country of  resettlement. What do you think about those proposals?



O’CONNOR: The country of resettlement, did you say?



JOURNALIST: Yes.



O’CONNOR: Look as with any proposed legislation, whether it be in the area of  immigration or any other area, Labor will always examine the provisions of any  proposed piece of legislation and then we will have a position that will be determined by  the Shadow Cabinet and the Caucus.



But look, can I say with respect to Minister Dutton’s approach, we believe it’s incumbent  on the government to stop the secrecy in relation to these matters. To let the public  know what is going on so these matters are transparent. So that there can be full  confidence in the manner in which the Australian government is dealing such sensitive  issues. You cannot have a cloak of secrecy on issues that are so important to the way  in which Australia is perceived internationally. Also, the way the Australian people  expect their government to operate. So we would ask Minister Dutton not only to deal  with these matters in a transparent way but in a cooperative way. Labor wants to work  with the Government to deal with these issues, but if they continue denying the public  sufficient information to know what is going on then of course there will be criticism of  the government.



JOURNALIST: Will Labor at all consider onshore resettlement?



O’CONNOR: We’ve made it very clear that we do not want to see the beginning of  perilous journeys on unseaworthy vessels that saw too many people die at sea. That’s  why we’ve agreed with the government to ensure there are sufficient deterrents from  people embarking on those journeys which have led to too many deaths. That’s why  Labor has supported offshore processing, but we believe that in supporting offshore  processing, it must be done in a humane way. It has to be done in a way that treats  people with dignity and insofar as this particular issue is concerned, we should be  focussing on finding ways to resettle people in countries that are signatories to the  convention. We believe the government in the last three years has been derelict in not  finding suitable opportunities to settle genuine refugees. They need to focus on that  issue in order to remove the mental anguish that comes from being detained  indefinitely. I think that has been a great concern. I think Labor is willing to work with the  government in order to find a way to achieve that goal.



JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, why is Labor putting pressure on the government  to intervene in the ruling on penalty rates when Bill Shorten said they wouldn’t make any  moves to make sure penalty rates changed?



O’CONNOR: We actually did say that we would intervene if elected as the Federal  Government to make sure that the Commission fully understands the implications of  cutting penalty rates. We saw yesterday the wage growth figures of this country. We  have the lowest wage growth since at least 1998, in this country. Many sectors of our  labour market are in a form of wage recession. That is the cost of living is increasing  faster than their own wages. Therefore, the idea that you would not support those  workers who require penalty rates to make ends meet and not in the matter before the  Fair Work Commission only exposes the fact that Malcolm Turnbull and the Minister for  Employment have no regard for millions of Australian workers who rely on penalty rates  to make ends meet. Of course that’s what they should do. That’s what Federal Labor  said we would do if we’d been elected to government and that’s what we expect this  government to do if it has any regard for low and middle income earners in this country.



JOURNALIST: So are you now worried that the Commission will cut penalty rates?



O’CONNOR: We are concerned that there is a matter before the Commission that could  see a fall in real income for low paid workers at a time when we have the lowest wage  growth in a generation. This is something that’s going to hurt low and middle income  earners. This government will not provide any tax relief for the 90 per cent of workers

under $80,000 a year and will only provide tax relief to multi-nationals, big banks and  big business and at the same time it wants to aid and abet a process that may lead to a  fall in real income for low and middle income earners. Now, we already know they  commissioned a report which recommended a cut to penalty rates in this country. If they  don’t support that position they should come out publicly and say they do not want the  Fair Work Commission to cut penalty rates. But more than that, if they have any regard  for low paid workers in this country that are struggling to make ends meet they would  intervene in this matter as Labor would have done if elected and say it is not right, it is  not appropriate, it is certainly not timely to see the fall in real income for low and middle  income earners in this country.



JOURNALIST: Just finally I think a Nationals Senator has raised the issue of mobility  scooters and safety concerns. Have you got any thoughts on whether there should be  more safety regulations?



O’CONNOR: I’m not sure of the particular issue though it sounds like a state matter. I’m  looking forward to getting back into Parliament talking to the crossbenchers about a  whole range of issues. Our focus will be dealing with the matters that are coming up. As  I understand it there are three bills that are a priority for the Government happen to be  the ABCC - hardly mentioned during the election campaign - registered organisations  but they also too propose to intervene by way of the Australian Parliament in the CFA  matter. I would suggest Malcolm Turnbull think about that and allow the Supreme Court  of Victoria to consider the matter next month and not play politics with this issue. It’s not  fair on career firefighters, it’s not fair on the remarkable volunteers we have in this  country and it is unreasonable to act in this manner and we would ask Mr Turnbull to  respect the proceedings of the court and allow this matter to be determined in the state  of Victoria.



Thank you very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

