1





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer



TRANSCRIPT  2GB RAY HADLEY  MONDAY 17 OCTOBER 2016



E&OE

Subjects: Union action costing the construction industry; Bill Shorten’s Senate captain’s pick; Post-  sentence  preventative  detention  regime;  Medicare;  ACT  election;  Labor’s  push  to  increase  taxes;   Pauline Hanson; Labor’s refusal to back tax relief for Australian small businesses.

RAY  HADLEY:  Treasurer,  good  morning  to  you.  The  Prime  Minister  writes  in  the  Australian  today   about  the  threat  posed  to  the  whole  country  by  unfettered  union  power.  How  significant  is  that   threat?

TREASURER:  We  have  113  CFMEU  officials  currently  before  the  courts.  In  the  last  quarter  we  had   some 50 per cent increased in the working days lost in the construction industry. That accounts for  two  thirds  of  working  days  lost  across  the  economy.  This  is  costing  the  country  an  extraordinary   amount. Forget the union issue more generally, just think about it economically. This is why it costs  more to build a hospital, why it costs more to build a road, a bridge, right across the economy. It’s  costing  taxpayers  more  because  of  the  lawlessness  in  the  building  and  construction  industry.  Let   alone  what  it  costs  to  build  a  block  of  apartments  or  a  commercial  building  or  a  retail  shop  or   whatever.

HADLEY:  What  about  this  legislation  are  we  getting  closer  to  it  being  passed?  The  Building  and   Construction Commission legislation?

TREASURER: We’re putting obviously maximum pressure on the parliament. That will come through  the House of Representatives this week. It’s an important piece of legislation. Not just to ensure that  the  rule  of  the  law  is  everywhere  in  this  country  and  the  building  and  construction  industry  isn’t   exempt  from  it.  As  Treasurer,  in  charge  of  the  economy,  these  changes  are  critically  important  to   boosting the productivity of our construction sector, which is a key sector for our economy and for  jobs moving forward. A million people work in this industry. We can’t have their jobs, undermined by  lawless  unions  and  lawless  behaviour.  We  have  now,  it’s  a  different  sector,  it’s  the  HSU.  But  Bill   Shorten’s  captain’s  pick  for  the  Senate,  is  an  individual  who  was  recommended  by  the  Royal   Commission  to  have  charges  brought  against  them.  That’s  he’s  captain’s  pick  to  replace  Senator   Conroy in the Senate.  If you don’t think that the unions are running the Labor Party, exhibit A.

HADLEY:  I  look  quite  often at  what  happens  in  Queensland.  Palaszczuk  is  beholden  to  the  CFMEU.    It’s  apparent  through  legislation  they  tried  to  get  through  that’s  been  usurped  by  the  Federal   Government in Victoria that Daniel Andrews goes cap-in-hand to the unions as well.

TREASURER: We dealt with that last week in the parliament with that CFA legislation. This was the  legislation  where  the  firefighter  unions  in  Victoria  were  seeking  to  sideline  rural  volunteer   firefighters.  The  unions were  driving  the  Andrews  Government,  and  they’re  driving  the  Shorten   opposition. We were successful with that legislation last week, we are getting things done. It was a  very  busy  week  last  week,  also  the  income  tax  cuts  passed  last  week  for  those  who  were  earning   between $80,000 and $87,000 will now no longer go onto the second highest tax bracket.

2

HADLEY: The Government pushing ahead according to News Limited papers today with laws to strip  dual national tourists of their Australian citizenship. Invariably, we’re talking about the worst of the  worst.  We’re  talking  about people  fighting  the  free  world  as  part  of  Islamic  State  in  Syria.  Yet,  it’s   almost  done  and  dusted  that  there  will  be  legal  challenge  to  the  High  Court  if  you  tried  to  stop   people from coming back to this country because they are no longer citizens of this country.

TREASURER:  That’s  no  surprise.  I  remember  when  I  first  proposed  these  laws  when  I  was    Immigration  Minister  several  years  ago,  these  are  the  issues  that  you  always  have  to  take  into   account. It doesn’t matter what you do in this space, they’ll always be those who raise objections in  the  courts.  It’s  a  free  country,  they  can.  The  laws  were  passed  and  introduced  late  last  year  and  I   have no doubt that they’ll be advocates and others funded by goodness knows who, who will take  forward those challenges. These laws are in place. We put them in place as a Government. They are  being implemented. There is a process which is being tightly  followed to  ensure that those people  who may be subject to these laws will have these laws applied to them.

HADLEY: I say that the lawyer is acting pro bono yet we can find a point of difference I feel a certain  way  as  you  do  about  illegal  boat  people.  They  feel  a  different  way.  They  say  we  lack  compassion,   they have compassion. How in god’s name can anyone have compassion for people who have been  in that part of the world decapitating people, having their images put on social media doing exactly  that. Killing children. I just don’t understand how anyone, lawyer or anyone else can say ‘oh well, we  gotta protect these people’s rights’. The bastards have no rights.

TREASURER:  They  are  dual  citizens  as  well.  It’s  not  like  they’re  left  stateless  under  these  laws.  By    their own actions they would have been disqualifying themselves to the values of Australia. I’m very  proud  of  the  fact  that  our  Government  put  these  laws  in  place.  I  think  it’s  an  important  signal  to   everyone that citizenship matters, there are obligations that are attached to it, not just rights. Those  obligations mean holding to our values and clearly going over there and fighting over there is against  every value an Australian would hold dear, doesn’t pass that test.

RAY  HADLEY:  Treasurer,  we’ve  spoken  before  about  service  centres  in  New  South  Wales  which  I   wasn’t a great fan of, but I’ve been proven wrong. The Baird Government put them in place, where  they’re the one stop shop, you go there, your births, deaths and marriages. You do your rego, you do  your  licensing,  you  do  a  whole  range  of  things  there.  It  would  appear  to  me,  that  the  traditional   Medicare  offices  are  gone  and  they’re  all  under  the  Centrelink  banner.  For  instance  people  in  my   area  who  used  to  go  to  Medicare  now  go  to  some  sort  of  kiosk  in  the  shopping  centre.  What  I’ve  come  up  against,  not  personally,  people  have  written  to  me  so  I  did  a  bit  of  investigation  the  last   week  since  we  spoke,  and  people  who’ve  got  sizable  amounts  to  claim  back  from  Medicare,  for   various services used to be able to go in, fill in a form and within 24 to 48 hours the money would be  back in their account because they’ve already paid the money out in terms of hospital and different  issues which are not covered by private health insurance but covered by Medicare. It now appears  that people are waiting weeks, and in some cases two or three months to have that money put back  in. I checked with one of my staff who recently had a claim on behalf of one of her children, and she  copped a tip from someone, go into these Centrelink offices and insist on it being done there, they’ll  do it. More often than not they’ll fob you off and say no, just fill in the form we’ll put in through. Is  there a deliberate attempt to delay the payment to these people or are they just slack?

TREASURER: No, there’s been no ending to the Medicare face-to-face services. What happens now is  96% of all Medicare claims are actually lodged electronically. That’s how the vast majority of people  do that these days. The service for people who are unable to use digital services remain the same.  About  four  out  of  five  of  all  those  claims  lodged manually  at  the  service  centre, they’re  processed  within 10 days. There’s no change  to that. Obviously some  claims are a bit  more  complicated than  others, but one of things that the Government is working hard on is we know that the services are  important and we’ve got to maintain the quality of level of services and we have to be able to do

3

that in a way which ensures that taxpayers aren’t paying more and more for those services. It’s kind  of like a business, I mean, business customers expect to pay less for something and the quality to be  better. The same is true of government. That’s what we’re working through which Medicare.

HADLEY: I’d suggest to you it’s not working. It’s not one or two, everyone I’ve spoken to. It’s mainly  older people. They’ve got access to computers, they’re happy enough to do it online or put a form in  the  traditional  sense,  but  they’ve  been  kept  waiting.  I  can  give  you,  off  air,  the  cases  in  question   where people have waited three months. And they’re still waiting.

TREASURER: Happy to take them Ray. The figures I have is about four out of five of the face to face  services, those lodged manually, they’re processed within 10 days. But I’m not saying that the one in  five that are outside of that, there will be a spread of experience on that and if there are particular  cases, happy to take that up with…

HADLEY: I’ll give you the example of someone who’s waited for a long time, and obviously respect  their  privacy  by  just  passing  it  to  you,  within  making  a  song  and  dance  about  it.  Why  has  Pauline   Hanson  been  able  to  increase  support  for  One  National  as  is  shown  in  the  Newspoll  today  in  the   Australian?

TREASURER: You’d have to ask her, but I think…

HADLEY: I’m asking you.

TREASURER: (inaudible)

HADLEY:  But  you’d  understand  why  because  you’re  a  conservative  member  of  a  conservative   government and it would appear that an even more conservative member of the Senate is garnering  a lot of support.

TREASURER:  Government  is  not  an  easy  thing.  Government  is a  difficult  thing.  You’ve  got  to  make  decisions  all  the  time  which  are  not  always  going  to  please  everybody.  Those  who  sit  on  the   crossbench  and  other  places  don’t  quite  have  the  same  pressure  applied  to  them  in  terms  of  the   decisions  that  they  make.  I  was  making  this  point  last  week,  and  I  was  making  it  overseas  as  well.   And that is; I understand that people feel anxious about what’s happening in the economy, I mean  people’s wages have not have not been growing like they used to, back in the days of John Howard  and Peter Costello and so on. Since the GFC wage rates and growth in wages have been very flat. The  same  is  true  for  businesses  in  terms  of  what  business  providers  take  home.  So  people  are  feeling   anxious  about  those  things,  they  feel  anxious  about  trade,  they  feel  anxious  about  foreign   investment  and  they  feel  anxious  about  immigration.  What  we  have  to  do as  a  Government  is  to   assure  people  through  our  practice,  whether  it’s  controlling  our  borders  so  people  can  feel   confidence  about  immigration,  to  ensure  that  on  foreign  investment  applications  that  it  is  in  the   national interest and there’s real value being added. And in trade deals, whether it’s China or others,  that it’s Australians who are getting the benefit from this. That’s the task we have set ourselves to  show why  that is making Australia richer, it  always has frankly  over the last 200 years. I know  that   they’ll  always  be  some  who  are  anxious  about  those  issues.  Now,  I  suspect  that  translates  into   support for other political parties. What we have to focus on are the reasons why people are anxious  and that’s why we’re working to try and boost people’s wages, and one of the ways you can do that,  is  what  we  started  talking  about  today.  That  is,  the  Australian  Building  and  Construction    Commission. Its absence is holding back people getting ahead in the construction industry, because  of  working  days  lost  and  the  lawlessness  in  that  sector  which  is  holding  out  economy  back.  Now   that’s a practical policy that can really address the concerns that those people have.

4

HADLEY: Just a question back on the dual citizenship, one of my listeners says, was there weakening  of  the  policy  that  you  and  Tony  Abbott  formulated  by  the  Turnbull  Government?  Have  things   changed in relation to…

TREASURER: No.

HADLEY: That’s exactly what was presented by the former Prime Minister?

TREASURER:  The  joint  standing  committee  on  intelligence  in order  to  get the  support  of  the  Labor  Party for the Bill, that was the same process that was initiated under Tony Abbott. So whether it’s on  that, on border protection, on our position more generally  on national security, there has been no  change,  no  change  between  what  Tony  Abbott  was  doing  and  what  Malcolm  Turnbull  has  been   doing.

HADLEY: Do you think you’ll ever live long enough to see a conservative government in the ACT?

TREASURER: I hope so….

HADLEY: Well you’re down there a lot more than me so I’m just wondering what the mindset is - five  successive Labor/Green victories?

TREASURER: They’re voting for tax increases down here. I got a question in the parliament last week,  Chris Bowen got up in the Parliament last week and asked me why won’t I increases taxes. He thinks  that’s  the  answer  to  Australia’s  Budget  challenges.  I  said  no,  the  answer  to  Australia’s  Budget   challenges  is  to  help  Australians  earn  more,  help  businesses  earn  more,  and  this  is  why  we  really   want  the  Labor  Party  to  support  the  changes  to  small  business  taxation,  which  would  lift  the   threshold for a small business from $2 million to $10 million. There’s a hundred thousand businesses  in that area. That’s 2.2 million Australians who work for them. We want to cut their tax rate to 27.5  per  cent  and  give  them  access  to  a  whole  range  of  instant  asset  write-offs  and  depreciation   provisions  which  will  help  those  small  businesses  grow.  The  Labor Party  are  blocking  this.  Not  just   last week, but they’re blocking it again next week. I don’t understand why they are working so hard  against the interests of small businesses.

HADLEY: Well given his questions it’s hard to think they’re going to reverse their decision isn’t it?

TREASURER: I’m working with the cross benchers on that. Labor thinks that the answer, like they did  here in the ACT, they  think the answer is to  not deal with Government spending, where the Labor  Party continue to block us on getting welfare spending under control, they won’t vote for that. What  they want to do is they want us to increases taxes instead and we’re saying no.

HADLEY: OK we’ll talk next week, thanks for your time.

TREASURER: Thanks for your time Ray.

[ENDS]

Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253, Kate Williams 0429 584 675

