

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  OPPOSITION LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN   MONDAY, 7 NOVEMBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: Referral of Senators to the Court of Disputed Returns; Turnbull  Government Senate chaos; Asylum Seeker Legislation; Section 18C of the Racial  Discrimination Act; US Presidential Election.

ALISON CARABINE: Penny Wong, thanks for coming in.

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Good  to be with you.

CARABINE: We’ll get to the Asylum Seeker Bill in a moment. But first, to what’s going  on in the Senate at the moment. Labor supports the referral of both Bob Day and Rod  Culleton to the High Court. Can I take it from that that you believe that having both  referred to the Court of Disputed Returns will work in Labor’s favour?

WONG: It’s very important that the Senate behave responsibly here and not with regard  to any partisanship. The question is have there been facts raised which give rise to a  question of the eligibility. I think there have, and this will be a matter for the Senate  today.

But I have to say, what a week we have here in the Senate. A Senate frankly that is in  chaos. A Senate which was returned after a double dissolution that the Prime Minister  demanded in order to clean out the Senate. Now he’s got a couple of Senators having  to go to the Court of Disputed Returns.

The very Bill that he said was the reason for the double dissolution isn’t even going to  be debated this year, that is the Australian Building and Construction Commission Bill.

CARABINE: It might be debated this year. The Prime Minister, on AM, was pretty  determined to get that Bill in once he’s got the numbers.

WONG: I think this is a Government and a Prime Minister with no agenda and no  authority and no achievement. The Senate program demonstrates that. Two Senators  being referred to the Court of Disputed Returns. Their flagship legislation not even in the  Parliament. George Brandis, the Leader of the Government in the Senate, is going to be  the subject of a report in relation to his attack on the Solicitor-General, which will be  returned on Tuesday. None of these, obviously, are issues that really go to the  economic circumstances of most Australians.

CARABINE: So, you describe the situation in the Senate as chaos. There is a  perception at least of disarray. How hell bent will Labor be trying to capitalise on that  disorder? Are you going to be even more determined to block legislation? Use every  Senate tactic at your disposal to try to disrupt Senate procedures?

WONG: We will take an approach that reflects what Labor’s principles and Labor’s  agenda is. So, for example, on the Plebiscite legislation, which is up for debate, we’ve  made our view on that clear. In relation to the referrals of the two Senators to the High  Court, as I’ve said to you at the outset, we’re not going to be partisan about that. This is  a very serious matter. It has happened very rarely since Federation, certainly you’ve  never had two Senators referred on the same day to the High Court, to the Court of  Disputed Returns. We will certainly approach that soberly and seriously as we have to  date.

CARABINE: Okay, we’ll move on to the refugee legislation. I know Shadow Cabinet  won’t be making its final decision until tonight, but already we’ve had Labor MPs calling  it extreme, evil, they’re just a few of the descriptors. Bill Shorten says it’s ludicrous.  Given that, how could you even consider supporting this Bill?

WONG: Let’s understand this legislation. A Prime Minister without an agenda has  looked desperately for a political stunt. And you don’t really need my word for that, have  a look at what has happened since. They make this big announcement to certain  selected media outlets and since that time we’ve learnt about different changes to deal  with some of the more ludicrous aspects of it, including what was again put out today to  the media that there would be some wide Ministerial discretion to deal with all of the  absurdities that people have been pointing out.

This frankly demonstrates that the Prime Minister doesn’t have an agenda. That he’s  desperately searching for a political hit.

CARABINE: But it could also be a political solution, not just a political stunt, or a  political hit. The legislation appears to be the forerunner to a deal on third country  settlement. If you block it, could you be jeopardising any chance, at least in the  foreseeable future, for refugees on Manus and Nauru getting off those islands?

WONG: If that is the case, the Government should come out and show us that. I mean  you’re right, resettlement is an urgent priority, and the Government has sat on its hands  when it comes to those on Manus and Nauru. But, at the moment, we don’t have the  Government explaining that. We have the Government trying to go on about an issue  they think will help them. We’ve got a political stunt, not a political solution.

CARABINE: So if the Government can show you what it is working on, re a third  country settlement arrangement, you would consider supporting the legislation?

WONG: I find it very hard to see, how banning somebody from ever coming to Australia  as a tourist - so for example let’s say someone is resettled in New Zealand. Prime  Minister Key has already said we’re not going to accept two sorts of New Zealand  citizens. But for argument’s purpose, the Government’s legislation, as originally  announced said someone who resettles in New Zealand, becomes a successful  business person, would be denied a tourist visa to Australia…

CARABINE: But that’s where Ministerial Discretion would come in…

WONG: In order to resolve an absurdity from the legislation itself. I fail to see any  argument which suggests that that proposition is necessary for resettlement. And if the  Government is serious about resettlement, instead of playing political games and  sending Peter Dutton out to do a Tony Abbott-lite impersonation in an attempt to get  some political mileage, perhaps they should have a serious discussion about what their  plans are?

CARABINE: Penny Wong we’ll move on to the Racial Discrimination Act. It looks like  Cabinet will refer 18C to the Human Rights Committee for an inquiry. The Prime  Minister, you would have heard him this morning on AM, he says such a review would  have considerable merit. Now that that long-running Queensland University of  Technology case has been thrown out of court, why not take another look at the words  “insult” and “offend”, which are embedded in the Act?

WONG: You don’t judge legislation by one case. There are many, many cases…

CARABINE: Many vexatious cases?

WONG: Many cases that are taken under these provisions which are simply resolved by  conciliation. And in fact my recollection is that the vast majority of cases which come  before the Commission, under Section 18C, are resolved by conciliation. So, that’s the  first point.

The second point is this; we all know what’s really happening here. There are a number  of, shall we call them cultural warriors on the Right of the Liberal Party, for whom this is  an obsession. And it is an obsession. So, they’re not obsessed with wages of working  people. They’re not obsessed with how we make housing more affordable. They’re  obsessed with this provision in a piece of legislation under which the overwhelming  majority of cases are resolved by agreement.

CARABINE: But would Labor support a referral to the Human Rights Committee?

WONG: I’ve not seen anything from the Government that makes clear what they are  proposing. But, as always, what I would be concerned about, is that this inquiry would  simply be a stalking horse for those warriors on the right for whom this would be an  obsession.

CARABINE: Okay, Penny Wong, just finally, if I could take you to the US Presidential  election, Bill Shorten has called Donald Trump barking mad, Tanya Plibersek says he’s  dangerous, you’re the Shadow Foreign Minister, you’re the one who would have to  make the relationship work, if indeed Donald Trump become President and there is a  Labor Government during the Presidency in this country. Is it really that wise for Labor  to be so pre-emptively critical of a potential US President?

WONG: Well this is an unusual US election isn’t it, when you’ve got Republicans  themselves criticising the Republican nominee. So, this is an unusual election. And  certainly people have become quite concerned and exercised by it.

But what I would say to you is this; whatever people’s personal views about any  particular candidate, and I note Cory Bernardi was suggesting Hillary Clinton was  corrupt last week, and I thought that was most inappropriate.

CARABINE: And your leader says Donald Trump is barking mad.

WONG: Cory Bernardi did that while he was in New York representing the Australian  Parliament, so I think the context of that was very different. Whatever people’s personal  views, whether it is the Coalition or Labor, we all support the US Alliance and we would  continue to work closely with whoever was elected because the Alliance is bigger than  any individual.

CARABINE: Penny Wong thanks for your time.

WONG: Good to be with you.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

