





THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  MEDIA CONFERENCE  UNITY HALL, BALMAIN   THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY, 2016

Subjects:  Grayndler electorate; federal redistribution; Malcolm Turnbull; Joel  Fitzgibbon; GST; Jay Weatherill; Greens political party; Julie Bishop comments  on Israel trips; Israeli-Palestinian conflict; AMA hospital report

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Welcome to the Workers Bar at the Unity Hall here in Balmain.  This is the very venue where the first ever branch meeting of the Australian Labor Party  took place some 125 years ago. We're a party with a proud history, and I'm proud to  have represented Grayndler in the Australian Parliament for the last 20 years come the  second of March. I'm here today to announce that I will be renominating as the Labor  Candidate for the electorate of Grayndler at the upcoming federal election. I do so as a  proud inner west resident.

The recent redistribution has cut off an area of Marrickville, Dulwich Hill, Hurlstone Park,  Newtown and Camperdown that I have formally represented. It is disappointing to lose  areas that you've represented and that you know well. But I've picked up areas,  including the Balmain peninsula, that I know well and that I'll be very proud to be a  candidate for. I've lived in this community my whole life. I bring a passion and a  commitment to be a local representative as well as someone who makes a contribution  in the national political debate.

I'm in the Australian Labor Party because it is one of the two options of forming  government. It is the party that produces progressive advances for Australia's future.  Whether it be in education, whether it be in health, whether it be in making sure that we  have an economy that's not just about growth, but about inclusive growth. An economy  that's about jobs and opportunity for all Australians so that when we look at an area like  the inner west, many people come from relatively humble backgrounds are able to enter  university, are able to make a contribution and to maximise their potential in life.

It's the Australian Labor Party that's made that possible, whether it be Gough Whitlam's  great advances on tertiary education, whether it be the contribution of the Rudd and

Gillard Governments in on education with the Gonski reforms about creating  opportunity, the healthcare reforms supporting public healthcare, or whether it be in the  area of social policy. What we've seen is a great deal of disappointment with the  incoming government.

Tony Abbott of course was someone who not only was stuck in the past, he wanted the  rest of Australia to go back there and keep him company. And that was the problem.  Someone who was an effective Leader of the Opposition, who never moved beyond  saying no. So he was rejected by his own party earlier in his term than any previous  elected Prime Minister in Australia's history.

But what we're seeing from Malcolm Turnbull is that he now leads a party that is divided  within itself. It's at war with itself over a range of issues between the conservatives and  the moderates within the Liberal Party. That's not the problem, however. The problem is  that Malcolm Turnbull is at war with himself. Malcolm Turnbull is at war with the position  that he has held over a political lifetime - on the republic, on marriage equality, on taking  serious action to avoid dangerous climate change.

When he lost the leadership of the Liberal Party he said he would not be prepared to  lead a party that wasn't prepared to take climate change action seriously. And yet today  we have the exact opposite of a conviction politician. Someone who's traded all of his  principles for the keys to The Lodge. And that will be the battle at the election this year.  A battle between Labor, committed towards advancing Australia's future - on education,  on health, on a fibre to the premises NBN, on marriage equality, on all of these issues  and Malcolm Turnbull and a divided Liberal Party.

Of course, in this area as well, we'll have a third force. But the Greens political party  candidate who's been chosen in this electorate has spent more time in the International  Socialist organisation than he has in the Greens political party, and if he was fair  dinkum, he'd run as an International Socialist and see how many votes he got there. It's  unfortunate that the Greens have been captured in this area and in New South Wales  by people who have a history in Socialist Party of Australia or the International  Socialists or the Socialist Workers Party and want to use the Greens banner to advance  an agenda that's about anything but the environment.

It will be interesting to see. Two tests for the Greens candidate in this seat; one is to  actually mention the Liberals, because normally they don't. The second of course, is to  actually mention the environment. The last two election campaigns I've had as the  candidate for Grayndler, the Greens candidate hasn't got anywhere near environmental  issues.

So I stand on my record as a local representative, but also my record in the national  parliament representing the views that are strongly held by this community and I'm  confident I'll be returned as the Member for Grayndler, but most importantly, I want to be  returned as a member of a Labor Government, because it is only in government that  you can make a real difference in changing the nation.

REPORTER: You've just said you're confident, but how confident are you, because  you've just made some fairly strong criticisms of the Greens candidate. Have you got a  big fight on your hands against them?

ALBANESE: I have never taken this electorate for granted. But if you look at the  pendulum, I think you'll find it's really easy to find Grayndler. At the last election the  Greens political party ran their state president, Hall Greenland in this seat. He at least  had a record of involvement in issues like Callan Park. The current candidate has no  local involvement, no local record, nothing to point to whereby they've engaged in the  local community.

I've been around a long time, lived in this community my whole life. I've never seen him  at any event or anything else, but then again I haven't been to International Socialist  demonstrations against global capitalism in the last few years so maybe that's why I've  missed him.

REPORTER: Nevertheless, will it be harder than ever to win this seat?

ALBANESE: This seat is a seat which cannot be taken for granted. This is a  demanding seat. That is as it should be. It's a politicised seat. People are active in their  local community. That's a great thing. That's one of the things that inspires me to keep  going. I'm very proud of the history of this area. The history in terms of the Labor  movement that began in this very hall and continues today. I'll be very pleased to  continue that tradition if the people of Grayndler have their confidence in me as they  have in the past. But I've never taken it for granted. I've always treated this seat as a  marginal seat even though if you look at the pendulum, it is not.

When I first ran in 1996, Malcolm Mackerras wrote in the Herald that the seat was over.  I wasn't going to win, the No Aircraft Noise Party were going to win. I think people are  looking for authenticity in politics. People might disagree with me, but what you see is  what you get. I stand up for my beliefs. I put my hand up when it counts. People know  what they're getting. People should have a close look at what the alternatives are in this  electorate, what their real views are. Just Google the candidates. It's amazing what  pops up.

They'll see the views, for example on the environment. I'm very proud that as Labor's  environment spokesperson, I was the person who wrote the policy for the renewable  energy target of 20 per cent by 2020. I wrote the policy to ratify Kyoto and introduced  Private Members Bills. I wrote the policy for the Green car plan. I wrote the policy for an  emissions trading scheme. I wrote the comprehensive plan to deal with climate change  that ended up being implemented once we were in government.

Of course, the difficulty that we had was that the Greens and the Liberals combined in  2009 to stop there being a price on carbon. Remember that. The CPRS, putting a price  on carbon and an emissions trading scheme would have been, in my view, today still

policy. The debate would have been over had just two Greens senators stood up and  walked across the floor. Two Liberals did cross the floor.

If the Greens had have voted for it, in the Senate in 2009, it would have been policy.  There would have been a price on carbon - and it was an economy-wide price - that  would have applied, and of course that would have put us in a stronger position  because we know that the earlier the action the cheaper the cost.

REPORTER: What will happen to your colleague Joel Fitzgibbon given his seat is being  taken away?

ALBANESE: Well, I'm sure that Joel will be a candidate at the election. He's a valued  candidate. He's one of my best mates in the Parliament as a fellow class of '96 member.  There aren't that many of us. There's Joel and myself and Jenny Macklin, we're all  elected in 1996. Joel, I'm sure will make a great contribution to the next Labor  Government.

REPORTER: [inaudible] move to Barton, did you consider that?

ALBANESE: What I had to do depended on the boundaries. They shifted substantially.  In the draft boundaries they put my home, my office and the place where they make  Albo Ale - very importantly - all into Barton. So I didn't move. The electoral commission  moved the boundaries around me. I always said I would wait for the final boundaries.

A range of journalistic colleagues have said over the period that they never change  them from the draft. Guess what? I've been around a while, and I know sometimes you  just have to wait for the final decision. It was always my preference to remain as the  candidate for Grayndler. The decision though, was which new area I would seek to  represent. The original draft of course, was to put the Drummoyne peninsula into  Grayndler so it was a very different seat.

As it is, Grayndler still has been carved up into a range of other seats, some has gone  into Barton, Sydney, Watson and Reid. So it is a very radical change in the electorate. I  believe though it is closer to the area that I have represented over that period of time  and I think people look for some consistency in terms of their representation. I know it's  become fashionable, a bit in the national parliament in Canberra for changes to happen  at regular intervals. I think though, people want consistency in terms of their local  representation.

The overwhelming majority of my old seat is now in the new Grayndler - including my  electorate office which I've chosen to run here. Frankly, I'm very much looking forward  to campaigning in the new areas of Balmain and Rozelle. I know this area very, very  well. I used to visit here up until the 26th of January last year when my dear friend and  mentor Tom Uren passed away, I would visit him, down in Gilchrist Place once a  fortnight when I could, but at least once a month.

I'm very familiar with this area. I'm familiar with the community based organisations.  Annandale, I've represented in the past for most of that 20 years and I look forward to  once again visiting Annandale Public School and Annandale North Public School and  engaging with that community, which is of course around the corner from where I grew  up in Pyrmont Bridge Road, Camperdown.

REPORTER: Do you think Joel Fitzgibbon will want to move to Pat Conroy's seat?

ALBANESE: With due respect, I'm here at Unity Hall to talk about Grayndler and to  speak for myself. Joel Fitzgibbon, I'm sure will be a candidate for the next election. I've  been concentrating on where the boundaries and the maps are in this area and that of  course is the appropriate focus that I've had.

REPORTER: Would Barton have been an easier proposition for you? Have you been  asked to stay here by the party because they think you're the only person who can fend  off the Greens?

ALBANESE: I don't think that the Greens political party are taking this seat seriously  with their choice of candidate, frankly. I think they do this area a great disservice. There  are a whole range of activists in this area. Environmental activists who are involved in  the conservation movement and none of them have been selected.

Every time, the Greens political party have gone for an apparatchik from within the  Greens party. The Greens have factions, there's a big one here in New South Wales,  and it's opposed to the national leadership of the Greens. Hall Greenland, my last  opponent described the Canberra leadership of The Greens as "Liberals on bicycles".  That's their view.

It runs counter to the views of people who might be thinking, will they vote Green or will  they vote Labor at the election. I think those people, as they have in the past in  Grayndler by a considerable majority, will ask who has a serious record in taking action  on climate change, on environmental issues? Who can be most effective as their  representative in the Federal Parliament as a voice on environmental issues? If you're  serious about environmental issues, then I'm your candidate at the election.

REPORTER: Do you believe that Jay Weatherill has the right to keep voicing his  support in principle for Labor to keep looking at the GST increase option or should he  be hushed up, as some people in the party seem to be wanting?

ALBANESE: Jay Weatherill is a friend of mine and I think he's a great Premier of South  Australia. Jay Weatherill is voicing the concerns that any Labor Premier would have  about the need to fund education and health. That's the views that he's put. He said he  wants to look at options of how you do that. Now, Labor's view is very clear. One of  those options is not increasing the GST. The sort of options that we've put forward are  progressive options such as on superannuation, closing those loopholes, and on  multinational tax avoidance.

I think that Australians are very concerned every time they read an article such as that  about Apple yesterday. Every time they read an article that says there are these big  corporates that they know are making a lot of money and they're paying a lot more tax  than they are, even though as a percentage of their income, even though they're only  average weekly earners, in some cases below average weekly earners.

REPORTER: But should Jay Weatherill be gagged or bound?

ALBANESE: Jay Weatherill is a Premier. We're not a Stalinist party. Jay Weatherill is  entitled as the Premier to put his views on behalf of the South Australian Labor  Government. He's entitled to do that. In spite of the commentary that's out there; I've  actually seen the interviews as opposed to the reporting of those comments.

What Jay Weatherill has said is he just wants options about the funding of education  and health and that's in response to the cuts that are there from the Turnbull and Abbott  Governments where we've changed the spokesperson but we haven't changed any of  the policies.

What policy has changed since Malcolm Turnbull took over the leadership of the Liberal  Party? I frankly was flabbergasted by Malcolm Turnbull's position on the republic this  week. I mean, if there was any semblance of integrity left in Malcolm Turnbull, how he  could come out with that position is a complete repudiation of a lifetime of political  engagement.

REPORTER: Mr Albanese, Julie Bishop said on Sky News this morning that any ban for  Labor MPs going on Israel trips would be prejudiced.

ALBANESE: Who's talking about it? I mean seriously.

REPORTER: Labor's Friends of Palestine are talking about putting that forward at the  next conference.

ALBANESE: We'll see. Or is it again reporting of things third hand? I mean, Julie  Bishop is more worried about getting photos in various magazines than in actually being  a serious foreign policy spokesperson. Labor has a very clear position on the Middle  East. Our position is a balanced position. It's one I share.

I support a Palestinian state, side by side with an Israeli state. People working together.  These places are the difference between Balmain and Marrickville. You're talking about  very small distances, whereby it's simply not possible for any solution other than people  to live side by side with mutual respect, with security, with support for a peaceful  resolution in the Middle East.

If not, Palestinians continue to suffer in those refugee camps, as they have for far too  long. But Israeli citizens suffer as well, because of the insecurity.

REPORTER: So should Labor MPs be banned from having sponsored travel to Israel to  express that they disagree with Israel's continuous expansion of its settlements?

ALBANESE: I'm opposed to Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza. I support  UN resolutions and international conventions on those issues. I think anyone who visits  the Middle East should have discussions with both the Israeli side and the Palestinian  side. There's a need for balance here and there's a need to make sure that we don't  reinforce a division that is not in the interests of either Israelis or Palestinians. So the  attempt to play student politics with this on either side is something that our serious  national representatives should not do.

REPORTER: So the motion won't get up, you're saying?

ALBANESE: I don't know that there is a motion, frankly. I don't know that people are  not just jumping at nothing. That is usually the case with the Liberal Party. The idea that  the Australian Labor Party can ban people from going to countries is frankly absurd.  Last time I looked, you didn't get a visa through the ALP national office to travel  overseas.

REPORTER: Sponsored travel, though, we're talking about.

ALBANESE: That's up to people, what they do, in terms of sponsored travel. But I think  that people should be balanced. I can't put it any other way than that. It's not complex.  I'm not trying to wedge anyone. I'm not trying to play politics. Julie Bishop should do the  same. Julie Bishop has a responsibility as the Foreign Minister to do the same.

The Australian Government, as we did while we were in government, should ensure that  it has a balanced position at the United Nations. Not be a cheer squad for one side or  the other, because frankly that just reinforces the hawks on one side or the other. What  Australia needs to do is to be on the side of the doves, both Palestinian and Israeli, not  the hawks, because that does not serve the interests of either Israel or Palestine.

REPORTER: Mr Albanese, the AMA has said this morning that public hospitals will be  the biggest financial challenge for governments, both state and federal in 12 months.  What's your take on that report? How should it address the shortfalls?

ALBANESE: It's a huge challenge because the Commonwealth government is slashing  funding for health and education. Yes, it is a huge challenge. I'll tell you what; first step,  elect a Labor Government.

ENDS

THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY 2016

MEDIA CONTACT: HANNAH FRANK 0427 636 837

