1

www.minister.border.gov.au



The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

TRANSCRIPT

Interview with Karl Stefanovic, Today Show

03 February 2016





Subjects: Zika Virus, High Court, IMA Children, ‘Return of Kings’ claims,  Election

E&EO…………………………………………………………………………………………..

JOURNALIST: We are joined now by Immigration Minister Peter Dutton. Peter, good  morning to you.

PETER DUTTON: Morning Karl.

JOURNALIST: Can you give us any further details on all of that? How many  mosquitoes have been found for example?

PETER DUTTON: Well Karl, obviously the Health Department here is working with  the World Health Organisation.

The Border Force staff and the Department of Agriculture staff at the airport will be  intercepting and having a look at people coming off particular flights.

There are also, as you point out, some spraying going on particularly around cargo  as I understand it.

The Department of Immigration works pretty closely with Health and if there are  measures that need to be implemented we will implement them, but the WHO hasn't  advised of any travel restrictions.

I think people should be reassured by the messages from the Health Minister and to  make sure that they look at the travel advisories from DFAT whenever you are going  to travel overseas.

JOURNALIST: This is the one key thing here, the one link we thought might spare  us. See if the virus is here and the mosquitoes are here then the horse may well  have bolted, yeah?

PETER DUTTON: I think as we have demonstrated through the Ebola crisis, through  other viruses which have been spreading particularly in our part of the world, that

2

www.minister.border.gov.au

given the millions of passenger movements across our borders each year, we have  got advanced systems to deal with it so we can screen passengers that are likely to  be at risk.

But we know the Health Department here can react pretty quickly and put in place  measures which will keep the Australian public as safe as possible.

JOURNALIST: If you could screen passengers coming in from those key areas, why  wouldn't you do it now though?

PETER DUTTON: They will make those judgments. As I say, they will assess the  risk and they will put in place what measures they think are going to work.

But we need to be realistic. Australians travel in huge numbers each year. We  welcome tourists in massive numbers, particularly from South- East Asia, and we  need to deal with the risk as it presents.

I think the Health Department is working through what the response will be right now.

JOURNALIST: I understand though it is not your Department. It’s a big concern for a  lot of women here in Australia, particularly those who might be pregnant.

Let's move on. The High Court will decide if hundreds of asylum seekers will be sent  back to Nauru and Manus Island detention centres, including 37 babies that were  born here in Australia. Are you prepared to send them back?

PETER DUTTON: I want to be the Minister that gets kids out of detention and we  had 2,000 kids in detention, we had 1,200 people that drowned at sea trying to get to  Australia by boat.

We have stamped all of that out. We have now got less than 80 children in detention  and I want to get it down to 0, but the last thing I want is for boats to restart.

As we are seeing in Europe at the moment, millions of people are prepared to pay  people smugglers to get on to boats to come to countries like Australia.

We have been able to stamp out that trade and I don't want it to restart. I don't want  our detention centres to refill.

JOURNALIST: So you will send them back?

PETER DUTTON: Well we will look at the individual cases. We have been very clear  that we want to provide medical support to families that are in need.

But in some cases where people aren't refugees and we don't owe them protection,  then we have been very clear about the fact that if you come to Australia by boat,  you are not going to settle here.

At the same time we have been able to increase the number of places for refugees  who are legitimate.

3

www.minister.border.gov.au

JOURNALIST: What about this five-year-old boy who was allegedly sexually  assaulted on the island?

PETER DUTTON: I've asked for some detail in relation to it because there hasn't  been that much detail that has been released publically - there has been a news  story.

But I've also seen the photos of the kids who drowned at sea and it's a terrible,  terrible confronting image and I just don't want the trade to start back up. If people  smugglers can say that if you've got women and children jump on a boat, pay your  money and you'll come to Australia because you'll stay there, we just can't allow that  to restart.

So we will look at this case compassionately. We are not going to send kids into  harm’s way, but we are saying very firmly that if you don't have a legitimate claim for  refuge in Australia then we want to help you go back to your country of origin.

JOURNALIST: Have you confirmed that this five-year-old was sexually assaulted?

PETER DUTTON: I've asked for information from the Department. There are about  270 people who have come from Nauru for medical assistance to Australia. So that  includes, for example, mothers who might be having a baby that we have brought to  Australia...

JOURNALIST: With the greatest respect Peter, a five-year-old being sexually  assaulted I would have thought was a priority.

PETER DUTTON: Well of course it is, mate. We won't tolerate that sort of behaviour  by anyone. If there is a refugee somewhere that has assaulted the child of this  refugee family, then nobody would tolerate that. We just don't accept that for a  moment.

JOURNALIST: Let's move on. This American bloke promoting sexual violence  against women posted this tweet yesterday saying he wouldn't need a visa to get in  as our border is weak and he has the funds to get in by boat.

Will he be getting a visa?

PETER DUTTON: Well, of course he won't. All you can do is laugh at this guy and  he must be ridiculed because I think all this guy is doing is trying to attract publicity.

Any decent man completely rejects what this guy has had to say about raping  women and legalising rape. His comments are abhorrent.

There is no record that I can find that he's made an application for a visa.

So I think he is basking in the publicity and he is getting lots of it and I don't think we  should give him any more sunshine.

JOURNALIST: All right done and he won't get a visa if he tries.

4

www.minister.border.gov.au



Just finally, Glenn Lazarus, Ricky Muir, Nick Xenophon, Jacqui Lambie, they are all  calling you on the double dissolution.

Are you going to man up and do it or are you going to go back to playing cards with  them?

PETER DUTTON: It is like a who’s who of the Senate at the moment Karl. Some  crazy images of Clive Palmer coming out of Parliament yesterday.

So look, these are serious issues and obviously the Government wants to implement  its changes, particularly around the union corruption because in the end, what that  means is that people that are buying a unit or a house, anywhere in Australia, are  paying tens of thousands of dollars more for that unit because of the CFMEU bully  practices on work sites.

So we want to stamp that out and I think instead of playing games, the Senate  should work with the Government to pass it because ultimately that will mean a  savings to people, particularly to young people, who are finding it pretty hard to pay  for huge prices for houses in Sydney or Canberra.

JOURNALIST: Really quickly because we are out of time, how long are you going to  give this? Are you going to give them another week, another five days, four days,  three days?

PETER DUTTON: I think the PM has been very reasonable in his approach and said  he wants to negotiate with them.

But look, we have got a sensible Bill which just puts the cop back on the beat to  make sure that these union thugs - who are ripping off workers, house buyers and  home owners - we want that practice to stop and that's what we want the Senate to  support.

JOURNALIST: Alright Peter. Thank you for that. Interesting times.

PETER DUTTON: Cheers Karl. Thank you.

[ENDS]











