



THE HON MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR IMMIGRATION  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 17 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Backpacker Tax; Penalty Rates; Budget - Super Changes/Lib Division; Election.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let’s go to our panel this morning with Liberal front bencher Scott Ryan, Labor’s Matt  Thistlethwaite. Senator Ryan first to you on this change, it was only $40 million in revenue the change, why didn’t the  Government react sooner to this because as you know your colleagues right across the country in regional and rural  areas worried about the impact on agriculture in terms of fruit pickers and also the pubs, tourism industry, it wasn’t  like this concern wasn’t put to the Government in previous weeks, why wait ‘til the campaign?

SCOTT RYAN: Well Kieran good morning, but look let’s wait and see what Kelly as the Assistant Treasurer  announces at 9 o’clock. I don’t want to pre-empt anything she says, it’s in her Ministerial Portfolio and let’s wait and  see what she has to say when she makes an announcement in about 30 minutes.

GILBERT: Ok well Matt Thistlethwaite I’m sure you’ll like to make a few comments on this, the Government listening  to the concerns of the farmers and the tourism sector, your reaction to this?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND  IMMIGRATION: Well Kieran they haven’t knocked it off, they’ve just delayed it, so the uncertainty continues for  backpackers and for employers in this industry. Really what they’ve done here Kieran is just kicked this down the  road, they’ve kicked the can down the road to ensure that it doesn’t become an election issue, but really what the  Government now needs to do is come clean because it was a revenue measure for the Budget so is the Government  going to adjust their Budget outlook? Are they going to book this in their budget costings? And are they going to  include this revenue in their election costings? These are all the questions that the Government will need to answer at  this media conference at 9 o’clock.

GILBERT: Yeah well I’m sure they will be asked that we’ll ensure that is one of the questions it’s a fair point that  where does the, what happens to that $40 million but Scott Ryan let me ask you again in a different way about this  issue, you would accept that for a lot of your colleagues this is, has been a concern because one of your Coalition  colleagues Andrew Broad has been saying if this tax was implemented then farmers would just have to be paying  backpackers cash in hand, that’s not really what you want out of a Government reform?

RYAN: Again let’s wait and see what Kelly has to say on the general principle Kieran of whether or not Governments  should actually occasionally reconsider policy, where there’s implementation issues or where the effect might be a  little bit unforeseen. I actually think the Australian people want a Government that is actually more than happy to  change course if for example there’s an unforeseen consequence in the policy, I actually think politicians get credit  when they say ‘well hang on, yes we’ve listened to your concerns, we will address it in this way’. I think that’s  something Australian politics could do more with and I don’t think it’s something that is necessarily going to be  something voters criticise the Government for.

GILBERT: Yeah that’s a fair point Matt Thistlethwaite is it that the leaders should listen to the electorate if there’s a  compelling argument we’ll then accept it?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well leaders should listen but they should develop good policies, and if this is kyboshed today  then it’s clearly a back down and this Government is very good at back downs, we had the Prime Minister float the  idea of the states raising their own income tax, backing down the next day, they floated the idea of a 15 per cent  increase in the GST, they’ve backed away from that; they’ve floated the idea of removing some of their concessions

on negative gearing, they’ve backed down on that; clearly this is a Government that’s got a lot of internal problems, a  lot of internal division, and has difficulty in making decisions and sticking with them and Labor’s had a clear set of  policies on tax reform, on education, on health, that we’ve had in place for the last 12 months and we’ve been out  there campaigning on and explaining to the Australian public. We’ve been very united on our focus on policy and all  you’ve got from the Government is division and chaos and they can’t make decisions.

GILBERT: Senator Ryan your reaction to that given well the Government’s trying to keep its focus on jobs and  growth and your tax cuts for companies but there’ve been distractions, you’d accept that wouldn’t you?

RYAN: Well the distractions have been on the Labor side Kieran, 25 Labor MPs and candidates that have basically  been on the record as openly saying you can’t trust Labor on border security. You’ve got Labor candidates saying  some of the most outrageous things about policies that apparently we’re meant to believe that Bill Shorten will  support yet we’ve seen when Labor won office in 2007 that these noises we hear from Labor MPs and candidates  then become opinions within the Labor caucus which then change Labor Government policy and we ended up with  the disaster of border protection and 50,000 unlawful arrivals that we saw. I mean the disunity and the chaos is on  Labor’s side, just because Matt Thistlethwaite comes here and repeats Bill Shorten’s lines on something we know  that on critical issues like on border security that’s not what happens, and yesterday we saw Labor’s chaos on  penalty rates, so just because Labor says one thing we know Labor’s track record says they do another when they  are in office.

GILBERT: Let’s get the response on penalty rates because you’re under pressure from the Greens  they’ve already  started an advertising campaign that the unions also want you to go further and legislate support for penalty rates,  your campaign says that you will see if elected penalty rates protected but you can’t give any guarantee of that.

THISTLETHWAITE: What the Greens are proposing Kieran is to enshrine it in legislation, now that’s never happened  before in Australia for the last 100 years penalty rates have been determined by the independent industrial umpire  and placed in awards. That’s the system that has ensured that we’ve had strong penalty rates and that Australians  have liveable wages and can participate within society and we’re not proposing to change that. A Government, an  Opposition can make a strong submission to an enquiry that’s conducted by the independent umpire which is what’s  occurring at the moment and Labor’s made a very strong submission supporting penalty rates but we don’t support  enshrining it in legislation because it’s not the way the system.

GILBERT: So should you change your campaign? Your advertising and so on which says you’re going to guarantee  penalty rates if you’re elected, there’s no room for nuance in your campaign you’re saying that they will be protected  under Labor there’s no guarantee though.

THISTLETHWAITE: They will be protected under Labor, because Labor believes in the system that protects penalty  rates, and that’s the system that’s existed for 100 years, to have penalty rates enshrined in awards and to allow  employers to bargain above those awards for superior wages and conditions through enterprise bargaining. Now the  Liberals philosophy, and we saw this with WorkChoices - and this is the great danger with what the Greens are  proposing Kieran, if you enshrine it in legislation it opens it up for having penalty rates completely removed to have  that legislation abolished by the Government particularly a Liberal Government if they gain control of the Senate  which is what they did with WorkChoices, they gained control of the Senate and they introduced a system through  legislation that allowed employers to undercut penalty rates. Labor will not allow that to occur, we will protect the  current system that enshrines them in awards and allows employers to bargain above them.

GILBERT: But it does also allow the Fair Work Commission to make judgments on whether Sunday rates for  example should be commensurate with Saturday rates that’s what they’re looking at at the moment, Senator Ryan  your reaction to the comments there from Matt Thistlethwaite?

RYAN: Look this is just another example of Bill Shorten and Labor not being able to be trusted by the Australian  people because they’re trying to create a political campaign that leads to one impression but the reality is very  different. I mean the Government’s policy is clear we support the role of decision making, the role of the independent  umpire, but Bill Shorten and Labor are getting themselves into awful messes on this and border protection and other  areas because they’re trying to say one thing on one hand to one audience and through advertising in this case  saying there’s a guarantee then they get caught out on radio when they get asked well what does the guarantee  actually mean? Now our position’s clear we support the independent umpire. It’s again Labor showing they don’t have  a plan for jobs they don’t have a plan for the economic future of Australia, they only have Bill Shorten’s plan to play  politics, it’s all about the election, it’s all about politics, it’s not about the Australian people.

GILBERT: Let’s take a break back in a moment with Scott Ryan and Matt Thistlethwaite.

GILBERT: This is AM Agenda with me the Minister for Vocational Education and Skills Scott Ryan and the Shadow  Parliamentary Secretary for Foreign Affairs Matt Thistlethwaite. Senator Ryan I want to ask you about the concern  among self-funded retirees and superannuants; this is really coming to boiling point according to the Morning Star  Investment Advice company Morning Star’s put out its advice its latest suggestion that self-funded retirees are at

boiling point accusing the Government of being worse than Ned Kelly in terms of the changes to superannuation and  its retrospectivity are you feeling this in terms of the backlash particularly from traditional Liberal supporters?

RYAN: Look I’ve had some people ask questions and there are some misleading comments out in the public domain  about this, but the truth is there’s no retrospectivity whatsoever the changes apply from the time they were  announced, they only actually affect the top one and four per cent respectively of people who are self-funded of  Australians with superannuation accounts and it’s about rebalancing superannuation system to ensure a couple of  things, firstly long term sustainability that it supports retirement incomes, as Kelly and as the Prime Minister have said  it’s not about estate planning or being able to manage assets, it’s really support income in retirement, but also it has  allowed us to institute some measures for example the catch-up provisions for concessional contributions for people  who spend time out of the workforce and they are primarily women at the moment, so it does allow us to institute  some measures that would lead to supporting people to save for their retirement as well. I understand the concern  and superannuation is always a very complex area but in this case it’s clear the changes are not retrospective. I  mean most commentators have pointed that out and while difficult changes in this area are always difficult for people  it’s important that we don’t let the Labor Party and others misrepresent what these changes are.

GILBERT: Well I’ll get to Labor in a moment but Morning Star’s head of equity said people are gobsmacked by the  extent and complicated changes to our already complex superannuation laws after carefully planning their retirement.  According to Government legislation self-funded retirees are being bushwhacked by an un-Australian bushranger so  your argument is not resinating in the investment space certainly not from Morning Star.

RYAN: Well that’s intentionally colourful language by someone who works in the area I mean I wouldn’t call that  actual formal advice on the issue, let’s put this in context someone with more than $1.6 million in their retirement  account gets to keep all their money, but they only get to have $1.6 million of that in the tax free pension retirement  phase, the rest of the money doesn’t get taken off them they can keep that in an accumulation fund which actually  keeps the tax rate at 15 per cent so still a substantially concessional tax rate, people can make up to half a million  dollars of contributions to a superannuation fund from their after tax income over the course of their life, now people  who trigger over both of those thresholds are in the top four per cent of superannuants so it doesn’t affect a great  number of people and obviously there are some people such as the gentleman you mentioned using colourful  language and he’s obviously got a newsletter that he markets but the important point to remember here is that we  have addressed some of the imbalances the superannuation system that do target a very small number of people  that still allow them to be very comfortable and they still have the ability to access existing tax concessions if they  have for example more than $1.6 million in super.

GILBERT: Well let’s go to the Labor’s position now because if people are going to be critical of the Government on  this and accuse it of retrospectivity well in terms of its result Labor’s policy is the same because you’re going to be  taxing earnings from superannuation retirement nest-eggs at upwards of $75,000 per annum that well is estimated to  be a nest-egg of $1.5 million in terms of superannuation accounts so that comes in at the same point that the  Government taxes kick in for superannuation accounts.

THISTLETHWAITE: Kieran ours is not retrospective at all. It applies prospectively so anyone that has a balance  above that threshold and earns an income on an annual basis above $75,000 off the balance so we’re not talking  about reducing the balance we’ll pay 15 per cent tax on that amount above the $75,000. Now this is a policy that  Labor developed over the course of the last 2 years in consultation with the industry you haven’t seen the criticism of  Labor’s policy from the industry that you’ve seen on the Government’s policy that was announced in the Budget and  that’s because we consulted with them, we did the proper costings on it, and we’ve had it out there for a year so  people could have a look at it and make a decision. The Government is making this up as they go and their policy is  retrospective because they introduce this lifetime non-concessional cap at $500,000 but it applies to contributions  that are made after the 1st of July 2007 - that’s clearly retrospective and that’s why you’ve got people that work in this  industry that do this for a day to day job coming out and saying that it is retrospective and that it is unfair.

GILBERT: Let’s wrap up I want to finish if we can on the campaign today the PM is in the Northern Territory  obviously trying to hold onto Natasha Griggs seat, what’s your sense of the campaign at this point Scott Ryan? Are  you feeling comfortable as we are now into the second week of campaigning, do you feel like you’re on track because  certainly Bill Shorten looks like he’s pretty relaxed at the moment.

RYAN: Well Kieran I’ll let the voters judge that but it’s during a campaign so I’d never say I felt relaxed. Anyone who  knows me knows that. When I’ve been out campaigning and I was in regional Victoria yesterday what the feedback  I’ve had from people on the street and small businesses I’ve visited is that people are interested in the Government  because it is clear that there’s a plan that supports economic growth, that supports jobs growth, that supports the  transition in the economy as well as understanding the risks from that transition and supporting people to go through  that. People are interested in what’s good for the country. They’re a little bit over the politics that Bill Shorten’s playing  and they know that Labor can’t be trusted on key issues. I mean whether it’s border security or the deficit or whether  it’s even Labor’s empty promises on education they know that Bill Shorten will say and do anything to win an election.  What they want is a Government which they are seeing led by Malcolm Turnbull that has the nation’s interests at  heart.



GILBERT: Matt Thistlethwaite only a minute left but while I mention to Scott Ryan obviously Shorten’s been  performing a lot better than he did towards the end of last year that’s for sure but are you worried about these  distractions with several candidates making comments in this campaign or their comments previously being dredged  up but either way very clear views against your own policy when it comes to border protection that’s not a distraction  you need right now.

THISTLETHWAITE: Bill Shorten is campaigning very well and he’s doing this Kieran because he’s outlining a clear  set of policies that Labor’s had in place for a long time and one of those policies is asylum seekers. We determined  that policy at our national conference in August last year, it’s a policy that’s backed by the caucus and it’s a policy that  we will take to the election and implement if we are in Government. But also Bill’s talking about the issues that matter  to Australians. Last week we focused on education, restoring the Gonski model of funding, ensuring we are funding  schools based on needs. We’re talking about jobs and investment in infrastructure today, and we’ll have more to say  on health, the economy and on renewables.

GILBERT: Thanks gents.

ENDS







