

THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR BLAIR



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  BREAKFAST, RADIO NATIONAL  MONDAY, 15 AUGUST 2016

SUBJECTS: Inquiry into Nauru reports; offshore processing and resettlement;  Abbott’s comments on Malaysia Solution

FRAN KELLY: Pressure is building on the Turnbull Government over the mistreatment  of refugees on Nauru. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights has called for a  thorough investigation into the more than 2,000 leaked incident reports, from The  Guardian, which includes allegations of violence, sexual assault, self-harm and  degrading living conditions. And on the weekend the Opposition Leader Bill Shorten  urged the Prime Minister to accompany him on a fact finding mission to Nauru. He also  announced that Labor will push for a Senate Inquiry into the offshore detention centre  when Parliament resumes this month. Shayne Neumann is the Shadow Minister for  Immigration. Shayne Neumann welcome to Breakfast.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good to be with you again Fran.

KELLY: We’ve been hearing these horror stories coming out of Nauru basically almost  from the time the Rudd Labor Government reopened the offshore processing centre  four years ago. Allegations of physical and sexual assaults, self-harm attempts, suicide,  substandard living conditions: these are not new. So why is Labor calling for a  Parliamentary Inquiry now? What’s changed?

NEUMANN: I think the Government’s response to these very shocking and deeply  disturbing allegations is the response, I think the Minister’s attitude clearly shows the  Government can’t be trusted to investigate themselves. And I think Parliament can and  should play a role in making sure there’s transparency and accountability across this  space. I think that’s why we need a Senate Inquiry.

KELLY: Labor is in lockstep with the Government when it comes to offshore  processing. In fact Labor as I said reopened it, restarted it, in a hurry four years ago with  a no-advantage clause that left people stuck there for indefinite periods without proper

accommodation, without proper support services, schooling, etc. And no surveillance.  You wrote the blueprint for this.

NEUMANN: Well we didn’t intend people to be living indefinitely for this period of time -

KELLY: But you didn’t have the answer to getting them out either.

NEUMANN: We reset these offshore facilities in the last few months before Labor lost  office in September 2013 and the Government’s been power for the last three years,  seems to have done nothing. We would not have let people stay in these facilities for  this duration. We would have proposed and would have worked hard for regional  resettlement -

KELLY: But the no-advantage clause is Labor’s policy. That was Labor’s idea.

NEUMANN:  - The Government seems to have done nothing in the last three years. We  urge the Government to process these people. To assess whether they’re refugees and  to look at regional resettlement. And we think you can be strong on border protection  but deep in compassion. We think a Senate Inquiry is necessary.

KELLY: So you support offshore processing, Labor does, but you say there should be  regional resettlement for these 750 people currently on Nauru and Manus. How and  where, are the questions though, because Labor is yet to come up with a plan?

NEUMANN: Well Labor is in Opposition. Now as I’ve said a number of times recently,  I’m the Shadow Minister and the Government’s got all the resources of Government; the  Department of Foreign Affairs; they’ve also got a Department of Immigration and Border  Protection and can liaise with foreign countries in relation to this. We look forward to the  Government contacting me and contacting us to discuss this. If Peter Dutton, the  responsible Minister, who lives on the Northside of Brisbane and I live on the south-west  in Ipswich, if he calls me today and says, Shayne I want to meet you in the Brisbane  CBD, in the Commonwealth Government building, we’ll talk about what we want to do,  and we want to put a proposal to the Opposition to see whether we can get your  support; don’t you think I’d be in my car on the Ipswich Motorway to get to the Brisbane  CBD as soon as possible? Consider this, take it through our internal processes and look  at it? What we want to make sure happens is the people are resettled properly, they get  adequate housing. The resettlement services are there. They get proper health and  education services and opportunity for a good and proper life in the future -

KELLY: But not in Australia, is that right? That’s still Labor’s position? Not resettled in  Australia.

NEUMANN: That is our position. That has been our position for some time now. We  think we want to take the option off the table. We do not want people to die on the sea.  We do not want the criminal cartels that smuggle people on the high sea, to be back in  business -

KELLY: Just on that, let’s look at that a bit more closely, because isn’t it clear now with  hindsight that under John Howard’s Pacific Solution, even after all those people from

Tampa ended back in Australia or New Zealand or some other countries; the boats  didn’t start up again and that was because of Operation Relex, of turnbacks. As Father  Frank Brennan, as Tim Costello and other have argued over the weekend, and we’ll be  hearing from Frank Brennan a little later, it’s the turnbacks that stopped the boats, not  the harsh offshore detention policy. Not the fact that people were brought to Australia  ultimately.

NEUMANN: We listened to the expert panel that recommended a number of suites of  measures to do. They included offshore processing, regional resettlement and  turnbacks when safe to do so, and we settled this policy some time ago. We think it’s a  combination of all three factors that have stopped the boats.

KELLY: So you don’t accept that if people were brought to Australia now; they’ve been  there for more than three years, there’s nowhere else to send them; this is the system  that you described as ethically, morally and legally irresponsible; that bringing them to  Australia, you say that is still out of contention, not possible.

NEUMANN: It’s our policy not to resettle people in Australia. It’s our policy to look at a  Human Rights framework, to look at regional resettlement. It’s our policy to make sure  people don’t languish in these facilities for this duration. And we call on the Government  to make sure regional resettlement takes place, but to treat people with decency and  safety and respect while they’re there. And that is why this Senate Inquiry is so  necessary.

KELLY: Let’s talk about the Senate Inquiry; because we’ve had the Moss Review,  we’ve had one Senate Inquiry into abuse on Nauru; we’ve had the Human Rights  Commission Inquiry into the mistreatment of children in detention. How would the  Senate Inquiry you’re proposing now be any different?

NEUMANN: I think it needs to look at what’s been exposed in the Nauru files. I think it  needs to look very carefully at the contributing factors to that abuse, reporting  mechanisms; the investigations that have taken place in relation to those things. The  Government has said they have undertaken investigations. What was the outcome of  those investigations? What recommended changes have taken place? What checks  and balances have been put in place subsequent to those investigations? And a whole  range of factors I think the Senate Inquiry needs to look at. And clearly they need to  relate to the abuse allegations that have come out. They are so shocking, so deeply  disturbing, that they need to be investigated. They’re some of the terms of reference  Labor believes ought to be looked at.

KELLY: Shayne Neumann, can I just ask you finally, Tony Abbott’s been reflecting on  his time as Opposition Leader, when the Coalition joined with the Greens to scuttle the  so-called Malaysia Solution. He’s now saying that, he doubts that would have worked,  but he should have let the Government try it. That he “would have been a step-back  from the hyper-partisanship that now poisons out public life.” Do you welcome this  belated concession from Tony Abbott?

NEUMANN: Well it’s an amazing admission isn’t it? Its proof that Tony Abbott and the  Liberals have been prepared to wreck policy solutions for their own political gain; hyper-

partisanship. I mean Scott Morrison needs to explain himself here as well. Does he  agree with Tony Abbott? He was the Minister for much of the last three years. Did he  deliberately play politics with asylum seeker policy in such a reckless manner? The  Liberals have completely failed I believe to find a viable third party solution -

KELLY: Should the Government try to reinvent the Malaysia Solution and would Labor  support that?

NEUMANN: If the Government came back to us with something in relation to Malaysia  or any other country, we’d look at it. We’d go through our internal processes and  examine carefully. But the Government’s completely failed and a third party  resettlement arrangement would be a priority under a Labor Government. That’s the  policy we took to the last election. We hope we don’t have to take that policy to the next  election. We hope the Government does the right thing and finds resettlement before  then.

KELLY: Shayne Neumann, thank you very much for joining us.

NEUMANN: Good to be with you Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  MADONNA OLIVER, 0416 199 808

