1

www.minister.border.gov.au





The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

TRANSCRIPT

Interview with Ross Greenwood, Radio 2GB

26 April 2016





S



ubjects: PNG Supreme Court judgement.

E&EO…………………………………………………………………………………………..

JOURNALIST: Immigration Minister Peter Dutton is on the line right now. Many  thanks for your time Peter.

PETER DUTTON: Thanks Ross.

JOURNALIST: So can you just explain from the Australian Government’s point of  view, what this decision does?

PETER DUTTON: Well just a bit of background first Ross. So, this was a negotiation  between the Rudd Government and the PNG Government at the time to set-up  Manus because thousands of people were obviously coming by boat, and I think the  Labor Party at the time, the government, were completely overwhelmed by the  situation - in fact we know overall there were 50,000 who arrived on 800 boats and  1,200 people drowned at sea - now, the Supreme Court in PNG obviously doesn’t  have jurisdiction over Australia, they have jurisdiction on PNG matters; they’ve  decided that there is a difficultly or a constitutional problem with the centre operating,  the Regional Processing Centre, operating on Manus and we need to see what the  PNG Government response to that will be.

The Australian Government’s response doesn’t change. Our position has been very  clear for a long period of time. We don’t want people smugglers back into business  and these people won’t be settling in Australia.

We’re not going to allow people who seek to come to our country illegally by boat to  settle permanently here. We’ve been very clear about that and it’s very important  that we repeat that message again tonight because the people smugglers are trying  to fill boats right now and they will use this as a marketing tool to say that the  gateway to Australia is now reopen….

JOURNALIST: …okay, just a question; the 850 people there who were seeking  asylum in Australia, does Australia or its Government have any duty of care over  those 850 people?

2

www.minister.border.gov.au

PETER DUTTON: We don’t have any obligation to take those people and we’ve  been very clear that we will not be taking those people Ross. We will work with the  PNG Government. We will wait to see their response to the court case and it will be  24 hours before I can get our legal advice in relation to the nuances of the  judgement. So we will wait to make further comment until we get all of the legal  advice.

We have been very clear; and that is that the Government is not going to take people  into this country that seek to come illegally by boat. We’ve taken record numbers of  refugees and the numbers will increase again this year through the UN process and  through the Special Humanitarian Programme. So we will take refugees and we’ll  take them by plane, not by boat because many of them end up at the bottom of the  ocean, and these people smugglers as people are seeing play out on their television  sets, all of the scenes across Europe now, people drown at sea, people smugglers  take advantage, they rip people off, they false promise all of these people to make  them pay their money and get onto boats and there are no women or children in the  Manus Island facility but we will work to try and help return those people to their  country of origin or to a third country but they will not be settling in Australia.

JOURNALIST: Okay, just another one on this because does Australia therefore not  necessarily, as you say have a duty of care to the 850 people who have found  themselves in Manus Island, does Australia have a duty of care to Papua New  Guinea and given it wasn’t your government, but it was still an Australian  Government that did a deal with Papua New Guinea, do we have a duty of care to  Papua New Guinea to make certain that these people are resettled somewhere?

PETER DUTTON: Well Ross, as I say, we’ll wait and see what the PNG Government  has to say once they’ve contemplated the legal decision and they’ve taken legal  advice themselves and then, like always, we’ll work with the PNG Government -  they are a trusted partner, just like Indonesia is and other people within our region  and we’ll work on this issue and many others on a daily basis - but the Regional  Processing Centre on Manus Island is the responsibility of the PNG Government.

There are many hundreds of people that have been returned from that Regional  Processing Centre back to their country of origin because they’ve been found to be  economic refugees; they’ve paid their thousands of dollars, they’ve got on a boat and  they’ve sought to come to Australia or somewhere else and they aren’t refugees.

The refugees that we’re taking at the moment are people who have had family  members slaughtered in Syria or who are involved in the society in Iraq where  they’ve had people in their own village or within their own groups beheaded. They’re  the refugees that we are taking because they are not economic refugees, they’re  legitimate refugees.

So as I say we’ll work with the PNG Government to contemplate the case but the  Supreme Court of PNG doesn’t have jurisdiction over Australia - as you would  appreciate - and we’ll continue to work with our partners in PNG because most  importantly we don‘t want boats to restart. We do not want people drowning at sea  and we don’t want to reopen detention centres because we’ve been able to close 13  or those 17 detention centres that Labor opened and we’ve now got no children in

3

www.minister.border.gov.au

detention - whereas 8,500 children went into detention when Labor lost control of  our borders.

JOURNALIST: Immigration Minister Peter Dutton, we appreciate your time at very  short notice this evening but an important issue no doubt.

PETER DUTTON: Thanks Ross. Take care mate.

[ends]



