SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR MENTAL HEALTH  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING THE LEADER ON STATE

AND TERRITORY RELATIONS  SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS - PVO NEWS DAY

FRIDAY, 13 MAY 2016



SUBJECT/S: Election 2016; People’s Debate; Perceptions of Malcolm Turnbull;

Labor’s positive education policies; superannuation; Malcolm Turnbull’s link to

the Panama Papers; preference deals.

ASHLEIGH GILLON: I am joined now by the Liberal Victorian Senator James

Paterson, thank you for coming in, we do appreciate you giving us time today. And

also from Canberra, Labor’s ACT Senator Katy Gallagher. James we are going to start

with you, Bill Shorten has been fronting up to these town hall style meetings and

people’s forums. I think he’s done about 100 or so in the last few months. Earlier we

have seen this week, Mr Turnbull didn’t go along to the street walk as planned, today

there was a bit of an awkward conversation with mothers in Adelaide. Is Mr Turnbull

going into tonight’s people’s forum as the underdog, do you think Mr Shorten will

perform better?



SENATOR JAMES PATERSON: I’m sure given that Bill Shorten will put in an

absolutely flawless performance [audio cuts out] expectations, but that sounds like

he’ll be ready to go. I hope what comes out of the forum is a real contrast, on the one

hand Malcolm Turnbull’s economic leadership and his vision for this country and

particularly the strong economic plan he has for jobs and growth, and on the other

hand Bill Shorten’s plan for higher taxes, more spending and more debt. I think that’s

the real contrast that the Australian people will see out of tonight’s debate.



GILLON: Viewers will be looking very closely to see how Mr Turnbull comes across in

terms of how he can deal with the real person’s questions, last night Peta Credlin

labelled Mr Turnbull as Mr Harbourside Mansion. Is that a real problem that he may

come across as an elitist, that he is not doing as good a job as he might like to in

terms of embracing his success and his wealth as a selling point, that that could be

seen as a detracting point for him?



PATERSON: I think most Australians know that Malcolm Turnbull is a wealthy man

but I think they also know that he wasn't given that wealth, he earnt it himself. He had

a pretty humble upbringing, a single father who sacrificed a lot to send him to a good

school and everything that he owns now and everything that he has now is something

that he has earnt over his life by taking risks, by having a go, by taking an initiative. I

think that's a great story to tell and it’s a really admirable thing about our PM. Yes he's

wealthy, yes he's got success, but we celebrate success in Australia, we don't

demonise it.



GILLON: Katy Gallagher, is that something that the Labor Party will be focusing on

over the coming weeks, trying to pigeonhole Mr Turnbull into being this elite Prime

Minister that can't relate to the ordinary Australian?



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER: [audio cuts out] the Prime Minister's doing a pretty

good job of that himself. I think in terms of selling a Budget that's rewarding the big

end of town and taking money away from those on lower incomes, I think yesterday’s

performance where he found it very difficult to answer the questions being put to him

by a single mum worried about her kids education and then went off and had lunch in

a gents only exclusive club, I think there's plenty of that out of touch image that's being

generated by the Prime Minister himself. I think people will have questions about that

and they'll be asked, no doubt, at the people's forum tonight.



GILLON: We've seen on Labor's campaign this week, it seemed to be given a boost

yesterday by the presence of Chloe Shorten on the trail, she seems to be winning the

hearts and minds of journalists and photographers anyway on the bus, that's for sure.

It has been messy in some quarters for Labor, we saw the dumped Fremantle

candidate not exactly going quietly, several candidates also comparing offshore

processing to concentration camps. We keep hearing about what a well-oiled machine

Labor has in terms of campaign headquarters but does there need to be more

discipline lower down the rung in terms of some of these candidates falling into line?



GALLAGHER: I think the message from Labor's campaign this week has been all

about education, all of the events that the Leader of the Opposition has done has been

in schools, talking to kids and teachers and outlining our plans around investments in

education. Sure, campaign leaders are going to have to deal with other issues as they

arise and I think they have been dealt with this week on refugees and asylum seekers.

It's been reinforcing the policy that Labor has, made very clear at our national

conference this week and in terms of the candidate in Fremantle; a decision taken by

National Executive. Dealt with and another candidate in place for the duration of the

campaign. These are just matters that campaigns need to deal with but the central

focus of our message this week has been on investing in education and the future for

the kids going through school.



GILLON: On that though, we did see Bill Shorten under a lot of pressure to explain the

economic benefits going forward, we saw the numbers tied to OECD research. It's

hard isn't it for a lot of Australians to start getting their heads around economic impacts

that could play out in some 80 years’ time?



GALLAGHER: Well again, I think the issue there is - and people get it - they

understand it, that if you invest in a child's education that there will be an economic

return from that over time. This is investing in the long term gain for the economy,

without a doubt, but I think most parents would understand that if their kids are

invested in, if they get the best education they can, that there would be certainly long

term benefits, not just for them as individuals but for the economy more broadly and

that's been the theme and the point that has been made by Bill Shorten this week.



GILLON: James, the Labor Party is looking to spend some $3 billion extra than the

Coalition plans to up to the year 2020. We keep hearing from your side of politics that

it's not about the dollars spent it's about the outcomes, it's about standards,

performance. Do you think Australians will buy that though? An extra $3 billion surely

goes a long way to really contributing to those outcomes being met.



PATERSON: I think it's important to remember Ashleigh that education spending this

year is at a record and it's going to increase next year and the year after and the year

after that under our plan. So it's not choosing between mega education spending on

the one hand and generous on the other. We've got two versions of very generous

education spending. Our plan we think is prudent and affordable though. The Federal

Government this year will have a $37 billion deficit and Labor doesn't have a plan to

pay for their education promises so the real question is, can they even deliver the

extra $3 billion that they say they can. We don't think they can, we think there's a big

hole in their costings, the Treasury thinks there's a big hole in their costings,

particularly around tobacco tax and they really haven't addressed that.



GILLON: Superannuation changes are going some way to boost the [audio cuts out]

in terms of both major party's budget forecast. I mentioned Peta Credlin earlier, she's

suggested that the retrospective aspect of the super changes could be a problem for

the Coalition in the campaign. She was asked what is a potential problem area and

that is the area she nominated. You hail from the IPA, that's your background, do you

agree with your former colleagues that this is  a retrospective policy change we're

looking at from the Coalition?

PATERSON: Well the government’s view is that it is not retrospective and

independent people like the Treasury Secretary say that it is not retrospective. I am

happy to take that on advice. I think the key thing about superannuation is…

GILLON: Sorry, do you agree with the government that this is not a retrospective

change

PATERSON: Yes I do.

GILLON: Do you think the IPA has got it wrong on this?

PATERSON: I think it is a change that will have an affect into the future and it will

affect people’s incomes into the future and that is true and we can’t get away from that

and some people will be worse off than that but substantially people will be better off

and the people who will be better off are middle and low income earners and that is for

an important reason because they are the people who are most likely to be on the

edge of relying on the pension or perhaps not needing the pension and we want to

target the incentives to those people to make sure they can provide for themselves in

retirement. I think it is an appropriate change.

GILLON: Katy, is it a bit cheeky for Labor to be attacking the retrospective nature of

this and this gets into a bit of a pointy, sort of, head debate doesn’t it because the

definition of what retrospective is changed. But, I think it was Peter Martin yesterday in

his piece compared it to smoking saying well you could say the cigarette tax is

retrospective because smokers when they started smoking didn’t expect that the price

of cigarettes would go up so much. Do you think Labor is just pushing the line a bit by

targeting this as a  retrospective change?

GALLAGHER: Well I think the IPA and a whole range of organisations that have

come out are actually making the case and drawing concerns to the nature of the

retrospectivity back to 2007. It has certainly been raised with Labor by superannuation

industry. Chris Bowen addressed this in his speech to the Press Club earlier this week

where if you have to write something in that it affects your decisions back to 2007 then

it is very likely to be retrospective. I think the Liberal Party seem quite divided on this.

Labor’s position is that we do have concerns with that part of the superannuation

changes that were outlined in the budget and that remains the case.

GILLON: All campaigns have blips and news stories that aren’t planned for the week

and this week for Malcolm Turnbull we saw his mention in the Panama Papers. James

that was probably bad timing, I mean he would have preferred not to be mentioned,

obviously. He says there is no suggestion of impropriety here but is there more for

Malcolm Turnbull to explain and even the fact that he was even mentioned. Are you

worried that the waters have been muddled so much by Labor that the average voter

thinks - Malcolm Turnbull, Panama Papers, that’s not a good mix?

PATERSON: Well it’s a pretty dishonest campaign. There is no evidence or

suggestion that there was any tax avoidance or anything going on here. The company

in question never even made a profit so there was no tax to be avoided. He was

director of a company that had a subsidiary that was based in Panama that is actually

a normal corporate structure that has been going on for decades. There is nothing

really to this. He was a director for a very short period over 20 years ago. I think it is

really not a story at all and for Labor to be pushing it is a pretty cheap effort.

GILLON: Is there more for Mr Turnbull to explain on this matter, Katy?

GALLAGHER: Oh absolutely and I think the fact he is named in the papers is a matter

of public interest. It is not everybody who is named in these papers and these

papers, as people are understanding, as information rolls out are relating to structures

around tax havens and tax avoidance and there is the Prime Minister’s name listed in

some of these papers then I think there is a public interest and I think there is a need

for the Prime Minister to address those issues. Yesterday there was one question and

it was dismissed very quickly and I think there needs to be a much fuller explanation

given by the Prime Minister and the Australian community deserve that.

GILLON: There is so much to talk about and we are running out of time. James, I do

want to ask you about the state of play here in Victoria. Coming up in an hour or so we

will be talking to Josh Gordon from The Age about the state of play in Victoria and

Greens preferences with the Liberal party. What's your view on this, I know it's very

controversial within the Liberal Party of course. Does it outrage you or are you very

pragmatic in terms of well, if that's what it takes then so be it?



PATERSON: It's not my role as an MP or candidate to be involved in preference

negotiations, that is a matter for the federal director, Tony Nutt, but look I trust the

judgement of Tony Nutt on this to balance the competing issues here. We do have to

balance our values as a political party with a political benefit and imperative. One thing

which I don't take too seriously is this self-interested bleating by the Labor Party about

this. If they were so sincere about how terrible it was to preference the Greens then

maybe they could lead and demonstrate they won't be preferencing the Greens. They

like to kick up a fuss -



GILLON: Sure, but the Labor Party is far more aligned on outlook on the world with

the Greens than the Liberal Party is.



PATERSON: Well, if you listen to Michael Danby and you listen to Stephen Conroy

here in Victoria they say that the Greens are the worst thing ever and for us to even

contemplate preferencing them is a travesty. Michael Danby himself said he won't be

preferencing the Greens in his own seat of Melbourne Ports so I'd like to see that

applied a bit more consistently and then maybe we'll listen to what they say.

GILLON: Okay, you're squibbing it a bit here James, you're not telling us what your

view is. Would you like to see the Greens given preferences in this election?

PATERSON: I don't want to see any more Greens members of parliament, but I do

want to see as many Liberal members of parliament as possible and if we can come to

an arrangement that allows more Liberals to be returned after the election then I think

that's a good thing.

GILLON: So you're being a pragmatist on this one. Katy, we did see the debate

playing out this week as to whether or not Labor would do a deal with the Greens in

the event of a hung parliament, if it is a choice between staying in Opposition or a deal

with the Greens, voters aren't silly, everyone knows what would likely happen in that

event regardless of how it could be spun at the time, a deal with the Greens has to be

a live option for the Labor Party in that scenario?

GALLAGHER: Bill Shorten has made it very clear that there would be no deal with the

Greens. We're campaigning in this election to win the election and that's our focus and

will remain our focus for the next 7 weeks and I think I can't add anything more to what

Bill Shorten has said over the last couple of days when he has answered these

questions, no deal and we're campaigning to win.

GILLON: And do you agree with that statement, surely you'd prefer a deal with the

Greens and to be on the government benches?

GALLAGHER: Again, I think the approach we have to take in the campaign is to

campaign to win. I don't think you can start, you know, we've got 7 weeks, we've got

the longest campaign right through winter, we have to be focused on that and not on

these matters and hypothetical things about what might happen afterwards. The

position is that we would not do a deal with the Greens and we are campaigning in this

election to win and we will be outlining our positive policies going forward. We've been

doing that for the last year and we'll continue for the next 7 weeks.

GILLON: Good on you both for fronting up and doing exactly that with us today.

Senator James Paterson, Senator Katy Gallagher, we do appreciate your time with us.

ENDS

Communications Unit: T 03 8625 5111

