



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Education and Training  Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Press conference, Adelaide  Topics: Early learning languages app; Keeping our borders secure; SA nuclear fuel cycle involvement.  14/11/2016  10:30 AM

Nicolle Flint, Member for Boothby: Good morning, it’s an absolute pleasure to have the Minister  for Education here with me today at the Waite Campus Childrens Centre. We’ve just been looking at the ELLA  app with some of the children here at the Centre. And they’re learning Chinese. As we know China is one of  our most important trading partners and it’s absolutely crucial that we encourage all children to learn other  languages and be exposed to other languages from an early age. So I’m delighted that [inaudible] has had two  trial areas and we’ll see more rolling out, as the Minister is about to tell us about.

Simon Birmingham: Well thanks Nicolle, it’s great to be back in Boothby with you and visiting this  wonderful early learning centre here at the Waite Campus of the University of Adelaide, importantly to talk  about the Early Learning Languages Australia Program. This is a $15.7 million investment by the Turnbull  Government in providing four and five year old Australians with early opportunities to start to learn new  languages. Already around 10,000 children across Australia as part of our pilot have been learning five  different languages, most of them Chinese or Japanese. And over the next couple of years we’ll make another  four languages available to centres around the country. This will be now an opportunity from today for every  pre-school and long day-care provider in the country to apply to be able to participate as part of the Early  Learning Languages Program so that students right across the country can get a head start in learning a  different language. Learning a different language is not just critical for their participation in the modern  economy, it’s also brilliant for the cognitive skills and mental development of young minds. We know that  young children learning a language early can get a head start on other children in terms of all aspects of their  development, as well of course in the learning of the language. And this app based activity that we have in  terms of the ELLA trial is one that will allow children to play in a fun environment, using modern technology as  they learn, supported by educators and teachers who learn with them and ultimately give them that flying start  from pre-school into school in their language development. It’s an exciting program that the Turnbull  Government’s backing because it helps position Australian children for the modern economy but also it’s a  cost effective way of enhancing the developmental skills of our youngest children.

Journalist: Minister, obviously a lot of fun’s being had in this room here today. Have you done  any testing as to how effective it is as a learning tool?

Simon Birmingham: The program has undergone an evaluation and we have both research and evidence  to show it’s helping children develop language skills, but also plenty of anecdotes from parents who have  come home and said their children are counting in foreign languages. Are picking up different fruits and using  the language to describe those fruits. So we know there’s a take home component from this language that  demonstrates kids are picking it up, they are getting more skills, it is helping their language development and  the rest of their cognitive skills as well.

Journalist: We know that a lot of Australians are trying to reduce the screen time for pre-  schoolers. Is this the best way of approaching this?

Simon Birmingham: This is a way of using children’s interest in technology in a constructive way. So it  actually gives discipline to focused activities that are about understanding and developing foreign language  skills. But of course we expect early learning centres like this one will be careful about how they use it, will  ration the time. And we hear that from the educators that these young kids are learning skills, how to self

regulate, when to hand over to the next child in terms of using the application and they’re only getting access  for certain times a day, supported then by other learning activities. So it’s about using technology for good and  teaching good skills in how technology is used.

Journalist: Yeah, just on border protection. Are you worried that the current deal with America  will see a surge of boat arrivals on the shores of Australia?

Simon Birmingham: Well we are conscious of the risk that the arrangements that have been announced  will be used by people smugglers as part of their marketing ploys and techniques, which is why firstly the  Turnbull Government is employing additional resources for our border protection activities across the North.  But secondly, why it is essential that the Border Protection legislation before the current Parliament is  supported. And Bill Shorten should take this opportunity now to back our policy to put in place into Australian  law arrangements that will make clear that nobody who arrives in Australia will ever be resettled in Australia if  they’ve come as an illegal maritime arrival. So this is a test for Bill Shorten to actually accept that our policies  to date are working. That if he wants to support us in our measures to clear out Manus and Nauru, he should  also support us in our measures to protect Australian borders by putting into law that ban on illegal maritime  arrivals ever settling in Australia.

Journalist: Malcolm Turnbull said he didn’t talk about this deal when he spoke with Donald  Trump on the phone. Given that he’s going to be taking over from Obama soon, should he have?

Simon Birmingham: Um no. We have to work with the American administration that is in power at present  and Barrack Obama is the President of the United States until the 20 th  of January. This is an agreement that’s  been worked on since the start of this year and we will work closely with the US Government. And of course,  we’ve seen over the years that one Australian Government changes, one American administration changes,  but our policies, the closeness of our relationship continue and we’re confident that will continue to be the  case in the future.

Journalist: So you’re not worried about Donald Trump rejecting the deal later down the track?

Simon Birmingham: We’re confident we will work with future American administrations just as we’ve  worked with the current and previous American administrations.

Journalist: Just on another topic. Steven Marshall, the Opposition Leader in South Australia, has  rejected the idea of a dump for South Australia after visiting Finland. What’s your take on that? Are you still  supportive of the nuclear process or do you want to see the Weatherill Government drop it all together?

Simon Birmingham: Well, I think we saw from the people’s jury process of Jay Weatherill that the wheels  really came off what in the end appears to have been a two year distraction by Jay Weatherill and the Labor  Party. This has been a giant smoke screen for the fact that South Australia has the largest unemployment rate  in the country, has a stagnating economy in far too many ways and that Jay Weatherill and State Labor  appear to have absolutely no plans of where to go and what we’ve seen now is a process that they put in  place to discuss. This went entirely off the rails and Steven Marshall was simply acknowledging the inevitable  last week, which is that Jay Weatherill’s process had gone off the rails. Clearly isn’t going to happen, clearly  doesn’t have public support. And that Labor had no other real plans for the economy in this state.

Journalist: So you think Steven Marshall’s making the right call for the State by telling Jay  Weatherill to abandon it?

Simon Birmingham: I think Steve Marshall is simply acknowledging the reality and of course we know that  that’s exactly where Jay Weatherill is headed. And we know that Jay Weatherill’s process has come up with a  big ‘no’ to his big idea and of course the left wing have no other ideas of how it is he intends to actually grow  the South Australian economy.

Journalist: One of the other reasons Steven Marshall was against it is was he was saying that  people on the ground were against it. Obviously you’re a Federal Senator not a state politician, but were you  hearing that from your electorate, your electors?

Simon Birmingham: Certainly degrees of resistance, reticence, but in the end I think the real issue here is  we’ve seen millions of dollars and a couple of years wasted by a distraction from Jay Weatherill and the Labor  Party. They never show leadership on this issue, they only wanted to use it as a distraction, as a smoke  screen, as something to talk about but never actually committed to it themselves. And then their process has  lead perhaps to an inevitable outcome from the process that was set up and yet the questions for South  Australians is where to now? What’s the plan? Steven Marshall has outlined a plan for 2036, a long-term plan

for South Australia’s economy, and we as a Federal Government are committing through our Defence  Industry investment significant resources to back the South Australian economy. But where’s Jay Weatherill’s  plan? What’s the Labor plan to grow jobs in this state and to turn around our record unemployment?

Journalist: I just have one more question on the language app. We know we’re losing knowledge  of a lot of our Indigenous languages at the moment, are there any plans to introduce similar tools for  something like that?

Simon Birmingham: We’re certainly having a look at it in the context of Indigenous languages and  particularly also in many remote communities where English is a second language for young Indigenous  children. So that’s something we’re giving consideration to as to how we might actually use the same types of  technology to help young Indigenous children master their English language skills as well as of course the  potential as to how it can be used in other ways to better appreciate Indigenous languages. We’re already  across parts of Adelaide, young children learning to sing songs in Kaurna language or the like. First and  foremost this is delivering five languages and we’re seeing from the choices of parents and early educators  that those big Asian languages, Chinese and Japanese, are the ones they’re embracing, unsurprisingly given  their significance to our region, to the economic development of Australia, to the likely job opportunities of  those children in the future. Thanks guys.

Minister Birmingham’s media contact: James Murphy 0478 333 974  Nick Creevey 0447 664 957

Department Media: media@education.gov.au

