







The Morning Show (Channel 7)



Thursday 24 March 2016 Transcript

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash [link:/cash]



Minister for Employment

Minister for Women

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public

Service

Senator for Western Australia



E & EO

SUBJECTS - Belgium terror attacks, recall of Parliament,

ABCC, Registered Organisations Commission

Presenter: It’s been two days since the Brussels terror

attacks and of course the fallout is still being felt right

around the world. Our Prime Ministers controversial

comments about the attacks are also in the spotlight.



Minister’s Media Centre  Employment portfolio

Presenter: Senator Michaelia Cash joins us now from

Perth, welcome to the show Michaelia.

Minister Cash: Great to be with you.

Presenter: Malcom Turnbull has been criticised for saying

security in Belgium had slipped, he has blamed the refugee

crisis saying Islamic terrorists entered posing as  refugees.

First we are going to take a look at what he had to say last

night.

Video of Prime Minister - European Governments are

confronted by a perfect storm of failed or neglected

integration, foreign fighters returning from Iraq and Syria,

poorest borders and intelligence and security apparatus

struggling to keep pace with the scope and breadth of the

treat.

Presenter:  So your take on this?

Minister Cash: I fundamentally agree with the Prime

Minister and I think his speech to the Lowy Institute last

night really highlighted why in Australia we do need to

remain vigilant. It also highlighted the fundamental

difference with Australia being an island nation and we are

able to know who comes in and who leaves our country. But

then you look at the situation in Europe any one of us who

has been to Europe knows, you jump in a car, you jump on  a

train, you jump on a bus, you are in one country in the

morning and in another country but a few hours later. That is

a fantastic thing - the free flow of people - but it clearly now

in particular with the crisis of millions upon millions of

people now flooding into Europe it is posing a real situation

for them and unfortunately, that situation is being played

out. We saw it in Paris but four months ago and now in

Brussels. So I think the Prime Minister really  has

highlighted one of the situations Europe is now facing but in

particular the fundamental difference with Australia.

Presenter: How do you think he can be so sure that we are

safe here in Australia because we talk to security experts on

the show all of the time, particularly around these tragic

incidents who are saying we are potentially in trouble here

too, it’s only a matter of time.

Minister Cash: Larry, you can never make any guarantees

obviously, when it comes to national security. But what you

can do as a Government is ensure that it is your top priority

and a Coalition Government always makes sure that the

security of the nation, its people and its borders is a top

priority. We obviously have information sharing at the

highest level in Australia and I think when your agencies

share information and they intelligence gathering, again as I

have said we are an island nation, we should know who is

coming in and who is leaving. We put the  appropriate

resources into national security, so whilst you’re right, you

cannot make any guarantees, we need to be constantly

vigilant. I can assure you that the Coalition Government

sees national security as a fundamental priority.

Presenter: Ok, we are going to move on from Brussels

now, there’s an article in the Daily Telegraph about Malcom

Turnbull’s secret society. According to this article, you’re in

the inner circle; do tell how do we get in?

Minister Cash: I don’t know maybe we have the Prime

Minister on the show… No look, at the end of the day  I

don’t think it would be unusual for any Prime Minister

whether they are a Liberal Prime Minister or Labor Prime

Minister to seek advice from certain people. I am very lucky

that when it comes to industrial relations, the ABCC,

registered organisations, the Prime Minister does pick up the

phone and talk to me. I’m assuming that he talks to other

people in relation to other portfolios but I don’t think any

Australian would be surprised to know that the Prime

Minister has a core group of people, just like previous Prime

Ministers have had that he speaks to, to seek advice. In fact,

I would say it’s a very good thing that our Prime Minister

does have an inner circle and is able to test advice but if

there is one thing I can tell you about Malcom Turnbull, he

is not afraid to pick up the phone and call you and say,  “I

need to run something past you, what are your thoughts,

thanks very much”. I personally think that’s a great thing in

a Prime Minister.

Presenter: It would be wrong of us to try and try and

negotiate some sort of commercial arrangement with you

but if you can get us into the Prime Ministers inner circle,

we will get you into the Logies - that’s our deal.

Minister Cash: I like the way you’re talking.

Presenter: Now speaking of the Logies, Parliament is set

to return on the 18th of April… highly controversial, how do

you see this playing out?

Minister Cash: Look, I don’t think it’s highly controversial.

I think that this ABCC legislation is obviously a

fundamental part of our economic agenda, in particular

given the building and construction sector employs over 1

million Australians. One in 10 Australians has their job as  a

result of this sector. We know that the sector is unfortunately

inundated with bullying, thuggery, intimidation on a daily

basis. Something needs to be done. The Senate does need to

be given an opportunity to consider in detail this legislation.

That is what the Prime Minister has now afforded the

Senate, an opportunity of three whole weeks. Should the

Senate choose to consider in detail the legislation, they don’t

have to but if they don’t  and the legislation is not passed  the

Prime Minister has made it clear this is important to us, we

need to break the deadlock and we will go to a Double

Dissolution election on the 2nd of July.

Presenter: Just on that, Larry did only get through his

second year of political science; we would like you to

explain to us if you could please help Larry out. In one

sentence, what a Double Dissolution is?

Minister Cash: Ok, every single one of us, Senators and

Members of the House of Representatives gets to apply for

our job again and if we are lucky enough for the Australian

people to give us our job for another term, we get to vote on

the important legislation that we could not get through this

Parliament, the ABCC and the ROC.

Presenter: Hopefully they never introduce that to

television. Thank you for clearing that up because a lot of

people are talking about that. Malcom Turnbull’s campaign

buzz phrase has become a bit of a joke after it was revealed

there is a striking resemblance to a show called Veep, in the

political comedy the Vice Presidents campaign is continuity

with change. Malcolm Turnbull’s buzz phrase is continuity

and change. Now the show’s star, Julia Louis - Dreyfus has

spoken out as well as the show’s creator saying, in season 4

of Veep we came up with the most meaningless election

slogan we could think of. Michaelia, over to you.

Minister Cash: Life does sometimes imitate art and I think

the reality for us all is when you are trying to distil

something down to what people understand continuity and

change actually does send the message to the people. There

is continuity whether it’s a Labor Government to a Liberal

Government, a Liberal Government to a Labor Government

there will always be continuity and there will be  change.

Certainly in terms of transitions from Prime Ministers of

course there is continuity. Malcolm Turnbull is a member of

a Coalition Government; he was a senior Member of

Cabinet. Certainly a number of the policies we will continue

with because we fundamentally believe in them. But also a

Prime Minister brings his own personal stamp, so there is

change in that regard and I think certainly I think if you had

to ask me what’s the number one thing that Malcom

Turnbull is obviously is in terms of the change side of the

equation, is innovation. A $1.1 billion investment in

innovation. I don’t think anyone could argue that when it

comes to innovation and the transition to the new economy,

Malcom Turnbull is well and truly the man to do that

because his entire life he has lived and breathed  innovation.

Presenter: Michaelia, Michaelia, nice try but you cannot

tell me that behind the scenes someone didn’t go “Bugger,

bugger, bugger, we didn’t check Veep” this show would be

watched by every single member of the parliamentary

gallery by every single staffer there in Canberra. You  cannot

sit there and tell me that someone is not going “we stuffed

that up, now we have Julia Louis- Dreyfus tweeting about

it”

Minister Cash: I have to say, it certainly highlighted the

issue, if nothing else it’s got everybody talking. But I think

it’s again, life does sometimes imitate art.

Presenter: There has been a review of entitlements after

Bronwyn Bishop’s chopper scandal. The changes will see

pollies banned from using limos, from Canberra airport to

get over there to Parliament House. They will have to catch

a shuttle bus instead, that’s a lot of hundred green bottles

going on their back and forth, what’s your take on  this?

Minister Cash: Look, at the end of the day obviously there

was a review of the work expenses of Members of

Parliament, that review has now been made public and the

Government is obviously considering some of the

recommendations in terms of the one we have been asked to

personally look at. I believe Mathias Cormann has issued a

statement that we basically accept the recommendations. We

spend taxpayer’s money, we need to do it carefully and

efficiently and if there are ways we can be more efficient

and more careful, then we should certainly have a look at

them. I have a basic rule for myself - is it going to pass the

pub test? That’s it and if it doesn’t you don’t do it. Very

simple and we saw what happened unfortunately with

Bronwyn Bishop. I’ve never caught a helicopter I have no

intention on catching a helicopter but certainly we spend tax

payers money and it does need to be spent appropriately and

wisely.

Presenter: Well said, the pub test I’m taking is if two

people are sitting in a bar or in a pub discussing it, can it be

justified. Is that what the pub test is?

Minister Cash: Yeah, basically. You’re sitting in a bar

you’re having a chat with people and they tell you what they

really think.

Presenter: Oh, I thought it was two Politicians driving  past

a pub in a limo seeing what time happy hour is. Thank you

for that. Michaelia, lovely to talk to you as always thank

you.

Minister Cash: Fantastic to be with you guys, have a great

day.

Presenter: We will see you in the inner circle.

Minister Cash: Thank you.

ENDS



For more information

Media line: (02) 6240 8667 [link:tel://0262408667],

media@employment.gov.au

[link:mailto:media@employment.gov.au]

