

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR MENTAL HEALTH  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING THE LEADER ON STATE AND TERRITORY

RELATIONS

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - PM AGENDA  SATURDAY, 14 MAY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Labor’s asylum seeker policy; Malcolm Turnbull’s cuts to health;  People’s Forum

JIM MIDDLETON: Joining us now is Labor frontbencher Katy Gallagher. Senator Gallagher  thanks for your time. I will get to the issue of pathology and medicine more generally in a  moment but first to this question about asylum seekers and national security. It is right is it  not when you have got half a dozen candidates or more now breaking ranks with, or have  done in the past on the issue of boat turnbacks and offshore processing that as Malcolm  Turnbull says the ALP is tearing itself apart on this issue?

KATY GALLAGHER:  Well, not at all. In fact we had a very public debate about this at our  national conference in July and everyone was allowed to witness that. I think it was televised  live and our policy was agreed to at that point in time and that is the policy that will be  implemented when a Shorten Labor Government wins the election. That is the end of the  story, that is the platform, it has been debated, people have had their views and that is the  policy that every candidate signs up to.

MIDDLETON: Well including you because you are one of the people who did vote against  this hard-line policy at that national conference last year.

GALLAGHER: Look, there was a couple of elements of the policy where it went to a vote  and in turns of the way the vote was conducted...

MIDDLETON: I think it was turnbacks wasn’t it?

GALLAGHER: There were two issues around the operation of Manus Island and Nauru and  whether or not turnbacks should be included as part of our policy platform and ultimately in  the debate and in the vote that is what is in our policy platform. It is one of the tools that is  available for - and I think everyone acknowledges including the government today that we  don't want to use those unless they are needed - but if they are needed it is contained in  Labor's policy and that is what will be implemented in government.

MIDDLETON: But why should people believe you when you and others have said what you  did say then. Aren’t you open to the criticism that this at least smacks of hypocrisy?

GALLAGHER: Well look, I think when you look at Labor’s platform and indeed all political  parties their platform of policies is developed usually by the membership. There are debates  and there are difference of opinion in every political party on various policies but ultimately  when it is put to a vote, and that vote is held, the majority view is what forms the policy  platform and that is - you know you can look at it more broadly than just asylum seeker and  refugee policies, you can look at across the whole policy platform where there are issues  that cause contention. But, the platform is what guides us, the platform is what we as  candidates sign up to and that is what would be implemented in government.

MIDDLETON: Now we should say at this point that we did offer time to speak as well as  Katy Gallagher to the government, to the Coalition. Unfortunately, they didn’t find their way  here to have anybody on-board. So I will, just before I get back to you Katy Gallagher point  to something that Malcolm Turnbull did say on this morning - this afternoon I should say.  Take a look.

TURNBULL GRAB: It was a catastrophe and I argued day after day in the Parliament with  Kevin Rudd and begged him not to change our border protection regime because we said if  you did that Mr Rudd, the boats would start again and he said no. Labor said no. They were  in denial and you can see - well we know what happened. It’s all very well for Mr Shorten to  say just as Mr Rudd did in 2007 that he is going to be strong and he will turn back the boats.  Well, Kevin Rudd buckled and abandoned the policy after he became Prime Minister. Bill  Shorten will do the same.

MIDDLETON: Now Senator Gallagher the way in which Malcolm Turnbull is using this does  suggest that there is evidence that you are vulnerable as a party on this issue - particularly  given there is history and particularly what did happen in the Rudd and Gillard years. Isn’t  that right?

GALLAGHER: Well I don’t think it is any surprise that the Prime Minister is wanting to talk  about, you know, a lot about Labor this week. We have heard him talk a lot about Labor and  a lot less about his plans for the country and I think we saw that again today. The reality is,  and I think many of my colleagues have said this, Labor has learned lessons about our  border protection policy. We have in government experienced those very tragic  circumstances of people losing their life at sea and that is the reason why turnbacks are  included in our policy to ensure that there aren’t those lives lost. So it is a very different  situation to the one that the Prime Minister was trying to draw an analogy with today. Bill  Shorten has been very clear about this, we have been very clear about what our policy is  since the July conference when it was agreed and settled, and that is exactly what would be  implemented in government, and that really is the end of the story. If the Prime Minister  wants to make politics out of this very, very difficult complex situation of people who are  displaced and seeking asylum then that is up to him but from Labor's point of view our policy  is very clear - it has been debated it’s been agreed and it will be implemented.

MIDDLETON: Now on the other side of the coin Malcolm Turnbull is obviously running into  trouble with the medical profession and also with health as a general issue. The changes  that he has been proposing are expected to raise the government something like $1.6 billion,  these measures on patient rebates and also on pathology. Labor is opposed to them, how  are you going to pay for it?

GALLAGHER: Well we will be announcing our policies in health during the campaign. I’m  not here to do that today but Labor has been very clear about our concerns. They really  relate to how much people are going to have to pay, whether it be pathology or diagnostic  imaging, which it seems there have been some short-term arrangement agreed to with the  government announced today. But in the longer term the Medicare rebate freeze that will  affect every GP and therefore all patients - you know that equals $2 billion over the six years

now and GPs are telling me that is going to require them to have a co-payment in the order  of $14 per visit. The feedback from GPs have been overwhelming and we have been  listening to that. It is definitely an issue that we have been working with GPs on and listening  to them, and Labor will make announcements around this and other health policies over the  next few weeks.

MIDDLETON: Well on that question, you are not going to tell us what you are going to do  but can you guarantee whatever it is will be fully funded?

GALLAGHER: Well, all of our policies will be fully funded. They are all being submitted  through to the Parliamentary Budget Office as the independent office that does those  costings. We have been working hard on this over the last couple of years. All of the policies  we have announced to date should be seen against the other announcements we have  made around savings and tightening up tax subsidies, but absolutely, I think the Australian  people will demand that of any political candidate in this election and absolutely Labor will be  doing just that. We will be explaining exactly how we do it but our priorities really are  education and health and if you are wanting to prioritise those areas then you are going to  have to explain how they are funded.

MIDDLETON: Indeed. Now one final question before we move on. The People's Forum last  night, I take it you did watch it. If you were like me you watched it with a house full of kids but  never the less it cut through. I just want to ask you were you surprised at the emphasis on  issues like health and education, welfare and so on. Is this simply a reflection of the fact that  in those sorts of electorates so many people now get money from the government in some  form and that is why these issues are top of mind for undecided voters in forums like this?

GALLAGHER: Jim, yeah I did watch it and I can certainly say my kids weren’t as interested  in it as I was but I pushed through. In terms of the issues that were raised - I mean Bill has  done around 25 of these town hall style meetings very similar to the format last night and  these are the issues that have been coming up. I think it is really about trying to understand -  trying to ensure that the government cares about their kids and is going to properly fund  education but also that politicians are listening to the things that they are noticing in their  day-to-day life - whether it be cost of living pressures, things like childcare, or making sure  you able to afford to go to doctor. I think it is easy to forget that there are a lot of people who  really struggle week-by-week to get through and I think the issues we saw last night being  raised are issues that are front of mind for many Australians and it is certainly no secret,  these are issues that came up this morning when I was doing some street stalls as well  because people are getting that the squeeze is on pensions and there has been health cuts  and cuts to education but at the same time they are seeing this disconnect at the top end of  town or with multinational companies paying tax and I think there is a very live debate in the  community at the moment about, you know, we are all being asked to tighten our belt but at  the same time I am not seeing that happen for people that are high income earners or  multinational corporations and I think that is resonating in the community and I think you saw  a bit of that last night.

MIDDLETON: Katy Gallagher, I do appreciate you taking some of your Saturday away from  your family and also that you did watch the Sky News People's Forum last night.

GALLAGHER: Oh, I am glued to Sky - glued to Sky. Thanks Jim.

MIDDLETON: Thank you very much indeed, we will have you back on again shortly I hope.



ENDS

