



HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CASEY HOSPITAL, MELBOURNE  MONDAY, 27 JUNE 2016

SUBJECTS: Medicare; Hospitals funding; Costings; Customs scandal;  Superannuation.

BILL SHORTEN: Six days to go in the election and Labor is most committed to  defending Medicare. We've just been visiting hospitals talking to patients, talking to  their parents, talking to the kids, talking to the hard working staff here at this very,  very good facility. There is no doubt in my mind that defending Medicare against the  ruthless cuts of the Liberal Government is a first order issue for Australians. Mr  Turnbull has made choices in this election, so have I. Mr Turnbull's chosen to give a  $50 billion tax cut to large corporations. We've chosen to properly fund our hospitals.  Mr Turnbull has chosen to defend banks, we've chosen to defend Medicare. Mr  Turnbull has chosen to keep going ahead with his six year freeze on GP rebates,  we've chosen to unfreeze the rebates. Mr Turnbull has chosen that from Friday, the  bulk-billing incentives which are available for blood tests, which are available for X-rays, for those bulk-billing incentives, will be cut. We've chosen not to cut them, and  in doing this, we do so because we fundamentally believe that the health care of all  Australians and any Australians is a matter for all of us. You cannot be Prime  Minister of this great country if you're not prepared to prioritise the health care of  Australians. We believe that an economic plan requires a healthy Australia. We  believe that a prosperous Australia requires an Australia where it is your Medicare  card, not your credit card, which determines the level of health care.

This election on July 2 will be a referendum on the future of Medicare, we remain  absolutely committed to put forward our positive plan for health care in this country.  Our positive plans to help save Medicare from the dismantling by Mr Turnbull piece  by piece, brick by brick of our Medicare system. And we are confident that the  Australian people, on July 2, will choose to prioritise and defend Medicare, not large  $50 billion tax cuts for large corporations.

Before I go to questions though, about defending Medicare and other matters, I feel  it is important to talk about the major, massive corruption scandal facing Mr Turnbull  and his Government. If the reports in today's media are even half true, the Australian  Government has lost control of its visa system to the crooks and criminals. When

you look at the very serious allegations which are being raised, Mr Turnbull has  serious questions to answer about the integrity and administration of our visa  system, and the Government's abject failure to uphold a straight visa system in this  country.

These are serious allegations. Allegations of organised crime, running immigration  rackets, providing false visas which allow people to illegally enter this country. It's a  most serious matter that whilst this Government has been in charge, the Liberal  Government, with senior ministers serving as Immigration Ministers right under their  very noses, we discover that if you pay up to $50,000 you can get a bogus work visa  to illegal enter this country. Mr Turnbull has to explain to us, how widespread is this  problem? How many tainted work visas are there? Labor's been calling for reform of  the visa system and today's scandalous revelations require the Government to  provide a full accounting immediately of the crisis in our visa system. The crisis in  our visa system which undermines people's confidence in the ability of this  Government to competently manage anything. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Has Peter Dutton taken his eye off the ball here with what you were  just talking about in favour his laser-like focus always being on asylum seekers and  part B, isn't this another reason why Labor should back a Federal ICAC?

SHORTEN: Well there’s plenty in what you say, so let me take all of the parts of your  question, Heath. First of all there are a million people currently in Australia who have  visas which give them some work rights. It is appalling and astounding and many  Australians will be up in arms as they learn the news that it is possibly for criminal  gangs, for organised crime overseas, to manipulate and bypass, almost casually, the  integrity of our visa system. The fact that Australian visas are for sale for cash, for  sexual favours, for corruption in other countries, undermines the very heart of our  immigration system. In terms of the investigation and the best response, let us just  recognise that there are even more allegations which are going to be revealed, we  understand, tonight and tomorrow.

But Labor will not allow the Government to sweep this massive undermining of  confidence in the integrity of our visa system. The fact that this Liberal Government  has handed control of our visa system to criminals and crooks. We believe that the  Government must make a full accounting, we'll certainly see what further facts come  to light in the next 12 hours and 24 hours. We are not going to let this issue rest.  Australians are very concerned to make sure that Australian jobs are going to people  who are properly here. This Government cannot tell us right now, as we speak, who  is here, what are the circumstances in which they're here, are they actually doing  what the visas say they're meant to be doing, how many people have manipulated  the system and got in under Australia's guard, and then we see a complete  breakdown of the visa system. This is a major crisis for the way we handle visas and  the way we handle people coming to this country seeking to work. Full stop.

I answered part B by saying we'll watch what gets revealed in the next 12 hours.  There is no doubt in my mind, though, that the Government simply brushing the  matter off and saying that we'll worry about it on July 3. That won't cut it. I talk to  everyday Australians, Labor's been talking about reforming the visa system.  Everyday Australians will probably at some level think we always wondered if this

system is being reason properly. Now we know it. You have senior ministers, Dutton  and Morrison, renowned for arrogance, renowned for their addiction to secrecy, and  clearly now renowned for their competence at managing the visa system. This is a  major crisis and nothing less than a full accounting will satisfy the Labor Party.

JOURNALIST: What will you do to get to the bottom of this visa situation and to  crackdown to stop these rorts?

SHORTEN: Well, Labor has, we announced a series of reforms I have to say, not  even knowing the extent of the corruption which has now been revealed. What we've  said is that employers should not be allowed to bring people here unless they've  tested the local labour market. We have to make sure there's more resources for  enforcement, we have to make sure that the job listed on the application is actually  bona fide. What these allegations reveal is that Australian laws are being gamed by  criminals and this government hasn't got a clue what to do about it. They clearly  haven't been aware of it and now we find out that our visa system is in tatters.

JOURNALIST: Just on Medicare, obviously that is a focus as we head to July 2. Do  you think that voters believe your message though, considering the latest Newspoll  actually has the Coalition ahead?

SHORTEN: I'm very confident that Australians are very concerned about the future  of Medicare. I have to say to people that Australians, wherever I go, want to be  reassured that we will defend and save Medicare. They want to hear Labor's policies  to make sure that we keep downward price on the cost of medicine. They want to  hear Labor's policies that we will save bulk-billing in GP clinics. It was the Royal  Australian College of GPs who said that the Liberal policies mean that 14.5 million  Australians will pay more to see the doctor. Australians want to hear that at least  there's one major political party in this country on their side. The people we just  visited in these hospital wards, they know the importance of well-funded hospitals,  the parents here know the anxiety of long waiting times making sure their child is  okay. Labor is the only party who can be trusted to properly support our hospitals, to  make sure we retain bulk-billing, to keep downward pressure on the price of  prescription medicine. This is what Australians want and Labor will defend and save  Medicare with every ounce of effort that we can muster before the 2nd.

JOURNALIST: If that's the case though, then why is the Coalition now ahead in the  Newspoll?

SHORTEN: Well, I think you're question assumes an election outcome which I don't.

JOURNALIST: On your costings that were released yesterday afternoon, how can  voters trust your economic credentials when you've said that the deficit will be $16  billion worse over the forward estimates under Labor?

SHORTEN: We're very determined to reduce the deficit, but we're not going to do it  by smashing household budgets. Our numbers, our costings which we produced  yesterday well in time for the election, in good faith with the Australian people I might  add, our costings show we achieve balance in the same year they do. And because  we're introducing long-term reforms, what it means is that we can make long-term

improvement to reducing debt, reducing government debt, in the future because  we're making the long term reforms now, without making savage cuts to the things  which really matter to Australians - Medicare and education. And furthermore, this  Government is deceitfully relying on fake savings which no-one in Australia expects  them to be able to pass. I mean, I think it's long overdue for the Government to  reveal their own costings, don't you?

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, your costings yesterday showed that you're banking the  savings from the Coalition's proposed changes to super, so are you adopting all of  their policies and if not, are you not giving retirees total uncertainty until Labor does  reveal its own plan?

SHORTEN: Well, let’s be straight about superannuation here. The Government, in  their budget, ambushed a lot of us with their radical changes on superannuation. I'm  on record as expressing severe concerns, like a lot of other people too I might add.  When we are in government, if we win the election, we're going to revisit these  measures because we're not sure how workable they are. The Government says,  hand on heart, they're not retrospective. We're sceptical of this and if we form a  government we'll be in the best position possible to actually see the accuracy of what  they said before the election as compared to afterwards.

JOURNALIST: Will you be committing to the policy?

SHORTEN: The Government says the changes are not. We are sceptical of this.  Truthfully, what we need is to get the head of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Finance,  and Treasury to actually sit down and examine these rushed changes by the  Government to see if they stack up or not. Government is the best place for us to do  that from.

JOURNALIST: How can you include those savings in your costings unless you're  supporting them?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all the Government has asserted that they’re not  retrospective but let's also be very clear here. When we form a government, if we wn  the election, we will revisit these measures to see their workability, to fully  understand if they can actually be done. There's plenty of people who are saying that  these changes will be very hard to implement. For example, one of them is, they  require people to keep records for ten years retrospectively when in fact they don't.  But, the fact of the matter is that the best place for us to determine the truth of what  the Government's finally said will be using the most senior public servants if and  when we win the election.

JOURNALIST: Tony Burke this morning talked up the benefit of ten year costings  and you said this election is about healthcare. Are you going to the election with a  questionable bottom line since you've said nothing on hospital funding beyond the  four years of the budget, and as Chris Bowen said this morning, have your prioritised  schools over hospitals?

SHORTEN: First of all, I don't know if we've seen the Government's costings over  ten years, in terms of health care, and I can tell you the answer to that, they haven't

revealed them. What we're doing is providing long-term forecasts and long-term  analysis of our position because Australians deserve to be treated with a long-term  vision, not just a short-term fix til after the election. When it comes to healthcare,  we're making it clear that we will unfreeze the GP rebate going forward and this is a  benefit and something we factored in over a decade. When it comes to retaining the  bulk-billing incentives for diagnostic imaging and for X-rays and for pathology, we've  been able to analyse that over the ten years. With our hospitals agreement in  particular, we are optimistic that because of our better planned, more productive  investments we're making over four years, and these are four year agreements with  the states, that at the conclusion of four years, especially if Labor gets elected on  July 2, we will have achieved improvements which will actually see us be able to  estimate lower costs in hospitals than we otherwise would.

JOURNALIST: Picking up on that point, how do you anticipate those costs for  hospital will be lower? What are you basing that upon? This morning we heard  Andrew Leigh say that all the costings, all the amounts for hospital funding are in the  costings. Is that true and does that mean you wouldn't you renegotiate with state and  territory governments for future hospital funding past the forwards?

SHORTEN: I'll answer that but I realise it was a second part of the earlier question  which I just want to come to about education and healthcare. We've made choices  about what we've prioritised. We are prioritising defending Medicare and we are  prioritising properly funding schools. What we're not prioritising is giving a $50 billion  tax cut to large corporations.

In terms of your question, the hospital agreements are negotiated every four years.  What we've done in our hospital funding package, which I know has been well  received at the Monash Hospital here, is that we are providing extra resources for  hospitals, full stop. We're going to the 50 per cent efficient pricing of what states  require to run their hospital system. Now, what we've seen from efficient pricing  when Labor last negotiated the hospital agreement, is we have seen improvements  to the bottom line, both in patient care in terms of performance and in terms of cost.  What we're also doing, apart from that 50 per cent efficient, funding delivering  reforms in hospitals, is that we're also providing additional money to help reduce  waiting lists for elective surgery, waiting times in emergency hospital wards of  hospitals. So that combination of reform we believe will generate improvements but  we'll have to see how that system rolls out and you can't be in a position to know the  success of those reforms until we've undergone that period.

One thing I can guarantee, Mr Turnbull's not funding hospitals as well as we are. Full  stop. Mr Turnbull's making changes which will discourage bulk-billing, which means  that patients in some cases, tragically and sadly, defer going to see the doctor until  they're sicker. He is increasing the price of prescription medicine and he's cutting the  bulk-billing incentives for blood tests and for X-rays. This all means that the prospect  for Australians is they're going to pay more for their healthcare if Mr Turnbull's  returned on 2nd of July and that is a statement beyond doubt. Sorry I might share the  questions around.

JOURNALIST: If Labor has nothing to hide with its costings why won't you release  the PBO correspondence and how many of your policies does the PBO rate as low  reliability?

SHORTEN: First of all, if we talk about hide and seek, the hide and seek game of  this election is finding the Coalition costings, isn't it? We should almost set up a  competition because they're not producing them. Labor brought out a costings panel.  These are very respected leaders in the business world, very respected business  minds, very respected accounting minds. Our costings panel has looked at all of our  propositions and they've put their name to it. I'll back that up against Scott Morrison  who can't produce his costings. At some point the Australian people deserve to hear  from the Government on their costings, we've put ours out on the table. We've done  it earlier than people have done it ever before in the past. Remember the Hockey  ambush on the nation and the nation's media, dolling it out on the Thursday night  before the election? I know that some of you have forensically asked me, will you  release your costings? We have and we stand by our costings, full stop.

JOURNALIST: Given healthcare is your focus this week, why aren't you -

SHORTEN: It's one of our focuses.

JOURNALIST:  Why aren't you giving the states an idea about how much you're  budgeting for hospitals over the ten years ,and also which have you backed away  from your promise to fully return the money that the Abbott-Joe Hockey budget took  out of hospitals?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, we're doing what all the other political parties are doing  with the hospital profile, we're providing four years. So we're doing nothing more or  less in terms of transparency about the hospitals. What we are doing on hospitals  though, which our opponents are not doing, is we're properly funding hospitals. I'll  tell you what, if you did a straw poll of eight states and territories, they're pretty keen  to get their hands on our hospitals package. I'm not saying the Liberal premiers won't  vote for Liberal candidates, but I am saying their little inner health child is saying,  gee, I just wish Malcolm Turnbull had done what Labor have done. I've got no doubt  about that. When you look at the AMA, for instance, or the Royal College of GPs, the  Royal Australian College of GPs, they know the greatest challenges to our health  costs are losing bulk-billing through the freezing of rebate and of course properly  funding hospitals.

I can go to every hospital in Australia and say vote Labor because we'll provide for  more funding for hospitals. I can go to every Australian who is currently on an  elective surgery waiting list for hip replacements, for knee reconstructions and say  vote Labor because we're actually going to make it more possible for you to have  your surgery more quickly. I can look at everyone who uses prescription medicine  and purchases prescription medicine and say vote Labor because we're  actually keeping the price down and we're scrapping the price hike. And I can do all  of that because we are not doing Mr Turnbull's key number one economic plan,  which is a $50 billion tax give away to large companies. That is why we can make  the promises we're making, full stop.

JOURNALIST: On the superannuation again, are you not leaving older voters and  retirees in limbo by not admitting what your policy is going to be? Do you not  consider them an important demographic in the lead-up to Saturday's poll?

SHORTEN: My words, I think all superannuants have been deeply let down by this  government. Our policies on superannuation have always been well cast and well  advised and consulted well in advance of this election. It was in the middle of last  year that we proposed reforming the top end of superannuation tax concessions.  What we've also said is that we want to restore the money which with the tax credit,  which was the tax deduction which was available for people who earn less than  $37,000 a year. There's 3.5 million Australians earn less than $37,000 a year.  Currently, when they pay their superannuation they've got to pay 15 per cent tax on  their superannuation, which is in many cases is higher than their actual marginal rate  of taxation. The Government scrapped that tax deduction which would have seen  literally hundreds and thousands of dollars put forward into people's low paid  workers' superannuation accounts, and through our campaigning, we're able to  make sure that that is reversed and that low income superannuants, low income  workers get better superannuation.

In terms of what the Government's doing, we have concerns with the way they're  implementing and rolling out. These changes are not due to 1 July, 2017. I'm  confident if you get a government in charge who actually understands  superannuation, we can move beyond the shocks and surprises which this  government administered with no warning on budget night this year.

JOURNALIST: Just on super, you haven't answered the question as to how Labor  can actually hang on to the Government's revenue from these retrospective super  changes and not implement them retrospectively yourself. Are you planning some  other hit to super that we don't know about, and secondly, you've complained about  a $57 billion funding shortfall for health, yet your costings don't complete that  shortfall, don't fix it. Are you going to make any more health funding announcements  this week that might get you there?

SHORTEN: Well first of all, I'm pleased that The Australian newspaper is  recognising there’s a debate about these changes are retrospective, because that  has been something which has concerned us and if there's been a change of -

JOURNALIST: And we've written about it before, many times -

SHORTEN: If there is a change of editorial policy which is actually saying these  things are retrospective, that's a development in the public debate. Let me be very  direct about this, I have grave concerns about the way this Government is handling  superannuation. They froze the 9.5 per cent increase going up to 12 per cent, they  froze it. They're happy to pocket 15 per cent superannuation themselves as a  defined benefit, this government, but they have not supported working Australians lift  super from 9.5 per cent to 12 per cent. Then this government made a whole lot of  unannounced changes on budget night which has caused great consternation. The  best place for us to work through these changes, to understand the implications, is  from government, and that is what we're going to do.

You asked about the $57 billion too, I beg your pardon so did someone earlier on.  We would like to reverse every cut this government's done, but we have to make  hard decisions. This government has smashed a lot of the issues which were  important to Australians. Remember in 2013, in the week before the election, Tony  Abbott said there would be no cuts to health care, no cuts to education? Then in the  2014 budget that's exactly what they did. We called them out on that. Not everyone  agreed with us, as I recall, but we called them out on that. What we are doing, is we  are doing improvements to what the Government is doing in health care. The simple  fact of the matter is though, is this Government has tripled the deficit, the simple fact  of the matter is this Government has increased net public sector debt on every  Australian in the country. The fact of the matter is this Government has caused a lot  of harm, we can't undo every bit of the harm, but what we are doing is we are  reversing $12 billion worth of cuts to Medicare and bulk-billing and the GP rebate.  We are reversing approximately $3 billion worth of price hikes that they're putting on  other PBS, we are actually opposing cuts which over ten years will see something  approaching $3 billion in terms of bulk-billing incentives for diagnostic imaging  centres and for pathology labs, and of course our hospitals package is much more  generous than what the Government's offering, and so is the package we're offing  for elective surgery. So when you total all those things up, we're a much better  prospect for the health of Australians than the Government.

JOURNALIST: There is some independent praise for your release of costings  yesterday and the rigour of the figures, there's also a view among experts that your  budget deficits over the forward estimates would increase the risk of Australia losing  its triple-A credit rating. Do you acknowledge that if you run the budget deficits you  say you will run that there is a real risk Australia will lose its credit rating anyway?

SHORTEN: Complete rubbish. Not that you asked that question, but the proposition  behind it. The only party in this election who has had the credit agencies question  their ability to hang on to the triple-A credit rating is the Government. The fact of the  matter is we're making long-term changes. It would be perhaps easy for us just to  simply adopt every fake measure the Government has and say, see we could make  it look better, but we knows that’s not right. We know that, for instance, the  proposition that this government is ever going to increase the work age to 70, we  know that won't get through any Senate of any foreseeable makeup of the future. So  this government is massaging its own budget numbers based on false savings,  zombie measures, I think they're known as.

By contrast, what we're doing is we're implementing change, but for instance with  negative gearing, we're doing its prospectively. What we're doing is all existing  investors, they invest under these rules, they're fine, because that's where we head  and so we could make quicker measures, but the point about it is that would affect  people more, disadvantage people far more, so we're going to do slow and steady  improvement, structural budget reform without smashing household budgets.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, What would you say to Victorians who are considering  not voting for you on Saturday out of spite for the way Daniel Andrews has handled  the CFA dispute, and secondly, after the riots in northern parts of Melbourne  yesterday, would you consider perhaps banning the burning of flags?

SHORTEN: Let's talk about the first question that you asked and I think in your  question you answered it, you’re saying, is the CFA and a decision by Mr Andrews  something which should be a reason to vote in a Federal election? You're quite right,  they are separate matters, you are quite right. The fact of the matter is the safety of  all Victorians is what interests me. I have no doubt that career firefighters and  voluntary firefighters and their leaders will sort these issues out. I'm a bit  disappointed that it has taken as long as it has, but, as I've said in the past, in each  negotiation there is always a start, middle and end. Volunteers are at the heart of the  CFA and I've got no doubt this will be resolved and I've got no doubt that it is a state  issue. I think it's interesting today that Mr Turnbull's so-called political solution  doesn't appear to stack up legally. I think what is important is the volunteers and  career firefighters are not used as pawns in some Federal election when in fact the  solution resides far closer to home at the state level.

In terms of burning the flag, I deplore burning the flag. Anyone who burns the flag is  an idiot. I don't think we need a law to ban burning the flag, frankly, I think everyone  knows it is a stupid, idiotic thing to do and I think 99.999 per cent of Australians think  it is an idiot act to do. One more question.

JOURNALIST: One more question on Border Force. One of the main whistleblowers  is a Joseph Petyanszki, he was an investigative chief for the Immigration Department  from 2007 to 2013. You're saying today there is a full-blown crisis, surely then, it  began on Labor's watch?

SHORTEN: No, I don't think that’s the case. I think that it was Labor who instituted a  Customs Reform Board, I think they had a number of eminent Australians, David  Mortimer, a business leader, former Police Commissioner Ken Moroney, Justice  Wood. Now that was set up to improve the operations in terms of the culture of  customs. What happened is this, though, this government merged customs in a sort  of sidelining and abolishing the oversight of these very important people who could  have, I think, potentially make a difference. This government, on its watch, has  undermined our visa system. I think that it is outrageous, leave aside an election or  not, that we don't know that the people coming here on work visas are bona fide. I  think it is outrageous and undermines the integrity of our visa system to find out if  there are hundreds of allegations, even if half of them are true, this is an incompetent  government who has not been managing the visa system. Now the visa system is in  crisis, there is no doubt in my mind that this government has lost control of the visa  system in favour of criminals and crooks and this government needs to answer these  questions right now.

ENDS



