UNCLASSIFIED

TRANSCRIPT

Interview with Michael Brissenden, ABC AM Programme

4 February 2016





Subjects: High Court judgment; tax reform.

E&EO…………………………………………………………………………………………..

JOURNALIST: I’m joined in the studio by Immigration Minister Peter Dutton. Peter  Dutton, welcome to the programme.

PETER DUTTON: Thanks, Michael.

JOURNALIST: First of all, the High Court has ruled that the offshore detention regime is  lawful. So, just to be clear, you will be sending those asylum seekers back and the  children back to Nauru?

PETER DUTTON: Michael, the same principle will apply into the future as it has in the  past - and that is that if people have acute medical needs and they come to Australia  then those needs will be met.

We’ll provide the medical support - as you would expect from a compassionate country  like Australia - and that at the end of that medical support when the doctors and the  Department deem that it’s appropriate for that person to return to Nauru, that will be the  policy continuing and I think it’s very important to send a very clear message, that is that  we’re not going to put children into harm’s way, we’re going to work individually through  each of the cases.

I think the most important point out of this too is that of the 250-plus people, many of  those people have come down with family members that have required medical  assistance. For example, a mother who has a complication in terms of her pregnancy,  requires specialist obstetric services, could have that baby delivered in Australia, but we  would bring the family members down with that person.

So amongst the 267, there are many family members that haven’t required medical  assistance, but nonetheless have accompanied somebody that does.

JOURNALIST: Ok, let’s talk about the children because that’s where the focus clearly is  - the focus of much of the opposition to this clearly is. This report written by doctors  working for the Human Rights Commission that will be released today says the children

- as I said - are among the most traumatised we’ve ever seen in our 50 years of  combine  d professional experience. That’s a pretty extraordinary statement, isn’t it?



PETER DUTTON: Well, Michael, I’ve made it my business from day one to get kids out  of detention and I’ve said - and I repeat again today - that I want to be the Minister that  gets children out of detention. There were 8,000 children who were in detention when  Labor was in power. The number peaked at any one time at 2,000 and the number  today is less than 80.

JOURNALIST: But the fact is you are going to send these kids back to Nauru when  these children apparently - according to this report - talk openly of self-harm and  suicide. They have “palpable anticipatory trauma at the mention of return to Nauru”.  Surely there's a better way. Yes, you don't want people drowning at sea but it's simply  cruel isn’t to send these traumatised kids back to Nauru?

PETER DUTTON: Michael, the arrangements that we have in place, as I said to you  before, is to look at the individual cases. If there are exceptional circumstances in the  individual cases, then we're happy to look at that - and that’s always been the case.

We've brought people from Nauru, if there is additional medical support needed and  we've provided that to them. So that will continue.

But I just make this point, there were 1,200 people who drowned at sea, including  women and children, the voices of whom have never been heard. We're seeing in  Europe at the moment the same outcome and millions of people flowing across borders.  When I talk about getting children out of detention in Australia and trying to provide  medical support in a first world country like ours, people smugglers in Indonesia are  messaging out that if you have children, get on a boat now because you will settle if  Australia and Dutton will release you out into the community.

So, we have to be compassionate on the one hand but we have to be realistic about the  threat from people smugglers and we’re going to continue our vigilance against people  smugglers whilst providing compassion to those that have been traded in this evil  people smuggling organised criminal syndicate.

JOURNALIST: It must be difficult for you, clearly, I mean you've got doctors, health  professionals, church leaders, now the Human Rights Commission, all of them urging  you not to return these very traumatised children. The UN Human Rights Commission in  a separate statement that's also come out this morning - I’m sure you’ve seen it -  sending these children to Nauru could contravene Australia's obligations under the  convention of the rights of the child, we remind Australia that children, regardless of  their legal status, have the right to be treated as children first and foremost and urge  Australia to ensure that the principle of the best interests of the child takes precedents  over migration management or administrative considerations.

PETER DUTTON: Michael, we're acting in the best interest, not only of these children  but children that would follow them - and that’s the issue. I don't want to reopen the  open border policy and many of the advocates that you speak of are completely  opposed to any border protection measures at all. They want a free arrangement where  people could come to our country at any time but the Government is not going to...

JOURNALIST: …but they’re also clearly motivated the welfare of these children?

PETER DUTTON:…and I’ve addressed that because I'm not going to put children into  harm's way. I've said that. I've said that we'll provide medical attention, as we have in  the past, to those children that are in need. But I also think there is a lot of hype and  scare in this campaign in relation to what's actually happening on Nauru.  The fact that it  is a very different situation on Nauru than when Labor was in government, because  there is no detention on Nauru, there is a 24/7 open centre arrangement. Some families  decide to stay within the centre because there are meals provided, medical support,  education.

JOURNALIST: But they can’t leave Nauru?

PETER DUTTON: They can leave the centre, so they’re not detained there and there’s  accommodation provided for them on island. But the important point here is, Michael,  that for the families that have been found not to be refugees, we have offered generous  settlement packages to return to the country of origin, because through the legal  process it’s been deemed that they are not refugees to whom Nauru owes protection or  to whom, in other cases, Australia owes protection and in that circumstance, we provide  support to people to return to their country of origin.

And, frankly, some people who are offering out false hope to say that this could be  successfully challenged in the court or the Government is going to change its position,  they are prolonging the situation of many of these families and it’s not helping the  families and it’s not helping the general approach to these issues, which is to try and  sort matters out quickly. If people are owed protection that’s fine, if they’re not then we  want to provide them with support to go back to their country of origin.

JOURNALIST: Ok. You keep saying, you know, you won’t send anyone back to harmful  situations. But this is a situation where we simply have to trust you on this, don’t we?  Because, I mean, there are the claims, as you know, of sexual assaults every 13 days.

PETER DUTTON: Well, I addressed that yesterday on the ABC so I’m sorry that you  repeat it again today because it’s a false claim.

JOURNALIST: Ok. But can you understand that the public might be a bit sceptical  about this because there’s very little information really about what’s going on there.

PETER DUTTON: I can understand that if people are led to believe things that aren’t  true then that is a different situation.



JOURNALIST: At one point the Government, for instance, publicly claimed it had  received information that the Save the Children charity workers were coaching asylum  seekers to self-harm and then it turned out that the Human Rights Commission says  there was no evidence that this happened.

PETER DUTTON: Well, again, that’s a report that came out some weeks ago. I think  the issue, the issue today which…

JOURNALIST:…I know it came out some weeks ago, but this is about a matter of trust  and about the Government saying that these people are not going to be sent into harm’s  way and that you do have their best interests. So, I’m just trying to underline that  perhaps people are sceptical about that because we don’t know very much about what’s  been going on there.

PETER DUTTON: Michael, the only point that I would make is that in relation to that  particular issue which has been investigated happened before my time in this portfolio.  It was a very different situation on Nauru some years ago when there were a thousand  people a week arriving on boats and Labor had tents set up in a very difficult situation  where it was open for people to be assaulted, for there to be a lack of order within the  centres and Labor admits that. They admit that they got it wrong and what we’ve been  able to do is, as I say, reduce the number of children down to less than 80 in detention.

I want to make sure that that number can get to zero, but I don’t want the 13 of the 17  detention centres that we’ve closed that Labor had reopened to be needed again.

I don’t want the boats to start and all of the intelligence to me suggests that people  smugglers are trying again to get people onto boats and we’re not going to allow that  situation to arise.

JOURNALIST: Ok. Just quickly on another matter, on the GST issue which is around  this morning. Reports are emerging that many of your colleagues are getting a bit  nervous about this. Pretty clear that some are worried, particularly marginal seat  holders. Is it time to put some concrete proposals on the table and stop this bleeding?

PETER DUTTON: Michael, I think what the Government is doing through Treasurer  Morrison, who I think’s doing a very good job, is explaining what the Government wants  to do and that is to relieve the tax burden from middle Australians who are working hard,  who are trying to provide for their families. If there is a way in which we could deliver  tangible tax cuts to those people then I think that’s the debate that’s underway and  these things will be fleshed out in due course and that’s a matter for the Treasurer and  the Prime Minister. But the Government’s made no ultimate decision or…

JOURNALIST:….I think this is part of the problem for some of them though, isn’t it?

PETER DUTTON: I think it’s important, as the Treasurer’s pointed out, that we need to  precede the debate with some information about what the Government’s motive is. And  that is, that we want to provide support to families who are working harder and paying  more tax. We want to relieve that burden so that they’ve got more money to support  their families and we want to provide stimulus to small business so that they can employ  more people and help grow the economy.

The Government’s adamant about that approach and the Prime Minister and the  Treasurer no doubt, when a decision is made, will provide more detail. But we have  committed to tax reform going into this election and no doubt the detail will be provided  as soon as possible.

JOURNALIST: Ok. Peter Dutton, thanks for joining us.

PETER DUTTON: Thanks, Michael.

[ends]



Nicole Chant | Media Adviser  Office of the Hon Peter Dutton MP   Minister for Immigration and Border Protection  Parliament House  Suite MG-46  CANBERRA  ACT  2600   T: 02 6277 7860  M: 0419 850 222 E: Nicole.Chant@border.gov.au



