

SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC  ATTORNEY-GENERAL

THE



HON PETER DUTTON MP

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION

17 February 2016

T



RANSCRIPT - DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, WASHINGTON DC

Topics: Quintet of Attorneys General and Five Country Ministerial meeting in Washington DC; ‘Let  Them Stay’ campaign; resettlement of Syrian refugees; encryption; Cardinal Pell; Julian Assange,  Senate voting reform; counter-terrorism legislation; international law for self-de fence

E&OE………………………………………………………………………………………………….

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: For these last two days the Minister for Immigration and  B  order Protection and I have been in Washington for an important national security

conference involving the so-called ‘Five-Eyes’ nations, the five main English speaking  de  mocracies - the United States, Australia, the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand.

R



epresented at the conference have been the attorneys-general, the national security  m  inisters, and now for the first time, the immigration ministers of those five nations.

The



focus of the conference has been how to keep our population safe, particularly with a  focus on the continuing threat of global terrorism. We have spent two days discussing with  Jeh Johnson - the American Homeland Security Secretary, Loretta Lynch - the American  Attorne

y-General, Theresa May - the British Home Secretary, and oth er counterpart  Ministers, ways in which the threat posed by terrorism can be addressed both individually  a

nd in our respective countries and collaboratively through greater sharing of techniques,  g

reater sharing of information, even greater cooperation at an intelligence and at an  operational level, and also, importantly, cooperation between law enforcement agencies and  the private sector and civil society.

It’s a conference that will occur each year, it’s a conference of growing importance, and as  far as the eye can see it seems the focus on terrorism will remain the principle business of this  c

onference. I’ll invite my colleague Peter Dutton to make a few remarks, in particular, about  the outcomes in re  lation to border protection from the conference.

IMMIGRATION MINISTER: George, thanks very much. Firstly can I say thank you  very much to Secretary Jeh Johnson, also to the Attorney-General Loretta Lynch and all of  our c

olleagues for what I think has been a very productive meeting.

As the Attorney-General points out, for the first time immigration, homeland security and  border force ministers have come together because all of our countries face the threat from  foreign fighters, either departing our shores, or returning even more radicalised and posing a  significant threat to our own people.

I’m very pleased that as part of the discussions the Australian Border Force has been able to  enter into a further agreement with the US Homeland Security Department to enhance the  re

lationship, to provide a greater level of exchange of information. And the US faces an  incursion of its borders and that’s the case of course for many countries across Europe and all  of the projections that we’ve heard over the course of the last couple of days we’ll see those  numbers continue into the foreseeable future.

Obviously Australia has been very successful in stopping the boats, in particular, in making  sure that we don’t allow people to drown at sea and the response to that has been positive  because as all Australians know it’s important for sovereignty of any nation, it is very  important for the sovereignty of any nation, to make sure that your borders are secure, and  Austra

lia has been successful at doing that but we face down the threat of people smugglers  e

very day. At the same time we are able to bring in people in record numbers through the  refugee and humanitarian programs into our country and of that I think all Australians should  be

very proud.

I think they’ve been a productive couple of days and certainly the relationship between the  Australian Border Force and Homeland Security has only been enhanced and I’m very  grateful for the bilateral meetings we’ve had with the other partners as well. And this will  continue as an annual event, as the Attorney points out, because the threat from terrorism, the  threat from people moving illegally across borders will be with us for our lifetime and we  need to make sure we work together, we collaborate and have a free, wherever possible real  time, exchange of information and that has been advanced during the discussions in the last  couple of days and it’s been a very productive meeting indeed.

JOURNALIST: Attorney-General, you’ve discussed expanding efforts to counter the  thre  at of Islamic State or Da’esh and other international terrorist groups by, you say,

stre

ngthening border and aviation security. What more can be done that hasn’t been done to  date?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well I think in dealing with this threat one of the keys is to  ensure that there is as much information exchanged between our various intelligence and law  enforcement and border protection agencies and, as was stressed during the course of the  c

onference, that that information should be exchanged swiftly and, where possible, in real  time. So we, Minister Dutton and I, had quite a deep discussion with our international  partners about how, not merely the nature of the information that is exchanged can be  expanded, but also how swiftly that information can be exchanged so that, for example,  something that raises a flag at one border should immediately raise a flag on the borders of  the other partner nations.

JOURNALIST: Immigration Minister, the ‘Let Them Stay’ campaign is quite  prominent. Do you have anything further to say about the future of the asylum seekers due to  be sent back to Nauru?

IMMIGRATION MINISTER: Well the Government has been consistent all along in  relation to our strong stance to make sure that we keep our borders secure. I’ve repeated on a  number of occasions that we’ll have a look at each individual case and we will be  compassionate in our assessment of those cases. But the Government’s resolve remains  unchanged and that is to ensure that people who seek to arrive in our country by boat won’t  se

ttle in our country. And we have provided medical support to a number of people off  Nauru, as well as family members who are in good health but have travelled with a family  membe

r in need of that medical support. The principle will continue in relation to any of  these cases and that is that once the medical support has been provided then the person will  be a

ble to return to Nauru. That remains the position of the Government and we’ve been  consistent on that from day one.

JOURNALIST: I’m sure it would have come up at the conference in the last couple of  da  ys but Labor in Australia has called on you to explain why Australia has only settled 26

Syrian refugees in the past five months after the former Prime Minister announced an  emergency intake of 12,000 as quickly as possible, whereas the Canadian Government, in just  thre

e months, has flown 20,000 Syrian refugees to their country and welcomed them with  ope  n arms.

IMMIGRATION MINISTER: The first point of course is that I’ve said from day one  that we are going to conduct biometric screening, enhanced security checks, including  working with our partners in the US, Canada, the UK and elsewhere if appropriate to make  sure that we can check the bona fides of people that seek to come to our country. Now there  are two reasons for that and two reasons that makes it very important for us not to  compromise those security checks. The first one of course is that we want to extend a hand of  welcome to those people who are in desperate need of a new life because they have been, in  the c

ase of Syria or Iraq, they’ve suffered at the hands of terrible people or they’ve  been displaced from their homes, whatever the case might be. Secondly, we want to make  s

ure that the security of our nation remains the absolute priority and that we don't  displ

ace people that are genuine refugees that would seek to come otherwise, and we seek to  g  et that balance right and I think we do. Several thousand people have been screened in, but  we are waiting to do security checks with the US and otherwise.

I



f Mr Shorten or Mr Marles is suggesting that somehow we should compromise on the  se  curity checks and express people in then I think they should make that very clear because I  thi

nk that is at odds with what the Australian public demands. The Australian public demands  that the A

ustralian Government does everything possible to make sure that first and foremost  our n  ational security is protected, and secondly to make sure we are bringing the right people  int

o our country so that they can start a new life.

JOURNALIST: Canada, as you mentioned at the outset, is an intelligence partner of  Austra  lia.  Are they operating off different information when they receive refugees from

Syria?

IMMIGRATION MINISTER: Well it’s an issue for Canada to comment on but in  re  lation to Australia we’ve been consistent again from the time of the announcement last

y

ear, and that is that we are going to conduct biometric testing, we are going to check against  databases, we are going to make sure we can establish the identity of people and in some  cases that is very difficult because they are without proper documentation and all of those  background checks need to be undertaken. And I’ve given an assurance right from the start

that we will not compromise, not even in one case. If we are in doubt in relation to a  particular application that person will not come to our country because my responsibility, the  responsibility of the Prime Minister, is to make sure we keep the Australian public safe and  that’s our

absolute priority.



JOURNALIST: In the United States, Attorney-General , the issue of encryption has been  incredibly fraught, because of the issues of privacy and also the issues of law enforcement -  mos

t recently in the case of the San Bernardino terrorist attack where Apple has now been  asked by US courts to provide access to that phone - what’s the Australian Government’s  posi

tion in relation to allowing companies like Apple to ensure they have custom software  that allows a terrorists phone to be accessed by investigators?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: First of all, this is a decision of an American court and it has  be  en something of a background to the conference that we’ve been having over the past two

days. To put the situation shortly, American law enforcement authorities, in seeking to  investi  gate the San Bernardino massacre in which 14 people were the victims of a terrorist

crime, sought access to a mobile phone, that was denied, so they applied to the court and it  has been reported in the United States this morning that the court made an order requiring  Apple to facilitate access to the data on that phone.

Apple is considering its position. Apparently it is appealing the order. The Australian  Government’s position naturally is that we would expect, as in Australia, that all orders of  courts should be obeyed by any party which is the subject of a lawful order by a court. The  particular facts of this case are not facts that would arise in Australia. But what I think it does  il

lustrate is at a time when encryption of data is becoming almost ubiquitous and vast  quantities of data which would previously have been accessible by warrant to law  enforcement agencies, inaccessible, I think it shows how important it is that ISPs do  c

ooperate with law enforcement agencies in facilitating and cooperating with proper  investigations into serious crime.

JOURNALIST: You said ISPs, would you also include companies like Apple, companies  that do make this software on their products because, as has been raised in the United States  in t

he Congress in front of hearings, if it’s not an American company that is going to be  encrypting, it will be a Russian one, it will be a Chinese one?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well this particular case involved Apple and I think that the  obser  vation applies generally to all companies in the tech-sector.



JOURNALIST: How important do you think it is that this sort of compliance occurs in  Austra  lia? Do you have any concerns in Australia that a citizen’s right to privacy would be  impeded via some sort of backdoor access to personal devices for intelligence purposes or  otherwise?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: We’re not proposing that and this is not a problem that has  a  risen in Australia. My Department has established very cooperative and collaborative  relationships with companies in the tech-sector and we’re happy with the level of cooperation  we are receiving. But nevertheless there is a broader problem for law enforcement, in all  jurisdi

ctions frankly, if data is encrypted in a way that is entirely inaccessible without the  cooperation of the ISP or the maker of the device, then that makes inaccessible relevant

investigative information that would hitherto have been accessible and that’s a problem for  law   enforcement.



JOURNALIST: Minister, in the last 48 hours there’s been a campaign to get Cardinal  Ge  orge Pell to return to Australia to answer questions that he’s otherwise going to answer

from Rome, at the Vatican, to the Royal Commission. Do you believe Cardinal Pell should  return to Australia?

MINISTER DUTTON: Obviously the Royal Commission is underway and I don’t think it’s  he  lpful to make comments in relation to their ongoing matters and I’d leave any comment  obviously to the Commissioners to make.

JOURNALIST: Attorney-General?

ATT



ORNEY-GENERAL: I agree with what Mr Dutton has said. Cardinal Pell is giving  evidence by video conference, which is not at all unusual by the way, as a result of orders and  directions made by the Royal Commission itself. Now those people that have gone into the  public arena to criticise that, are in fact criticising the orders that have been made by the  Royal Commissioner and calling them into question. I think frankly the Royal Commission,  the Royal Commissioner and the manner in which the Royal Commissioner chooses to  a

rrange the Royal Commission, should be respected by everyone.

JOURNALIST: Julian Assange, has the Obama Administration asked you about his fate?

ATT



ORNEY-GENERAL: No, certainly no communication has come to my Department.  I  ’m aware of the latest developments in relation to Mr Assange but Mr Assange’s fate is in  Mr Assange’s hands. He’s the subject of a valid warrant issued by the British Government  under European law, under the collaborative European warrants scheme and he is perfectly  free to walk out of that Embassy and face the consequences of a valid warrant that has been  iss

ued against him in relation to allegations of serious crime.

JOURNALIST: Sena te voting rules, when should we expect the Government to introduce  changes to those?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: No announcement has been made about that.

JOURN



ALIST: Will the Government accept the recommendation of changes to the control  or  ders legislation?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: That’s been reviewed as part of the review of the latest tranche  of   national security legislation by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and

Security. The Government works collaboratively with that committee. In the past we have  routinely accepted their recommendations. There have been very few cases in which we  haven’t accepted recommendations in relation to national security law because we do want  the Par

liament to be a partner in this. This is not just a matter of the executive government  putting legislation on the table, and as it were, saying ‘take it or leave it’. So the latest batch  of recommendations is under consideration at the moment.

JOURNALIST: The application of international law for self-defence, the issue of  imminence, that came up at your talks in the last 24 hours. Can you elaborate on what the  significance of that was?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Yes. In public international law and the law of armed conflict,  ther  e is a lively debate going on at the moment in relation to what is known as the West Point

principles, and in particular one of those principles which concerns what constitutes an  imminent threat so as to justify in international law acts of self-defence and military actions  in the nature of pre-emptive self-defence. So as a result of the intervention, in particular of  the British Attorney-General, supported by Australia, an officials working party has been  established among the Five Eyes nations to try to arrive at a common position among us as to  what the nature of an imminent threat, so as to justify and invoke the doctorate of pre-e

mptive self-defence, is in the law of armed conflict.

JOURN



ALIST: That’s in relation to Syria and our bombing of Syria and the involvement in  I  raq at the behest of the Iraqi Government, isn’t it?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well, it arises in that context but of course the issue is a generic  iss  ue of international law.



[Ends]



