



THE HON BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS  SHADOW SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE

MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC 774  SUNDAY, 3 JULY 2016

SUBJECT/S: Election 2016.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Brendan O’Connor before the election Labor said they’d be  doing no deals with the Greens. If you were to cobble together a minority  government and you can get ahead, how are you going to manage that issue?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Let’s just see how the results pan out Patricia.

KARVELAS: But you’d need the support of Adam Bandt, wouldn’t you?

O’CONNOR: Let’s just see how we go first. Probably wait for the AEC to count the  votes first before I start answering those sort of questions. But I will say this, there is  no clear winner, there is only a clear loser, Malcolm Turnbull. He was put into the  position as Liberal leader and Prime Minister to garner votes, to collect votes. His  one job. They don’t like him, but they knew he was popular or they thought he was.  He’s failed in the one task that was set for him, and there is going to be a lot of  internal problems as a result of the results.

KARVELAS: But on your side Sky News’ David Speers is reporting that the left and  the right, which is the unusual part, are supporting Anthony Albanese to contest the  leadership of the Labor party [O’Connor chuckles]. Well David Speers doesn’t make  stuff up. He’s a Walkley award-winning reporter. Given that - [O’Connor chuckles  again] He is.

O’CONNOR: Every journalist in every media outlet told us that the Liberal Party  were going to win last night convincingly or by a reasonable margin and they were  totally wrong.

KAREVELAS: Are you telling me that Bill Shorten is not facing a challenge?

O’CONNOR: I’m saying to you that the Labor Party is entirely behind Bill Shorten.  We are in a position where we could be looking at forming a Government. I think the  idea that there wouldn’t be support for Bill Shorten is nonsensical.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN: I’m sure Josh would love it if I tried to talk about the Labor  Leadership. However, just to go to the campaign, Josh. Let’s accept that the  Coalition thinks the Labor Party were lying about Medicare. For the sake of this  question let’s say that’s correct, just for the sake of this question -

JOSH FRYDENBERG: We don’t think about it, we know it -

EPSTEIN: You can’t put all of the trouble you’re in down to a Medicare scare  campaign. Surely you’d have to say you didn’t prosecute your case properly. If you  had prosecuted your case properly a Medicare scare campaign wouldn’t have made  a difference, surely. I mean you have to look at the campaign and go well, “we really  mucked up”. You might not even get over the line with a majority.

FRYDENBERG: There will be a time and place for that official and I’m sure  comprehensive post mortem of everything from communications strategies to  policies and the like. But as for Medicare, Labor successfully got us talking about  that issue over the last week and that was the issue that sort of dominated the last  24 hours of the campaign. And as scare campaigns show even though some people  might discount it the majority of people might believe it and I think that was a major  factor. Sure, there were other factors at play - I think that was a major one - but -

KARVELAS: There must be a smorgasbord of them?

EPSTEIN: Is it policy? Is it other things like maybe the NBN where you couldn’t  argue your message properly? Was it perhaps you had a too narrow focus? I don’t  know.  Don’t you need to at this stage don’t you need to be a little bit honest with  people and say we could’ve done x,y and z better?

FRYDENBERG One of the issues is I think about how Bill Shorten remade himself  over the last few months and he took himself from somebody who wasn’t seen as a  future Prime Minister to be seen as an alternative one by some.

KARVELAS: How badly did you underestimate him?

FRYDENBERG: I don’t think we underestimated him.

KARVELAS: You did.

FRYDENBERG: I think, Patricia, he framed himself as an alternative Prime Minister  whereas we always knew that with his background both in his personal background  and work with the trade union movement but also the policy positions he’d taken  over the course of his time in the Parliament did show that’s where his bias was  always toward.

KARVELAS: Josh I’ve been speaking to Labor strategists who can’t believe you  didn’t go more negative in the campaign. They said that you failed to execute a scare

campaign for instance on asylum seekers that meant anything or that resonated and  that was that was Malcolm Turnbull that failed. They thought that would have hurt  them more. What did Malcolm Turnbull do wrong? Was he very bad at scare  campaigns?

FRYDENBERG: Well, maybe that’s a good thing for the public by the way Patricia -

KARVELAS: It’s not a very good thing for you though.

FRYDENBERG: If you’re saying we weren’t scaring the public into voting for us  whereas the Labor Party was scaring the public into not voting for us and I think  there will be a time and place for that postmortem that’s all I can say. As for what  Brendan has pledged his loyalty to, to Bill Shorten last night Tanya Plibersek was  hedging her bets refusing to endorse Bill Shorten and I think that’s where the game -

EPSTEIN: Josh I want to ask Brendan about this in a tick. Do you give the Labor  Party props? They put a lot of policy out there, you might not like the policy but did  that help? They had lots of policies like negative gearing and stuff. Did that make a  difference, Josh?

FRYDENBERG: I think there were lots of factors at play.

KARVELAS: Josh it did. I mean on housing affordability, was that not raised with  you?

FRYDENBERG: House affordability was, sure. But also negative gearing was raised  as well.

FAINE: Josh Frydenberg is the Resources Minister, Brendan O’Connor is the  Shadow Employment Minister for now. Brendan did it actually make a difference  having a range of things to talk about. I wonder which part of what you did you think  - which policies got you to where you are?

O’CONNOR: I’ve been in campaigns where we’ve tried to be a small target in  Opposition and whilst there’s some safety in going down that track it really is hard to  campaign on. And whilst people want to make the point about Medicare I think there  were significant cuts to Medicare and really it’s very hard to be lectured to by a  political party that chose to talk about $100 lamb roasts and Whyalla being wiped off  the map. Now, our Medicare campaign was predicated on facts that Medicare was  being systematically undermined by significant cuts. I also think Malcolm Turnbull’s  one pitch was to give $48.2 billion - $50 billion to big business. That did not work for  them.

KARVELAS: You say that it was a fair argument - sure you can make arguments  about cuts to health but you said Medicare was being privatised which is inaccurate  isn’t it?

O’CONNOR: The Liberals have always hated Medicare. I’ll be blunt and Josh can  interrupt me at any point but look they abolished it -

KARVELAS: I was there when John Howard bank rolled Medicare like I’ve never  seen before -

O’CONNOR: We also know why. The only reason why the Liberal party would ever  support compulsory super and Medicare is because they are iconic Labor policies  that the public like. But let’s be clear, they abolished Medibank, they’ve undermined  Medicare before -

EPSTEIN: Quickly from both of you because I do want to get to some calls. Josh are  you - if I had to force you to make a bet - do you think the Coalition will have a  majority?

FRYDENBERG: Well 76 is the magical number for us and I’m very hopeful we will  get there -

EPSTEIN: Confident or hopeful?

FRYDENBERG: Hopeful is the word I’ve used. And the reason is there are still so  many votes to be counted and they have historically flowed to the Coalition. And the  seats that are in doubt, we’re talking hundreds of votes, not thousands of votes and I  think that is very important. The other thing that has been interesting in this election  is the differences in the states, in Victoria the coalition has done really well and I  think the CFA issue has no doubt contributed to that.

EPSTEIN: Brendan O’Connor, do you think the Coalition is going to get a majority  and a very quick word on the CFA as I do want to get to some calls.

O’CONNOR: Look I just quite frankly don’t know. I say there is no clear winner, there  is only a clear loser, Malcolm Turnbull and the double dissolution strategy was  appalling.

EPSTEIN: We haven’t got time to pursue that. Brendan O’Connor, Josh Frydenberg  thanks so much for having a chat to us after what has been a long campaign.

Newsbreak and number of callers.

KARVELAS: It’s a fracturing of politics, that’s how I see it. I think the major parties  are really struggling with identity there are less rusted on people supporting the two  major parties. A lot of people parking their votes with independents and I think it’s a  bit of a crisis for the two major parties.

FRYDENBERG: We’re also going down the path of populism in politics that was  seen in the United States with Trump.

EPSTEIN: Because there was no populism in Tony Abbot’s campaign, was there  Josh?

FRYDENBERG:  But we’ve seen it with Pauline Hanson in the past, her populist  politics, but now that is back. Xenophon has not been subject to the same scrutiny

as the major political parties and indeed the Greens have been allowed to get away  with policies that are really bad -

EPSTEIN: You’re both pointing to all the negativity, people go to those parties  because you’re not giving them what they want.

FRYDENBERG: That might be a perfect world but we are dealing with a new media  environment. Many young people don’t buy newspapers anymore, they get all their  information through social media. I think the major parties have to learn better  techniques of communicating people that way

KARVELAS: You need to have a joint conference you two together.

EPSTEIN: I need to leave it there because the news is upon us. Thank you both for  joining us.

ENDS



