

ANDREW LEIGH MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMPETITION AND PRODUCTIVITY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CHARITIES AND NOT-FOR-PROFITS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE IN SERVICES  MEMBER FOR FENNER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TV INTERVIEW  SKY AM AGENDA  MONDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: Asylum seeker resettlement; front page of The Australian - CFMEU  officials.

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda with me now is the Shadow Assistant Treasure  Andrew Leigh. Dr Leigh thanks very much for your time. First of all, the asylum seeker  permanent ban. The Government has basically said it’s insuring that any pathway or  hope of a pathway to Australia is blocked. What's Labor's position on that?

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Kieran, the key for the 800-odd people who are on Manus and the 800-odd people on Nauru is third country  resettlement. This bill won’t resettle a single refugee, it won't save a single dollar from  the budget, it won’t create a single job for Australians. It's just another step in the  steady metamorphosis of Malcolm Turnbull into Tony Abbott.

GILBERT: Do you get the feeling that they are trying to wedge Labor on this issue  because it is obviously one of great sensitivity? We saw in your city of Canberra on the  weekend a huge rally in support of refugees and we know that there is a big  cohort within the Labor party that believe already that Labor has gone too far to the  Government position on this issue?

LEIGH: We'll look at the legislation when the Government actually produces it Kieran.  But frankly what this looks like is a Government that's trying to distract from their many  failures. The spat between George Brandis that's seen the Solicitor General step down,  the use of dodgy data last week by Christian Porter and the ongoing inability of Malcom  Turnbull to focus on long term issues for the good of the country.

GILBERT: The Minister in relation to one of the things you alluded to, third party  resettlement, seems to have again ruled out New Zealand. He was asked about that  again on the ABC this morning. Is it still your view that New Zealand is not an option for

resettlement and he says that people smugglers market New Zealand in the same way  as they do Australia in terms of support services, health, welfare, accommodation, that  deal doesn't work he says. So it looks like despite the fact that they're shutting down the  visa option for Australia down the track it's not even going to open up New Zealand as a  prospect either?

LEIGH: Kieran the Government just needs to get on and do third country resettlement.  We've got the PNG Supreme Court in April having said that the Manus detention centre  was unconstitutional and we've got ongoing reports from Nauru about extreme mental  and physical harm to the detainees there. It's not surprising because the Government  has dropped the ball on third country settlement. These refugees are in great anguish.  Labor supports any actions the Government can take to resettle these refugees safely.

GILBERT: Last question relates to the front page of The Australian today, this video  that's been unveiled online. In relation to two union officials in WA who say they want to  take ownership of the Labor Party. Not a good look for you, two CFMEU officials saying  that they are going to exert influence over the party and if they don't like the politician  that's in there, they'll get rid of them.

LEIGH: Kieran it's no secret that the Labor Party is a party that was set up by the trade  unions and which has constantly fought for more jobs and better paid jobs. Of course  there will be people in the Labor Party that want to exert more influence, that's the  nature of a political party. But within our party it's people who are fighting for the rights  of workers. Within the Liberal Party, it's lobbyists and within the National Party it's  tobacco donors. I think we're in a pretty good position.

GILBERT: Andrew Leigh, I appreciate your time this morning.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LILLIAN HANNOCK 0402 189 188

