THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AUSTRALIA - PVO NEWSDAY

TUESDAY, 16 AUGUST 2016



Subjects: Banking royal commission, Nauru.



PETER VAN ONSELEN: We're talking now to senior Labor frontbencher Anthony

Albanese who joins me here live in the studio. Thanks for your company.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Good to be with you, Peter.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: What do you think about this tribunal idea that some Coalition

MPs are pushing for? They're saying the royal commission will take years, it will be

expensive, it won't ultimately necessarily achieve anything. You have a tribunal here

now and you can start to deal with things immediately with the banks.

ALBANESE: Well, I tell you what. As soon as we announced our position of support for

a royal commission the banks reacted prior to the election campaign and actually

passed on the interest rate cut before last. As soon as the pressure was off, back they

went to the bad old habits, not passing on interest rate cuts, increases in salaries for

senior bank executives, back to business as usual. The same old arrogance and it

appears that the Coalition are desperate to avoid a royal commission which is what is

required. They come up with this, they came up with the absurd proposition of Malcolm

Turnbull that the banks will have to go to an economics committee in the House of Reps

once a year. I mean, pathetic. What they need is a royal commission, not just into the

banking sector but into the whole financial services sector, who have a range of

scandals.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I ask you about that because one of the things that Scott

Morrison on Sunday Agenda was complaining about was the lack of terms of reference

being suggested by the Labor Party in terms of what a banking royal commission should

look at. Some of the things you've raised, it sounds like and I'm not going to ask you to

lay out the terms of reference now, but it sounds like the sorts of areas you'd like them

to look at are the financial services sector more generally, interest rates and salaries,

would that be fair from your perspective?

ALBANESE: Yes, and essentially if you want an overview, it's the relationship between

the banking and financial services sector and consumers and their customers and the

abuse of that relationship. There's been a range of scandals whereby local members

have been confronted with people who've lost out as a result of mismanagement in the

financial services sector and for the government to say we haven't put out the terms of

reference is I think very disingenuous. We have put this forward in a practical way.

We're trying not to lock in the government, to give them the scope to come along with us

for it to be a bipartisan move and that's why quite clearly we should pursue this when

parliament resumes.

VAN ONSELEN: I want to ask you about that. I've written about this today in The

Australian making the point that there's a risk there for the government that if Labor

decides to go for a motion or even the introduction of legislation to force a royal

commission, I know it's an executive decision ordinarily, but you could try to use the

Parliament, because they've only got 76 seats now if there's any dissent in the lower

house they're at risk there. You're a former Manager of Government Business, is there

a way through for an opposition to be able to push this if they can carve off some votes

from a narrow majority government?

ALBANESE: There is absolutely a way through. I think the weakness of Tony Abbott

between 2010 and 2013, he was very good at being an oppositionist and being opposed

to everything and trying to destroy the parliament. What he didn't try to do though was to

be an alternative government  from the opposition benches. We have the opportunity to

do that, to set the agenda and we are successful in that agenda because there's a

vacuum there. Malcolm Turnbull's gone missing, the government has no agenda, we

don't know quite what they stand there except for the three word slogans.

VAN ONSELEN: Take us through the procedure though. What would be their sort of

way that you could imagine doing this? Would it be via a motion, is there a way that you

can get around Christopher Pyne as Manager of Government Business to introduce

legislation and get it tabled in the lower house to call for a banking royal commission?

ALBANESE: It certainly I believe would be within the scope of the Parliament to have

legislation. Normally it would be through the executive but through a motion. I think if the

Parliament of Australia carried a motion calling for a banking royal commission I think

that would be irresistible. For all those local members out there who've said they care

about this issue, well, we'll give them the opportunity I'm sure in various ways and

across a range of issues, not just on this, but we will be giving them ways in order to

show where they've stood on issues and to demonstrate that support for action.

VAN ONSELEN: I will put that to Craig Kelly. He's one of the people being quoted today

in The Australian about this tribunal idea, I'm talking to him later this afternoon. Why

limit this to banks though when we're looking for example at the CEO of CBA today with

his salary going up to round about $12 million? I had a quick look before coming on air

at the latest highest ten CEOs, this admittedly is from last year, not this year, that's not

out yet, but, Ramsay Health tops the list with $30 million. Westfield comes second with

$24 million. The CEO of James Hardy, of all companies makes $20 million, from the

2015 year and you go down the list - you've got Seek, you've got BHP, which is going to

render a loss this next financial year, all sorts of people in there. The only one in the top

10 from this list, pre the change of CEO is the former Westpac CEO Gail Kelly in 2015.

Why limit this to a look at banks and CEOs? They are at least the highest market cap

businesses. A lot of these businesses don't make that much money, particularly one like

Channel 9 where David Gyngell was on something like $19 million in his last year, it's a

company that barely turns a profit.

ALBANESE: Be very clear, the main aim of the banking and financial services sector

isn't about the salaries of the CEOs. That's an issue which has created a lot of tension

and anger out there I think from consumers but that's not the main objective here. The

main objective is protection of consumers.

That’s what we are about. But with regard to the issue that you raise, I will tell you what

- a big sleeper out there in politics at the moment is inequality. I think people feeling

frustrated - they feel like that are slipping behind while a few people at the top are

continuing to move ahead and calling upon them to tighten their belts even further.

That’s what makes people angry. That’s why the 2014 Budget led to the demise of Tony

Abbott as the Prime Minister and led to the predicament that the Coalition are in today.

So I’d say that one of the issues that we will be are raising and that will become a bit of

a theme, I think, is the issue of that growing inequity - inequality not just of income but

also of opportunity and that’s where education and health come in as well.

VAN ONSELEN: One of the issues around inequality is always the perception and the

way that it makes people feel. A lot of people would say, and I have heard this

mentioned in business circles certainly, that Labor’s laws to force fuller disclosure of

CEO salaries was one of the things that actually pushed salaries up because then

competitors knew what they were earning, they were able to horse trade when

negotiating and then it also actually makes your average Australian understandably look

at it now that it’s all out there in the open and say: Wow, that’s a bit unfair.

ALBANESE: That sounds like a pretty big excuse from people who voted increases for

themselves. That’s what that sounds like to me. You know: If only there wasn’t that

transparency there, we would have settled for $10 million rather than $12 million. That

sounds like a stretch to me.

VAN ONSELEN: That’s why I asked but I knew the answer, I shouldn’t have asked. All

right let’s move on, I want to ask about Nauru and about Manus also I suppose. Surely

there has got to be a time limit on how long these people can sit there as a form of

human bait to try to stop people smugglers from coming to Australia.

ALBANESE: Of course there does. It was never envisaged that there would be

indefinite detention for these people and that’s why there needs to be third-party

settlement found for these people.

VAN ONSELEN: Start with New Zealand. New Zealand has offered 150 places but the

Australian Government says no because they are worried that that would put the sugar

back on the table and because New Zealand is a great place to live and of course there

is a capacity for once you are a New Zealand citizen to freely come to Australia. Would

Labor immediately put 150 people in New Zealand?

ALBANESE: Well from Opposition and not in my portfolio I am not about to make

statements of precisely what we would do. What we would do though, very clearly, is

find solutions and it is up to the Government to do it. I mean, what are they saying here?

Are they saying that we are just going to leave those people there forever? These are

people who haven’t committed a crime. These are people who have been found to be

genuine asylum seekers who we have responsibility for in terms of assisting them into

settlement. Now, prior to the election campaign I raised Canada as a an example of a

country that would be prepared, I am sure, to have some form of arrangements. There

are a range of countries in our regio. That’s why we need a regional settlement

framework. That’s why also that we need transparency here. I think the Nauru files that

were published in The Guardian have raised quite legitimate concern that things that

are being done in Australia’s name - Australians have a right to know what is going on

and that’s why in the last Parliament I seconded Richard Marles’ Private Members Bill

which would have mandated reporting of any allegations of abuse, there would be an

obligation for the reporting there, an independent person who would look after the

welfare of any child who was in detention. All of those issues need to be confronted by

the Government. They can’t just continue to stonewall these issues and that’s why we

have said there needs to be an inquiry as well into the release of these files and the

details that are there and get down to the facts here.

VAN ONSELEN: Just one last one on this. If they have been determined to be

legitimate refugees as they have been, why can’t we just settle them here in Australia?

They have been languishing for three years John Howard even did that once the focus

was off …

ALBANESE: John Howard certainly did do that after the Tampa. In spite of him saying

no-one on the Tampa would be settled in Australia, we know that that of course that

wasn’t the case. They were settled here and they have contributed and are contributing

to Australian society.

VAN ONSELEN: So why can’t you do that?

ALBANESE: Well, the policy is third-party settlement. That shouldn’t be that difficult for

the Government to organise. The fact is the Government has, it would appear, chosen

not to even try to do that. It is beyond belief that nothing has happened for now three

and a half years. I mean, this is a Government into its second term. It just can’t continue

to blame Labor as the answer for all of these questions. It has to find solutions and it

has to find solutions that are: Yes - be tough on people smuggling, but you can be tough

on people smuggling without being weak on humanity and I think the concern from the

community is that we are being weak on humanity and aren’t treating people in our care

with properly.

VAN ONSELEN: Anthony Albanese, always a pleasure to talk to you. Thanks for joining

us.

ALBANESE: Good to be with you.

VAN ONSELEN: Cheers.



[ENDS]

TUESDAY, 16 AUGUST 2016

MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868



