



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION SHOW  SKY NEWS  MONDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2016

SUBJECT/S: Immigration Legislation; US election & Mosul

PETER VAN ONSELEN: As promised I’m joined now live out of Geelong of all places by  the Shadow Defence Minister, Richard Marles, thanks very much for your company.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: G’day Peter how are you?

VAN ONSELEN: I am very well, I want to get straight into this issue around the  government wanting to ram through legislation next week I believe, to prevent anyone  that comes here by boat from being able to ever, come here subsequently resettled  somewhere else. Whether it’s on a tourist visa, attend a family members funeral, you  name it. Does Labor support it or oppose these measures?

MARLES: Well, there are a whole lot of questions which are raised by what we’ve seen  in the media, Peter, and the first point to make is; the motivation for this, why the  government feels the need to put this forward has not been properly explained. I should  make it clear we haven’t seen the legislation; we haven’t been briefed by the Government.  I spoke with Shayne Neumann today, he hasn’t had a briefing from his opposite number  Peter Dutton about what is sought to be achieved here. So there’s been a lot in media;  this isn’t the way you do good public policy in terms of just putting out press releases,  there’s been no discussion with us so it’s very unclear what’s sought to be achieved here.

VAN ONSELEN: I was going to say, look fair enough you want to see the legislation  before making an ultimate position but it does seem pretty simple whether you agree or  disagree with it. They want to make it so that anyone tries to come here by boat can  simply never come here hereafter. Is that a principle that Labor agrees with or do you not  like the bluntness of the instrument?

MARLES: Well as I say we need to see what’s in the legislation. No one is talking about  bringing the cohort from Nauru and Manus to Australia. That is not on the books. At the  moment we are very keen to ensure everything is done make sure journey between Java  and Christmas Island remains closed. Offshore processing has been a critical part of that  and no one is out there proposing that that cohort should come to Australia.  Now what  exactly is being sort by what the Government proposes here I think is unclear.



VAN ONSELEN: What they say Mr Marles is, and Peter Dutton spoke a short time ago;  the argument is if they don’t do this then we can’t guarantee that boats stay stopped. Now  we can agree or disagree on that, but what I want to know is what does Labor think about  the idea? That if you’ve tried to come here by boat, you’ve been rejected, you might be a  genuine refugee, we have a policy that if don’t come by boat, if you don’t come via the  normal cue you get rejected, you go back to your homeland, you perhaps get in the cue.  Years later you get settled in; let’s just pick a country say Canada, does Labor have an  in-principle problem with that asylum seeker who settles in Canada but did previously try  to get here by boat. Do you have an in-principle problem with them one day seeking to  come to Australia on a holiday or seeking to one day migrate here if they’ve got family  here or do you say no, we have to send a message, that can never happen?

MARLES: Well I think as your question implies there’s a whole lot of examples that you  can think of where people might be coming to Australia or seek to come to Australia in  future circumstances. I think it is confusing as to exactly what the Government is trying to  do here. Let’s be absolutely clear from the point of view of bringing to an end the journey  of Java to Christmas Island it was Labor who understood that what we need to do here  was to take Australia off the table. It was Labor who made it clear that anyone who came  by boat would never be resettled in Australia and that decision taken by the then Rudd  Government was the most significant decision that any Australian Government’s taken in  bringing an end to the flow of boats between Java and Christmas Island. Now, what we’re  talking about here, a lifetime ban, that there would never be a circumstance in which  somebody might come to Australia, I can imagine a whole lot of scenarios as you’ve just  painted which would go well beyond the question of people being settled in Australia. So  I think the Government needs to explain what it is trying to do here. We’ve been going  about this in a very serious and sober way. This is a difficult problem, we’ve tried to apply  our values to this and come up with policy. We’ve never been about playing politics with  this issue. It is complicated enough as it is, the Government needs to explain what’s its  intentions are here. What its motivation is here. I think at the end of the day there’s a lot  of distraction from the fact that they have not found a third country resettlement option for  those on Manus and Nauru, and that is a disgrace. We do need to see people get off  those islands, that needs to be happening as soon as possible and it needs to happen  via a third country resettlement option, I think that ought to be the focus of the  Government’s attention, rather than whatever is going on with this pretty unusual  proposition.

VAN ONSELEN: Well, just the last one on this and then we’ll move on to other issues but  the Government seems to be saying via the Immigration Minister that if you want to truly  stop the boats you need to go down this path, legislatively, in terms of the total ban in to  the future. Does Labor disagree with that proposition, do you believe that you can stop  the boats without this legislation?

MARLES: Well the Government has been saying that for some time now that it has  stopped the boats. Now, actually I think, in truth, it is a range of policies that have been  introduced by Labor and indeed the Coalition, we’ve accepted that in terms of the policy  around turn backs, which have brought an end to the journey between Java and  Christmas Island but if I wasn’t mistaken I thought I’d heard successive Immigration  Ministers under this Government claiming mission accomplished, the boats have been  stopped. So if it’s now being said that some other thing needs to be done here, that is a  little confusing against the backdrop of what is already being claimed by this Government.

Be absolutely clear we are 100% committed to seeing an end to the journey between  Java and Christmas Island which saw so many people lose their life at sea. We have  taken very difficult decisions internally and as the Government of the day, to bring an end  to that, we are not about to do anything which sees the people smugglers get back into  business again. As to this particular proposition, frankly we need to see more detail here;  we need to understand what is sought to be done. I don’t want to be cynical about it,  about its motivations, but it’s hard not to be in terms of circumstances where the  Government has been so unclear about what it is they’re specifically trying to achieve  with this. If you want to talk about what is the next step in terms of policy around asylum  seekers, it is to find a third country resettlement option for those on Manus and Nauru  and the Government needs to get on its skates right now and make that happen.

VAN ONSELEN: On a separate matter, I want to talk to you about Andrew Robb, it’s been  revealed his appointment, he’s been appointed to the Chinese leaseholder of the Port of  Darwin. Any concerns on that front?

MARLES: I think again there are some questions which need to be answered by the  Government in relation to this; it’s not long ago that Andrew Robb was the Trade Minister,  a Member of Parliament and also a special envoy in respect of trade under this  Government, now none of that came to an end until the election this year. There is a  protocol, I think, which sees an 18 month gap between the time that members of the  Executive under this Government leave office and are able then to lobby their colleagues;  we’d want to know that that is going to apply to former Minister Robb.

Obviously we’re talking about a company which is the lease holder of the Port of Darwin  and we expressed our concerns at the time that a Chinese owned company would have  such an important contract in Australia in terms of our own infrastructure and in the  context of our own national security. A former Cabinet Minister carries with him a lot of  information about this Government. I think we need, we deserve to be told by the  Government that all our national security concerns are being met here and that there’s  no need to worry about it in terms of this appointment of Andrew Robb.

VAN ONSELEN: As the Shadow Defence Spokesperson, just looking to the US election,  does Australia have anything to worry about, defensively, I guess I could put it that way,  with Donald Trump’s election to the Presidency of the United States or is this something  that you just stay right out of, it doesn’t matter to us whether it’s Trump or Clinton?

MARLES: At the end of the day it’s not up to us whether it’s Trump or Clinton and we will  find out in the next ten days or so who the American people have chosen. The American  alliance is central to our defence strategy, it’s central to our foreign policy and whether it  is a President Trump or a President Clinton, we will have interests within our alliance with  the US that we are going to need to actively pursue in respect of the new administration.

VAN ONSELEN: Can I jump in though. Because Donald Trump, one of the things that he  said publicly is that he’d like to see some of the US allies armed with nuclear weapons. If  he starts arming allies with nuclear weapons, presumably, we’d want in on that?

MARLES: I don’t think that’s precisely what he said but I think the point here is that we  want to see; it is in Australia’s interest that we have a strong American presence in the  East Asian time zone, I think it’s in Australia’s interest that there is a strong American  presence, through its alliances with Japan, with South Korea, and obviously our alliance

with America is very critical and whoever is elected next Tuesday week, it is critical we  are arguing and in the context of the alliance for, as big an American presence within this  part of the world as we can see, in the pivot that has been underway since the first term  of the Obama administration there is a very important step being taken by the US from  the context of Australia’s national interest, we need to continue to argue that that continue.

VAN ONSELEN: And just finally Richard Marles if I could ask you about the situation in  the Middle East, this assault on Mosul. As far as I can see there are two schools of thought  here. One is that you surround Iraq’s second largest city, it’ll be a tougher fight against  Islamic State but nonetheless you’ll seriously degrade them once victory is won.  The  other school of thought is you keep a corridor to Raqqa so that it becomes an easier  victory in Mosul liberating Iraq essentially and also given a PR victory to allies more  quickly possibly taking out Islamic State on the road to Raqqa. But it does ultimately make  it harder to then defeat IS in Syria, in Raqqa particularly knowing as well as we all do how  complex the situation is. Which school of thought do you fall into?

MARLES: I don’t feel like I have all the information at hand in terms of the briefings I’ve  received to give a sensible contribution on that specific question of military strategy. What  I do know is this, defeating Islamic State is absolutely essential, denying ISIL any sense  of legitimacy it might claim in terms of the geography of the caliphate is really important  in terms of the way in which we do that. You’re right in saying it’s not a matter of Mosul at  the end of the day; Raqqa is part of the geography that is inhabited by ISIL at the moment  but capturing Mosul is a critical step along the way. What I think is important from the  point of view of the Australian Government and indeed the Australian Opposition is that  people know that we are committed to that task. That the wonderful work of the  Australians involved in this is completely supported in a bipartisan way here.

VAN ONSELEN: Richard Marles we appreciate you joining us on the program. Thanks  once again.

MARLES: Thanks Peter.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: Simon Furey - 0415 032 732

