

THE HON RICHARD MARLES  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE   MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW   TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2016

KARL STEFANOVIC: Joining us now is Christopher Pyne and Shadow Defence Minister  Richard Marles good morning chaps nice to see you all.

CHRISTOPER PYNE:  Good morning Karl and welcome Richard.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Good morning Karl, good  morning Christopher

STEFANOVIC: Well Christopher first up are you planning to ban Muslim immigration like  sixty percent of Liberal voters want you to do?

PYNE:  No we are certainly not going to do that, we believe in a non-discriminatory  immigration policy. What that poll reflects I think is that people are worried about their safety  when they see the television or read the newspapers and hear Islamic State or Al-Qaeda or  any of these other terrorist organisations making dire threats against the West and against  Australia, obviously is makes them nervous and I perfectly understand that and they have  been nervous for some time not just since the arrival of One Nation back in the national  parliament and that’s why the Government and the Opposition have to keep reassuring  people about the strength of our borders and national security, putting in place the measures  to protect us as much as we possibly can, which we have been doing for the last three and a  bit years.

STEFANOVIC: Okay Richard, 40 percent, a surprising figure I reckon. 40 percent of Labor  voters in that survey want the same ban.

MARLES: Look I think it’s a really concerning survey, but what it says to me is that we have  to have leadership in this country and Christopher talks about reassurance, there is no  reassurance when you’ve got an Immigration Minister who talks about illiterate, innumerate  refugees coming to this country stealing our jobs and being on the doll, now he said that  during the election campaign and if you want to give people a sense of confidence about our  multicultural society we’ve got to see leadership from our government.

STEFANOVIC: Christopher the PM completely fangirled over Barack Obama at the UN, but  then sounded more like Tony Abbott than ever before on Immigration, isn’t he having a bob  each way?



PYNE:  Well Malcolm Turnbull and the Government are absolutely committed to one thing  and that is strong borders, we repaired the damage that Labor did to our border protection  policies, under Labor fifty thousand unauthorised arrivals on eight hundred vessels over five  years because of Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard and Immigration Ministers in the Gillard Rudd  period, Malcolm Turnbull and Tony Abbott have repaired that and it’s a much better situation  and we have a lot more faith in our immigration policies as a consequence and I’m  disappointed to hear Richard Marles not being bi partisan on national security it seems very  surprising to me. We are not talking about skilled migration verses unskilled migration, we  are talking about people feeling safe at home and so far that’s always been a policy which  Labor and Liberal have been able to agree on.

STEFANOVIC: Okay Richard, your policy on asylum seekers was a disaster the PM says it  was a legacy of shame, would you allow more in?

MARLES: Look at Prime Minister is all over the place in terms of his understanding of this  issue. There were mistakes made unquestionable under the Labor period but one of the real  issues here was the cynical decision of the Liberal not to support the Malaysian arrangement  had a huge impact on resolving this issue, six hundred and seventy people perished at sea  after the Liberals blocked the Malaysian arrangement. But in the one breath he is  complaining about Labor closing Nauru and Manus and in the other he is criticising Labor for  reopening those facilities and having offshore processing underway at the moment. The truth  is this government doesn’t know what it’s doing when it comes to Manus and Nauru; they are  paralysed by fear and not only is that a problem for those people who are on those facilities  but ultimately risks our border security, because they are not sustainable facilities at the  moment.

PYNE:  And Karl, Labor’s policy - Labor’s solution to that is to double the refugee intake and  simply take all those people on Nauru and Manus Island, sending the green light -

MARLES: That’s absolutely not true

PYNE:  back to people smugglers -

MARLES: That’s not true.

PYNE:  The green light back to people smugglers saying your business plan is back in  business again.

MARLES: Christopher, you don’t have a solution for getting those people of Manus and  Nauru. We don’t want to bring them to Australia, but we do need to get them off those  islands because right now we don’t have a sustainable offshore processing system.

PYNE:  What we have heard this morning Karl, what we have heard this morning is that if  Labor wins again the people smugglers are back in business.

MARLES: Oh please, you’re talking about bipartisanship and you’re trotting out all the old  lines.

STEFANOVIC: Richard, Richard hang on, this is really important stuff this you’ve changed  the rules Chris to prevent an embarrassing exit of MPs from the House of Reps you have go  your whip out it seems Chris.

PYNE:  Hahaha, oh Karl, you wish, um… no.

MARLES: Now that’s real border security

PYNE:  We are going to make sure that we have no repeats of the September the first  issues and we have got the measures in place to make sure that that happens and honestly  it’s such an unimportant story for the newspapers of Australia

STEFANOVIC: What?

PYNE: How we manage the counting of our members is not very interesting to people.

STEFANOVIC: I’ve got vision of you Christopher leaving the Parliament quicker than a pink  flamingo across the Serengeti, a couple of years ago.

PYNE:   [Laughter] You won’t find any pink flamingos on the Serengeti, not running across  the desert, let me tell you, they need water Karl.

STEFANOVIC: Okay it’s good to talk to you guys, thank you and Richard, best of luck with  Geelong, the Cats, not too much luck though.

MARLES: Go Cats

PYNE: Go the Swans.

STEFANOVIC: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SIMON FUREY 0415032732

