

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC 730  THURSDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2016

LEIGH SALES: Joining me now from Canberra is the Opposition Leader, Bill  Shorten. Good to have you on the program again.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good evening Leigh.

SALES: There's been so much time and energy spent this week on the backpacker  tax. In the end, the 13 per cent, 15 per cent row that it descended into between  Labor and the Coalition was over a few bucks extra a week in tax on a $500 pay  cheque. What was that all about?

SHORTEN: Well, the Government proposed 18 months ago, introducing a new tax  on backpackers of 32 per cent. That immediately led to a drought of backpackers  and farmers and tourism operators said we're losing people. So Labor proposed a  tax on backpackers but quite a bit lower than the Government. The Government has  gradually moved from 32, to 19, to 15. So, we thought fair enough and we should  make a movement towards their position. But the problem is that the Government  instead of taking our sensible solution came up with a deal with the Greens because  the Government is so keen not to work with Labor because they see us as the  enemy that it cost taxpayers $100 million extra just to buy the votes of the Greens.  $100 million of taxpayer money, what a waste.

SALES: But it was 13 per cent. You guys ended up at 13, they were at 15. It was a  negligible difference in the end. Can you understand why voters might think, why  couldn't you just meet at the 15?

SHORTEN: Well, we started today at 10.5. We thought, fair enough, the  Government has got itself into a corner. The Senate rejected their 15, so we showed  some leadership. We went to 13 per cent. And the problem though is that the  Government has done a deal with the Greens, which the Greens concede as  effectively a 13 per cent tax. But the problem is the Greens on the way got bought off

with $100 million of extra funding and in the meantime what this Government has  done is got a higher headline rate of tax, which will discourage backpackers coming  here and they've had to pay out more money from the budget bottom line. I mean the  real problem here is that Australia's got to deal with a Budget deficit, but this  Government is more interested in playing political games, proving they can beat  Labor and on the way through now, it’s going to cost taxpayers an extra $100 million.

SALES: Well, when you look though at issues that the Parliament's been  preoccupied with over the past couple of weeks we had this backpacker tax, George  Brandis, the ABCC, the resettlement plan in the US for refugees on Nauru, do you  really reckon that these are the issues that most Australians would have as their top  priorities?

SHORTEN: Well, whilst I certainly want to see people resettled from Manus and  Nauru, I think you're right in general. This Government is pursuing a series of niche  obsessions. Do you know this week in order to get some votes on their anti-union  legislation, they've agreed to demand that the board of the ABC has got to meet in  different cities to where they meet?

They were protecting George Brandis, I mean really. I mean they couldn't even  guarantee there won't be a reshuffle over summer and they'll send this very  incompetent Attorney-General off to London as a reward for his incompetence. I  agree what's turning people off politics is when the niche issues seem to dominate  the debate and in the meantime our parents can't see their kids get apprenticeships.  We've got people in their 50s and 60s looking for work who can't get a job interview.

SALES: You point out the deals but you guys had to do plenty of deals when you  were in minority Government.

SHORTEN: Well, let's be straight here. Malcolm Turnbull gave us this Senate we've  got. He had this failed Senate reform. Now we've quite a lot of fringe parties in the  Senate. So now Malcolm Turnbull, because of the last election and his own lack of  performance, is going to have to play games with every sort of, every Senator from  every political persuasion, just to get the basics done.

What Malcolm Turnbull should do is sit down and work with Labor. The best  accomplishment since the last election have been a reduction in $6 billion in the  deficit and that's come through a deal working with Labor. And on the national  security legislation, Labor will always support keeping Australians safe and we've  managed to get all of that done. Six difference tranches of legislation in the last three  years. I think what the Liberals have got to do is stop worrying about Labor so much  and start focusing on jobs, jobs and jobs, focus on the important issues.

SALES: You say that the Senate is his own doing and all of the rest of it, but over  the past couple of weeks the two bills that he used to call the double dissolution have  gone through, he’s managed to work with the crossbench and the Greens today. It's  paid off for him, hasn't it?

SHORTEN: Do you really think that the division and dysfunction of this Government  has paid off? On the anti-union laws which they're keen to pass through, they've had

to do all sorts of deals which they would never have thought of doing. And when it  comes to this backpacker tax, they've just given $100 million of taxpayer money to  issues that the Greens asked for, when the Liberals could have had the same deal  with Labor without spending an extra $100 million which taxpayers know we need to  use to reduce the deficit.

SALES: In your address to the Parliament this morning which we heard a clip of  before, you said that there's national secret, which is that behind closed doors you  and Malcolm Turnbull actually get on quite well. Why do you feel the need to keep  that behind closed doors?

SHORTEN: I don't think I did, did I? I said it.

SALES: Most of the time people who follow politics would see you guys, you know,  really at each other, sometimes in pretty aggressive ways.

SHORTEN: I personally like Malcolm Turnbull. But the problem that he's got is that  he can't run the Liberal Party. And the Malcolm Turnbull I thought would - who came  in as Prime Minister, I thought he would be massively different, but he's a massive  disappointment.



So do I like him personally? Yes. But I'm watching him shrink into his job, sell out  positions he's always thought were really important just to keep his party happy. The  real issue is that as the Liberals approach the end of 2017 is that Tony Abbott's on  the war-path. I meant there's great division and dysfunction in the Liberal Party and  the problem for Australia is that when Malcolm Turnbull always got to look over his  shoulder, he can't see where he's going. I mean, quite frankly, if I was to lay a bet on  this matter, I don't think I'll be facing Malcolm Turnbull at the next election. I think the  Liberal Party will move on to someone else.

SALES: And who do you believe that you'll be facing?

SHORTEN: We all know that Tony Abbott laid out a job interview, the Sunday before  the last week of Parliament for an hour. I've got no doubt that Julie Bishop might  think she served three different leaders as deputy, it might be her turn. The point  about it is, for me it's not who the Liberals pick, they're not going to change their  policies. They still think that the Medicare cuts are a figment of imagination. They  don't understand the message out of the last election.

SALES: Well, let's talk about some of your policies actually. Given that it is the final  sitting day of the Parliament, I want to turn to having a look forward to 2017 as I did  with the Prime Minister last night. If you have to give me the three issues that you  think Labor thinks will define 2017, what do you think those three issues are?

SHORTEN: Jobs, fighting for, creating jobs. Building Australian, buying Australian  and employing Australians. So jobs is one.

I think Medicare is always right up there.

Defending our health care system, making sure that it's peoples Medicare card not  their credit card that gives them access to quality health.

And I think for the third one, it's going to be economic management in the interests of  middle-class and working class Australians. This country cannot afford to give $50  billion away to large companies. Now is not the time to be handing millionaires tax  cuts of $17,000.

Instead what we've got to do is look at sensible Budget repair that's fair. That's why I  would like the Government to take up our ideas on negative gearing, reforming the  system, so we have greater affordable for first home buyers. It's running the  economy properly, but in the interests of Australians, not despite them.

SALES: In the last Parliament, Labor took a calculated gamble that you would  release actual policy, for most of the period in the lead-up to the election, is that your  intention up until the next election as well?

SHORTEN: I'm very aware that we lost the last election. But from where we started  at the beginning of the year to where we end I believe has been a year of progress. I  said on election night, Labor's back. What we want to do in 2017 is continue to make  more progress in our policies and prepare a social and economic program for the  next election. We don't want to be a small target Opposition. I think Australians want  to see what you would do and well in advance of the election.

SALES: Given that you didn't win the last election, can Australians assume that  you'd be taking much of the same policy to the next election, given that you didn't get  to implement it last time around?

SHORTEN: We're reviewing our policies, but there's certain things I can say right  now. We're going to support Medicare. We're going to make sure that we have  negative gearing reform in the interests of first home buyers. We're going to make  sure that we reform the TAFE sector, we need a national training agenda. We think  we're on the right track when we talk about building infrastructure in Australia. We  desperately need something to replace the economic activity from the mining boom  which has come to a halt.

SALES: And is there any -

SHORTEN: And it's got to be infrastructure investment.

SALES: Sorry to interrupt.

SHORTEN: Sorry.

SALES: Is there any policies that you think you would drop?

SHORTEN: Well, we're reviewing the rest of our policies. But one things for sure, as  I travel around Australia and one thing I'm definitely going to keep doing in 2017, that  I did in 2016, is town hall meetings. We invite anyone in a suburb or a postcode to  come and talk and give us their ideas. What I want to do is make sure that

Australians have got some renewed faith in the political system. That's my job for  2017.

SALES: There's been a lot of talk since the election of Donald Trump in the United  States that we are in a new phase now, that we're operating in a post-truth world.  What do you think - how loose do you think politicians can be with the facts if they're  tapping into the public mood?

SHORTEN: No, I don't think that we are in a post-truth phase. What happened in  America I think was due to a great deal of disenchantment with business as usual,  with vested interests. But no, I don't think that the Australian people have moved  beyond wanting to hear the truth. That's why we're going to treat Australians as  intelligent and we're going to roll out our policies in a sensible and considered  manner in the course of next year.

I mean, this Government as you know, expected to do much better at the last  election, but they've been narrowly re-elected and they have no agenda. The Prime  Minister has no authority. Their basic mode of operating is to respond to events. We  think Australians deserve better. That's what we're going to do.

SALES: Well, as it's the final sitting day, we probably won't have you on the program  again before Christmas. So thank you very much for coming on regularly to speak to  the viewers. And Merry Christmas to you and your family.

SHORTEN: Thank you very much and for the work the ABC does.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053



