1

www.minister.border.gov.au





The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection

TRANSCRIPT

Interview with Stuart Bocking, Radio 2UE

21 March 2016





Subjects: Visa cancellations; Khaled Sharrouf; fixed four year terms.

E&EO…………………………………………………………………………………………..

JOURNALIST: The Minister Peter Dutton is on the line. Minister good morning.

PETER DUTTON: Good morning Stuart.

JOURNALIST: Thank you for your time. Some suggestion among some MPs in New  Zealand that these compatriots are petty criminals, how would you describe them?

PETER DUTTON: Stuart I have seen some of those claims from time-to-time but  when you go back through the criminal history, they’ve been extensive and many  people have been involved in outlaw motorcycle gangs and criminal gangs  otherwise.

So I think all Australians believe that if you come to Australia, if you’re a non-citizen,  you’re here on a visa, we expect you to abide by the Australian laws. If people  commit offences against Australians then they can expect to have their visas  cancelled - it doesn’t matter where they come from, if they’re from New Zealand or  any other country, we expect people to abide by the law, if not, we’re going to cancel  visas at an increasing rate.

JOURNALIST: Are there difficulties in having them returned to their country of  origin?

PETER DUTTON: No, we have an arrangement with New Zealand for example  where people can return until their matters are heard and finalised and then if they’re  able to get up on appeal, they can then return to Australia.

We’ve got a pretty robust regime in place. But if people are taken into detention once  their visa has been cancelled, pending their deportation, but as I say if they take  legal action they can do that either from a detention centre here or they can  voluntarily return to New Zealand and the matter can be heard and if it’s found in  their favour they can return - so it’s quite an advanced process - and I think we’re  making our society a safer place and we’ve done that on [inaudible] making sure that  we can secure our borders.

2

www.minister.border.gov.au



JOURNALIST: And so in a case like this, you’ve got a whole range of people, just  run through some of the offences they’ve been convicted of.

PETER DUTTON: We’ve had people who have committed sexual offences against  children, murderers, people who  have been convicted of armed robbery, people that  are involved in trafficking and distribution of amphetamines, including ice and that’s  why I think it really will make a big difference out in communities.

Mums and Dads are worried about their kids getting access to amphetamines. We  know that that bikies are the biggest distributors of drugs in this country and we’ve  gone through and cancelled a significant number of their visas and the view of the  police and the view of my own Department of the Australian Border Force is that this  is going to save as many people from becoming victims into the future and I think  that’s a good thing.

JOURNALIST: What happens, in terms of a visa where a crime is committed, do all  crimes necessarily then result in a visa being automatically cancelled or is there a  benchmark if you like?

PETER DUTTON: It depends on the circumstances. So, it does meet the serious  offence carries a term of imprisonment of 12 months or more in most cases, or it can  be any conviction of a sexual offence against a child and we go through, with the  police forces from each of the states and territories, to have a look at their [inaudible]  target.

So we are generally talking about the most serious of criminals but people that have  been convicted of a crime, 12 months or more, as people know, it takes a fair crime  to receive that sort of sentence and that’s what we abide by and I think we are  making our community a safer place and I think that is a good thing for our country.

JOURNALIST: Why is there a backlash then against some MPs in New Zealand? Is  it because they don’t want these undesirables back in New Zealand?

PETER DUTTON: I suspect there’s part of that and I think the other part is just a little  bit of grandstanding. There’s one MP here at the moment I think loves a bit of media  attention….

JOURNALIST:…..this is this Kelvin Davis who’s been over here….yeah….

PETER DUTTON:….that’s right and that’s fine if he wants to grandstand but my job  is to make sure that I firstly secure our borders and secondly to make our community  a safer place and I think we’re doing that and I think Australians [inaudible] people  can grandstand all they like, this same law applies to Australians if they’re overseas  in different parts of the world, if they commit a crime then people expect to be  deported back to Australia and similarly here - if people are here as a guest of our  country we treat them with respect and we expect that in return and if people are  going to abuse that trust then they can expect to have their visas cancelled and be  returned back to their country of origin.

3

www.minister.border.gov.au

JOURNALIST: I suppose the question some might ask is well, this is all well and  good, New Zealand is one of our close neighbours, a key ally as we’re prepared to  talk tough with them, do we take the same approach in relation to people from many  other countries where we don’t necessarily share the same relations, are we just as  tough on them where they commit offences and are on visas?

PETER DUTTON: Absolutely. The law applies equally and it’s a non-discriminatory  basis that we apply it. So it doesn’t matter where people come from.

But we have a special relationship with New Zealand which means that people can  travel to Australia from New Zealand without criminal checks being undertaken that  they normally might with other countries. So obviously we’ve got a lot of New  Zealanders because it is a very special relationship and as a result we have a higher  proportion of people from New Zealand that are being captured by these laws and  that’s as you would expect.

New Zealand is not being treated any differently to any other country.

JOURNALIST: And those other countries where we perhaps don’t share the same  sort of relationship, they will accept their citizens back where they do the wrong thing  while they’re on a visa here in Australia or can that be a little more protracted?

PETER DUTTON: Well no, the short answer is that they do accept them back. There  are a few countries that don’t - Iran for example, we have difficulties in returning  people to Iran and that’s true, not only of visas that we cancel but also people that  arrive by boat, where people have been found not to be refugees and we’re trying to  discuss and negotiate that with Iran at the moment - but that is a difficult situation  and there are others.

But generally speaking, countries are happy to accept people back because that’s  the basis on which they apply the laws of their non-citizens and Australia abides by  that as other countries do.

JOURNALIST: So we’ve got a situation now where you’ve got 600 New Zealanders  who’ve had visas torn up. How many more could there be, do you know how many  more there are potentially in the system that are yet to be processed still and could  be returned to New Zealand?

PETER DUTTON: Stuart, I don’t know the number, is the true answer to your  question but we are working through as I say with all of the police forces to identify,  particularly people that are involved in outlaw motorcycle gangs or involved in gangs  otherwise because we do know that they are involved in human misery, creating  human misery by standover merchants of small business, they’re involved in  extortion, armed robbery, importation, manufacturing, distribution of amphetamines,  including ice - we’ve got a huge problem with ice in this country and we’re working  through trying to stop the source of that - and if we can cancel visas of bikies, in  particular, then I think we make our country a much better place.

JOURNALIST: There are these reports that Karen Nettleton who is grandmother of  the children of Khaled Sharrouf is travelling towards Syria in the hope of tracking

4

www.minister.border.gov.au

them down, the 14 year old girl has been in touch with The Telegraph saying that  she’s struggling with the stress of now being the sole protector or her newborn and  four young siblings. It follows the death of Khaled Sharrouf and also her mother,  Tara Nettleton. Do you have any idea as to what dispensation there might be if Mrs  Nettleton is able to get to Syria and then returns to Australia? Could she face  charges?

PETER DUTTON: Stuart I just don’t have any comment to make in relation to that  family. Obviously the police intelligence agencies are best to deal with these matters  and they’re not best to be publicly commented on. The only general comment that I  would make is that people who take their children to war zones really condemn those  children to a life of misery and…..

[phone line disconnected]

JOURNALIST:….I’m sorry Minister we just lost you there.

PETER DUTTON: Yes mate, sorry about that….

JOURNALIST:….you were just making a general comment in relation to those who  do travel overseas, take children with them to some of these war zones.

PETER DUTTON: Well Stuart, I think any Australian recognises Syria is a very  difficult place. We don’t have an embassy there. We don’t have support on the  ground and potentially we put our own soldiers at risk because people that expect to  be extracted or have their children extracted from war zones, it is a terribly, terribly  complex situation in that part of the Middle East and we want to make sure that all  Australians get the message that it is just not the place for adults, let alone children  to be taken.

So if people have any inclination that somebody in their family group or at work is  radicalising or they believe that they’re at risk of departing our shores, particularly  young teenagers, they need to advise the authorities immediately because it is  inconceivable that you could take your children into a war zone like that and  obviously the authorities here and our people in the Middle East otherwise will  provide what assistance we can but these are complex matters and it is obviously  very difficult to comment on the individual circumstances.

But our general call, our plea would be, if you have any information that people are  at risk or you think somebody is in trouble overseas, please contact the Federal  Police as quickly as you can.

JOURNALIST: And we just saw, in your home state, it looks as if potentially this  referendum on fixed four year terms might get up in Queensland - they are in effect  in New South Wales - is there an argument to extend those to the federal level do  you think? Fewer elections meaning less disruption - I know it was a comment from  new MP for North Sydney Trent Zimmerman a couple of weeks back in his maiden  speech.

5

www.minister.border.gov.au

PETER DUTTON: I don’t think it is a priority at the moment but I think over time  there is an opportunity to have that discussion. Obviously the Government is  determined to work through the priorities that we’ve got at the moment and the  Government has a lot on its plate, we’ve got a lot of reform to implement, we want to  make sure that we’ve got a huge jobs and growth package for the economy as we  transition into a new economy.

So there’s a lot that the Government has to implement over the next few years. We  need to I think address one of the big issues in this country and that is the divide of  funding and delivery of policy responsibility between the states and Commonwealth.  So there’s a lot to do and no doubt at some stage we may look at four year term.

But I think in Queensland the fact that it got up is a good thing. I think it’s a reflection  of the fact that people are happy to support logical change to the constitution to the  way in which government operates in this country and I think it’s a good outcome for  Queensland. But at a federal level no doubt people will have their views for and  against.

JOURNALIST: I appreciate your time this morning. Good chatting with you.

PETER DUTTON: Thank you mate.

[ends]



