

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL  SERVICES   SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS 24, WEEKEND BREAKFAST  SUNDAY, 7 AUGUST 2016

SUBJECT/S: Banking Royal Commission; Asylum seeker policy; Senate

KUMI TAGUCHI: This week has seen the Reserve Bank cut interest rates to a new  record low with the big four banks facing increasing criticism for not passing on the  cuts in full.

ANDREW GEOGHEGAN: In response the Prime Minister announced a banking  inquiry that will see the bank chiefs face an annual grilling from MPs. Senator Katy  Gallagher is the Shadow Minister for Small Business and Financial Services and she  joins us now. Senator, good morning.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL  SERVICES: Good morning.

GEOGHEGAN: Banks are in the business of making profits. Why do they need to  justify their business decisions?

GALLAGHER: Well, in terms of what we have called for, and we have called for a  Royal Commission, that comes after a string of events over the last five years,  scandal after scandal, rip-off after rip-off for consumer. I think we all agree we need a  strong and competitive banking and financial services system but also need one that  is responsive, accountable and transparent to its customers. We would argue that  there is enough evidence there that would warrant a very close examination of the  issues facing Australia's financial services system and that a royal commission is the  best way to do that. I guess what we saw this week from the Prime Minister was a  cop-out.

GEOGHEGAN: We will get to the Royal Commission and your plans for it in a  moment but banks have an obligation above all to their shareholders. Surely if a  customer doesn't like the behaviour of their bank, they can simply shop around?

GALLAGHER: Well, that's right. Again, I guess if we go to the events of this week,  the Reserve Bank cut the cash rate, I think there is an expectation that that would  flow on to consumers. I guess what we saw was a decision by the bank that flowed  anywhere from 0.1 to 0.14% of that cut to consumers. The point we would make is  the banks need to explain that decision, need to be accountable and transparent for  that decision and need to balance the needs of shareholders with the needs of  consumers.

GEOGHEGAN: Do you feel as though banks should be compelled to have a moral  obligation to their customers?

GALLAGHER: I think they have to be - they do hold a very important place in our  community. That's a very privileged role. In terms of what we have seen over the last  five years, this isn't just driven by the Labor Party. There is plenty of other  commentators and, indeed, consumers that have been ripped off and lost thousands  of dollars through various scandals either in insurance or through the banks  themselves that are wanting to see more accountability, greater transparency, a  thorough examination of how the system is working.

GEOGHEGAN: In your calls for a banking Royal Commission, are you saying they  are engaging in illegal business activities?

GALLAGHER: Well, I think if you go back over the past five years, you will see  various scandals where there has been questions raised around ethical handling of  particular areas and certainly around professional conduct. There is scandal after  scandal. I think what a royal commission would allow us to do is have very good  look, very thorough examination at all of the issues, including how the regulators  interact with the banking and financial system to make sure it is strong and  competitive going forward.

GEOGHEGAN: Are you saying then you don't have faith in the regulators such as  the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority.

GALLAGHER: No I am not saying that at all. One thing the Royal Commission  would allow us to do, and this is an area that we disagree with the Government, is to  it would make sure the regulators are well equipped with the right powers to deal  with enforcing strong regulation in this sector. That's what we are saying and that's  why we have been pushing for a Royal Commission.

GEOGHEGAN: Your leader Bill Shorten says he will try to woo some Coalition  backbenchers to support setting up a Royal Commission. Do you know of any likely  candidates in that regard?

GALLAGHER: We know there are people that sit on the Government backbenchers,  we have Wacka Williams, Warren Entsch in the past. We know there are people who  sit within the Government who are worried about this, in some cases have been  arguing for a Royal Commission for many years. I don't think it is going to go away  because constituents are walking in their doors with complaints around their  interactions with the banks. This isn't something that's going to disappear. Certainly  we will continue to press our case and we will continue to look for supporters both

inside the Parliament and outside to continue the pressure on the government and  make sure they are going to respond.

GEOGHEGAN: You mentioned earlier some banks have been criticised for not  passing on that rate cut in full. Does it not - their point is perhaps that they have split  it in that they have given some benefit to deposit holders who, let's face it, they have  lost out recently in the last few years because rates have been so low.

GALLAGHER: Again, this is something that the banks need to explain. We did see  some increases for deposit holders. I would say that in response that's a very, very  small part of the banks' business in terms of the amount of customers who would  benefit from a reduction in their interest rate on their mortgage versus the amount of  customers, I think it is a very, very different scenario. You are talking about a lot less  consumers, customers, who would benefit from that deposit interest rate rise. Again,  this is something that the banks need to explain and they need to be making sure  they are accountable and transparent and that people understand in full the reasons  for their decisions and, again, we argue that that would be best investigated and  examined through a Royal Commission that looks not just at that issue but all of the  other issues that have plagued the banking and financial services system over the  last, say, five to eight years.

GEOGHEGAN: As far as that criticism goes on not passing on the full rate cut, there  is some point being made that perhaps that would take potential heat out of the  property market?

GALLAGHER: Yes, well, I saw that commentary as well. Again, we are not in the  business of telling the banks what they can and can't do. What we are arguing for,  and again this is one issue, it is not the issue that has determined our position on a  Royal Commission, is that we need a thorough examination and the banks need to  be better explaining the reasons for their decisions and why they are making them  and balance up the needs of shareholders with the needs of their customers.

GEOGHEGAN: Katy Gallagher, can I ask you to consider your role as Senator for  the ACT and there are reports many members of Labor in the ACT have left the  party or at least voiced their concern strongly because they feel as though Labor  policies have let them down, in particular your stance on refugee detention. How  concerned are you that you are losing members there?

GALLAGHER: I'm not aware that we have lost a lot of members. In fact, in recent  years our membership has been growing here in the ACT.

GEOGHEGAN: You must be aware of some members who have said they will leave  because they are unhappy?

GALLAGHER: I haven't actually spoken to one member who has left over this issue.  I have, of course, had discussions with members about it. It is an issue I think in any  political organisation, whether it be the Labor Party or the Liberal Party for that  matter, that causes either disagreement or angst. There is no doubt about that. I  guess the position is we have to argue the reasons behind our party platform, behind  our position, and make sure we are continuing to put pressure on the Government

about how they are treating people, particularly in Manus and Nauru, and make sure  there is a speedy resolution to the plight of those individuals. When you look at  Labor's policy, it is very different to the Liberal Party in terms of the humanitarian  side, the effort we would like to see taken to make sure people's human rights are  being respected and this is a continuing job for me as a member of the Labor Party  to make sure that our members are aware actually of what our policy platform says  and how we will continue to pursue this over the next term of government.

GEOGHEGAN: Of course, we now have the format of the new Senate, we know  who will be sitting there, including four One Nation senators. Are you concerned at  all with some of the views they have been expressing?

GALLAGHER: Well, personally, from what I have read, I can't find one area with  One Nation where I personally agree with what they are saying but I guess in a  sense, that's not unusual in the Senate. The Senate will be made up of parties and  individuals with very diverse views and it will be for us as a Chamber to try and  resolve that and make sure we can get the best outcome for the Australian people.

GEOGHEGAN: Do you think it will be a workable Senate?

GALLAGHER: It's got to work, doesn't it? This is what the Australian people have  elected. I think it is going to be a very difficult Senate. I think it will be very difficult for  the Government to pursue their agenda and I think it is up to all of us who hold a  seat in the Senate to make sure that the debates we do have are around uniting  Australians, not dividing them. I think that's going to be a real pressure for all of us to  maintain over the term of this Parliament.

GEOGHEGAN: Can you see yourself striking any deals as far as legislation is  concerned, blocking it, for instance, with One Nation?

GALLAGHER: Those decisions will be determined both in the short-term and  through individual votes in the Senate. The Labor Party has always taken the view  that we will do what's in the best interests of the Australian people. We watch every  vote, we decide every vote along those lines but I would say - I think the  responsibility is on all of us - as senators we are political leaders in this country, we  must continue to bring people together. We cannot use our positions to divide people  and divide the country. I hope that every Senator takes that approach to the work  they bring and the issues they bring to the Senate.

GEOGEHEGAN: Senator Katy Gallagher, thanks for joining us.

GALLAGHER: Thanks, Andrew.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PATRICK CRONAN 0432 758 224



