

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY







E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC CAPITAL HILL  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2016

SUBJECTS: High Court decision; Malcolm Turnbull’s Liberals’ 15 per cent GST on  everything; Syria and Libya

GREG JENNETT, PRESENTER: Labor's Deputy Leader Tanya Plibersek's pressing  the  need for quicker assessment of refugee claims and as the Shadow Foreign Affairs  Minister she also accepts a bigger set of resettlement options will be needed if refugees  are to be moved off Nauru. We spoke to her just after the High Court handed down its  decision. Tanya Plibersek, it's worth remembering that Labor restarted detention on  Nauru in 2013. It's been tweaked since then but the High Court has today found that  that regime is valid under Australian law. Is that a good thing on balance?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well I think  irrespective of the judgment today it's important to say that there's no excuse for the fact  that processing times have doubled under this Government, that they're at about an  average of 455 days now and it's also worth saying that our preference when we were  in Government was an arrangement with Malaysia that would have allowed people to  live and work in the community, children to go to school, people to receive medical  attention, that was our preferred position when we were in Government. We also should  say about immigration detention that people have to be properly looked after, their rights  protected. We've said that we would insist on an independent children's advocate and  mandatory reporting of any abuse suggestions. The detention centres on Nauru and  Manus are being run in a way that the Government should answer for.

JENNETT: Even with the cases that are settled when refugee status has been refused,  the numbers as you say are stubbornly high on Nauru in particular. You could be  Deputy Prime Minister of a Government in nine months or so, what would you do to  draw down those numbers?

PLIBERSEK: We made announcements at our national conference saying that we  would double our humanitarian intake, that we would work with the UNHCR, most  particularly in our region and contribute $450 million to the UNHCR, and I believe that  with a regional approach to resettling people we could see those people leave Manus  and Nauru and Australia continue to play a much greater and more generous role in  humanitarian resettlement of refugees.

JENNETT: Have you sounded out any regional neighbours about the possibility of  taking more because that's been a big problem so far, the're just not doing it?

PLIBERSEK: Both in the time that we were in Government and the time we've been in  Opposi  tion of course we have discussions with our neighbours and we have

discussions with the big international organisations like the UNHCR about how we can  play a better role and do our fair share. We think that a regional solution that takes  people more directly from source countries so they’re not risking their lives on boats is  critical to that, and we believe a cooperative relationship with our neighbours is critical  to resolving this issue.

JENNETT: And would you seek to revive a deal with Malaysia?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we would be talking to all of our neighbours to ensure that we have  a regional approach.

JENNETT: You still like the look of that original design design, the original idea?

PLIBERSEK: I'm not going to make specific comments like that. I’d say that having a  regional approach that involves the UNHCR, that takes more people but takes them  directly from the persecution they're fleeing is what we're after.

JENNETT: Just finally on this area, there are disturbing claims of the rape of a child and  other forms of abuse, is there any scope for one-off exemptions where people who  came by boat without a visa could come to Australia to settle under extenuating  circumstances?

PLIBERSEK: I don't think I can comment on individual cases but what I would say is  any reports like this are deeply troubling. Of course they should be reported, there  should be an independent children's advocate, there should be proper protection for all  of the people in our care on Manus and Nauru but most particularly for children because  they are so vulnerable. And the treatment of organisations like Save the Children and  whistleblowers has been completely unacceptable from this Government. The culture of

secrecy that’s developed, the punishment of people who are raising these issues of  concern is completely unacceptable.

JENNETT: Let's move on to economic management and Paul Keating has made an  intervention into the GST debate broadly arguing against a 15 per cent GST but he  does say that if you went up 1 or 2 per cent to around 12 and you took that extra money  and dedicate it purely to health and hospitals, that could be sold to the public. What's  wrong with that argument?

PLIBERSEK: Well he's quite right in making the point that this is not reform, it's just  sloppy tax increases. But he’s also right to say the states and territories do have a real  problem because the Federal Government has cut $80 billion from state health and

education systems. We say that there’s a better way of raising that revenue - we’ve  pointed out $70 billion of improvements to the budget bottom line, including proper  taxation for multinational companies that are avoiding paying tax in Australia, the very  high income superannuation tax concessions , increase obviously in tobacco  excise.  But also, stopping wasteful spending like the Government’s new Baby Bonus  proposal and of course the $160 million they want to spend on this ridiculous  plebiscite on marriage equality. So there are better ways of raising this revenue that  aren’t just lazy tax increases from the Federal Government.

JENNETT: But this Paul Keating idea would at least meet someone like Jay Weatherill  in the middle, and maybe the Victorian Premier as well in as much as it does explore  new revenue streams, while not going the whole hog, and giving it to those areas that  are acutely feeling pain in the case of the state governments.

PLIBERSEK: The problem with the GST is that the Government has spent this money  several times over.   The states and territories think that they’re going to get the cash so  they’re open to it, obviously they are because their budgets, particularly health and  education budgets are under such pressure. High income earners think that Scott  Morrison’s talk to them about bracket creep means that they’re going to get a tax cut in  personal income tax. The business organisations think they’re going to get a company  tax cut. There is no way that Scott Morrison can keep all the promises that he’s made  about what he’s going to do with the extra revenue.

JENNETT: Well Labor is obviously committed to fighting the GST. Just talking about  Paul Keating, why not take a leaf out of his book and promise to fight it all the way up  and through a campaign but to double down on that and say, “if we lost and the Turnbull  Government was elected, you would absolutely get that higher GST because we would  back it through”?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we're not into hypotheticals, we're going to be fighting the GST and  we're of course going to make it an election issue. But it's not the only reason that  people should vote Labor at the next election. People who don't want a GST should  vote Labor but people who want a decent school system that invests in their child's  education should vote Labor.

JENNETT: Do you rule out that tactic though, in the heat of a five week campaign?

PLIBERSEK: I’m not going to talk tactics now, I’m going to talk about why we should  fight the GST.

JENNETT: Let's go into your portfolio area of foreign affairs and we have Julie Bishop,  the Foreign Minister, overseas at the moment, looking at the possibility of upping our aid  commitments to Syria, possibly also to Libya. You were criticised by the Minister for  floating these sorts of ideas, I think suggesting picnic baskets for terrorists was her  description, do you think she's looking likely to go where you were going last year which  is in fact to increase this aid commitment?

PLIBERSEK: Well I certainly hope so because Australia has not pulled its weight in  terms of humanitarian assistance to Syria. We have in fact cut assistance to Syria as  this crisis has worsened. The Government claims $190 million has been given to Syria  for humanitarian assistance, 100 of that was under the previous Labor Government  when this crisis was in its early days and not as serious. We’ve spent $550 million on  the military intervention so far, and Oxfam says that our fair share of humanitarian  assistance for 2016 alone would be around $178 million.

JENNETT: Do you accept that number? Do you endorse that number?

PLIBERSEK: Well look it's not for me to pick a number out of the air but what I would  say is the fact that we have been reducing our effort as this crisis has worsened is  shocking, and of course Labor has supported military assistance in the fight against IS  but we absolutely say that our humanitarian effort has been underdone and you only  have to look at the pictures - there's something I shared on the Internet today, a drone  flight through Homs looking at the destruction of this city after years of fighting and yet  people, children still running through the streets. The humanitarian situation in Syria is  shocking, the world food program is cutting assistance because it doesn't have enough  money to provide food, we've got many thousands of people starving in besieged cities,  we must do more. The international community must, but we as a good international  citizen have dropped the ball and we should increase our effort.

JENNETT: Do you accept that it looks likely the Government will do that?

PLIBERSEK: I certainly hope so. I was shocked at the sort of criticisms that the Minister  was making early on pretending that this would be, if we provide food assistance to  starving Syrians it would be a terrorist picnic - I hope she’s seen the error of her ways.

JENNETT: Tanya Plibersek, thank you.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

