THE HONOURABLE TONY ABBOTT MP

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR WARRINGAH



TRANSCRIPT OF THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MP, ADDRESS  TO THE SAMUEL GRIFFITH SOCIETY, STAMFORD PLAZA  HOTEL, ADELAIDE  August 12, 2016

My first task tonight is to congratulate the Samuel Griffith Society for its unflinching  commitment to upholding our constitution and to safeguarding our legal traditions.

You are, if I may say so, a thoroughly conservative body - not in any partisan sense but in  your respect for what has shaped us and in your determination to build on the best features of  the past.

Although Sir Samuel Griffith led a 19th century Queensland version of the Liberal Party, there  were occasions, he believed, when “the comfort of the individual must yield to the good of  the public”.

He had a strong social conscience but no sympathy for those “who endeavour to bring about  reforms by crime and violence”.

He opposed indentured labour, but was more inclined to phase it out than to ban it.

And he was, of course, the principal author of the first draft of our constitution; which has  turned out to be a splendidly serviceable rule book for a practical people.

Although he once claimed no inconsistency whatsoever between any of his innumerable  speeches on a huge range of topics, he was more pragmatist than ideologue.

His was a pragmatism based on values: sympathy for the underdog, respect for institutions  that have stood the test of time, and a preference for freedom.

My second task is to confront a regrettable truth: these are vexing times for conservatives -  legal conservatives no less than political ones - and we need to ask “why?” if better times are  to come.

Take an issue that’s quite rightly exercised many here: section 18C of the Racial  Discrimination Act that prohibits what might “offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate” on  racial grounds.

This is a troubling law. At its worst, it limits free speech merely to prevent hurt feelings.

John Howard opposed it when Paul Keating introduced it but didn’t repeal it in government.

After the successful prosecution of Andrew Bolt, I promised to “repeal it in its current form”  but reneged after fierce criticism from Liberal premiers and a wall of opposition in the senate.

As well, I was seeking ways to limit jihadi hate preachers and worried about the appearance  of double standards.

Perhaps the cause of free speech would have fared better if my government’s initial bid had  been merely to drop “offend’ and “insult” while leaving prohibitions on the more serious  harms.

Still, as things stand, there’s no real prospect of change - even though several young  Queenslanders are now facing official persecution merely for questioning reverse  discrimination on social media and the Race Discrimination Commissioner is now itching to  prosecute our best-known cartoonist.

The decency and fair-mindedness of the Australian people will always be a better defence  against hate speech than a law administered by ideological partisans - yet our parliament  prefers to tolerate over-the-top prosecutions than to upset thin-skinned activists.

Take another issue dear to adherents of the Samuel Griffith Society: the restoration of a better  functioning federation - a federation that more faithfully reflects the letter and spirit of our  constitution - by allowing the different levels of government to be more sovereign in their  own spheres.

In the 2014 budget, Joe Hockey and I implemented our election pledge to limit the Rudd-Gillard school and hospital cash splash to the 2013 forward estimates.

We reduced Commonwealth support for the states from the unsustainable, beyond-the-out-years, pie-in-the-sky promises of the previous government, to CPI plus population growth in  the fourth year of the budget projections.

Our idea was the constitutionally correct one: to have the states and territories running public  schools and public hospitals take more responsibility for funding them.

The public would then know better whom to blame when things went wrong.

Again led by Liberal premiers, the response was a fusillade of criticism along the lines of  cruel cuts and broken promises.

Along with a modest Medicare co-payment for otherwise bulk-billed GP visits, reductions in  stay-at-home-mum payments once the youngest child was at school, CPI rather than  MTAWE indexation for pensions, and insisting on learning-or-earning for school leavers  rather than going straight on the dole, these reductions-in-the-rate-of-increases to spending  were sabotaged in the senate.

So, as things stand, rather than reform a dysfunctional federation, the states would rather  blame federal funding than address the shortcomings in their schools and hospitals; while the  Commonwealth won’t risk a scare campaign by considering real change.

There’s much that my government achieved in two short years: abolishing taxes, stopping the  boats, finalising FTAs, boosting small business, starting big projects like Sydney’s second  airport, keeping our country safe - and not shirking budget repair.

Still, I have to take responsibility for our inability to reform section 18C and to deliver the  beginnings of federation reform.

Free speech is worth the risk of giving offence.

The Commonwealth can’t be the states’ ATM if our federation is to work.

Government can’t continue to live beyond its means.

I did make these points but not often enough or persuasively enough to bring about the  changes I sought; the changes, I suspect, that you wanted too.

Hence the need for all of us to ponder how these good causes and other good causes might  better prosper in the future.

You won’t be surprised that I have been reflecting on my time as opposition leader, as well as  prime minister.

Interestingly, while less than 50 per cent of the current government’s legislation has passed  the parliament, almost 90 per cent of the former Labor government’s legislation passed  without a division.

I think the Abbott opposition was right not-to-oppose means-testing family tax benefits and  means-testing the private health insurance rebate; because, although these measures hit the  aspirational families the Coalition most wanted to help, they also helped to rein-in an  increasingly out-of-control budget deficit.

Unquestionably, we were right to oppose the carbon tax which was not just a broken promise  but the antithesis of the former government’s 2010 election commitment.

We were right to oppose the mining tax which destroyed investment, cost jobs, and boosted  red tape without raising serious revenue.

We were right to oppose the over-priced school halls programme and the combustible roof  batts programme and the live cattle ban that threatened Indonesia’s food security; because  these were all bad polices incompetently implemented.

I wonder, though, about the former government’s people swap with Malaysia.

The 800 boat people that could have been sent to Malaysia was less than a months’ intake,  even then.

I doubt it would have worked.

Still, letting it stand would have been an acknowledgment of the government-of-the-day’s  mandate to do the best it could, by its own lights, to meet our nation’s challenges.

It would have been a step back from the hyper-partisanship that now poisons our public life.

In the last parliament, I could invariably count on Bill Shorten’s support on national security  issues.

On deploying the armed forces or strengthening anti-terror laws, there were cabinet ministers  harder-to-persuade than the Leader of the Opposition!

The challenge for the new parliament will be to be as sensible about economic security as the  old one was about national security; because we can’t keep pretending that economic growth  on its own will take care of debt and deficit.

Of course, Labor’s instinct is for more tax and the Coalition’s preference is for less spending  - but if Labor wants spending legacies such as the NDIS to survive, it should be prepared to  work with the government in dealing with the spending overhang that it created.

After an election where the government all-but-lost its majority, yet the opposition recorded  its third worst vote in 70 years, the sensible centre needs to focus even-more-intently on what  really matters to middle-of-the-road voters.

All of us need to dwell less on what divides us and more on what unites us, and to have an  open mind for good ideas - as the Howard opposition did with the economic reforms of the  Hawke government.

Still, we’re much more likely to rebuild trust by telling the truth than by running away from  hard decisions.

We have to keep reform alive because it’s the reforms of today that create the prosperity of  tomorrow.

Budget repair, federation reform, productivity reform and tax reform can’t stay in the too  hard basket for the whole term of this parliament.

Of course, all significant change has costs that need to be taken into account.

And yes, it’s easy enough to make a bad situation worse with ill-considered change.

Yet often enough we must change merely to keep what we have.

We are free because we’re strong.

We are fair because we can afford to be.

But every day we must ask how we can be better, smarter, stronger - and adjust as  circumstances require.

This isn’t ideology; it’s common sense.

It shouldn’t be a crisis that forces parliament to face facts: everything has to be paid for;  every dollar government spends ultimately comes from taxpayers; and taxpayers are also  voters with a vested interest in getting value for their money.

My job tonight, though, is less to address the challenges of government, than to address the  challenges facing those wishing to build incrementally on our constitutional and legal  heritage.

The main problem is that fewer and fewer people actually know what that heritage is.

Some years ago, after John Howard had questioned the state of history teaching in our  schools, I quizzed my then teenage daughters about some of the big events in Australia’s  past.

“We haven’t been taught that”, one shot back. Her history study had been ancient Egypt:  “pharaohs and stuff” she told me “and the Rosetta Stone”.

If people don’t know the bible and gospel stories; if they haven’t read Shakespeare or  Dickens; if they haven’t heard about ancient Greece and Rome; if they haven’t studied the  political evolution of England; if they know little of the Great War and the struggles against  Nazism and communism; how can they fully appreciate the society they live in, or deeply  grasp Australian democracy, let alone the subtleties of the relationships between the different  branches and levels of government?

With less common knowledge, shared understandings become more difficult.

Without moorings and without maps, inevitably, we are adrift and directionless.

What’s deep and lasting becomes harder to distinguish from the ephemeral and we end up  taking sport more seriously than religion.

A few weeks back, I addressed my old school and spoke briefly about the debt that the  modern world owed to Christianity: how democracy rested on an appreciation of the innate  dignity of every person; and justice on the imperative to treat others as you’d have them treat  you; or to love your neighbour as you love yourself.

The subsequent questions, I have to say, focussed on the alleged cruelty of the Abbott  government’s border protection policies, the inadequacy of its climate change policies; and  the insensitivity of its approach to same sex marriage!

And why wouldn’t these be students’ concerns, given teachers’ preoccupations with  multiculturalism, reconciliation and global warming?

At least the Safe Schools programme isn’t yet mandatory at Catholic schools in NSW.

But there’s hope; one Year Nine student I questioned the other day, from a different school,  volunteered that our biggest national problem was the budget deficit.

It turned out that during the election he’d been exposed to a heavy dose of Sky News!

There wouldn’t be a person in this room tonight - not one of you - who would say that our  civilisation is more secure today than five, ten or twenty years ago.

The new tribalism, the loss of civility, and reality TV politics is taking its toll across the  Western world.

Yet for all our present discontents, there’d hardly be any one, here, unconvinced that Western  civilisation, especially its English-speaking version, is mankind’s greatest achievement.

To be an Australian is to have won first prize in the lottery of life.

A culture which welcomes diversity, which values women, which offers respect to everyone;  with universal social security, with political and social and economic opportunity; which  encourages people to look out for each other, which urges everyone to be his or her best self  and which is always looking for ways to improve…deserves to be much better thought of.

Yet what’s readily extended to other cultures is only grudgingly extended to our own: credit  where it’s due.

What’s missing from the public discourse and what makes consideration of so many issues so  contentious is an appreciation of our society’s strengths, as well as its weaknesses.

I won’t try to persuade you that there’s never been a better time to be an Australian - for  cultural conservatives there are too many frustrations for that - but surely the contention,  even now, that there’s no better country to live in ought to be self-evident.

Cultural self-confidence: that’s what’s missing; and that’s what’s required for more of our  debates to tilt the right way.

You appreciate what more of us should: that our national story has far more to celebrate, than  apologise for.

The challenge for all of us who seek a better Australia is rarely to throw things out and start  again…but…to build…on the great strengths we have.



