



THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR BLAIR



E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  WEEKEND LIVE, SKY  SUNDAY, 14 AUGUST 2016

SUBJECTS: Senate inquiry into incidents in Nauru.

ASHLEIGH GILLON: Joining us live from Brisbane is the Shadow Immigration  Minister, Shayne Neumann. Thank you so much for your time, we do appreciate it.  We have been reporting today of course that Labor is planning this Parliamentary  Inquiry into those allegations of abuse on Nauru. What are the Terms of Reference  for that proposal and do you believe you will have enough support from the cross-benchers to get it up?

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: We will deal with the issue of cross-benchers. We believe that there  are people of good will there who will support it. So we’ll undertake some  discussions with them. The Terms of Reference we haven’t determined but I would  envisage they would include such things as the contributing factors towards these  allegations; the reporting mechanisms that took place in respect of those allegations.  What investigations took place? What was the outcome of those investigations?  What checks and balances have been put in place? And what recommendations  were made as a result of the investigations? And many other factors. We’ll consult  with the cross-benchers in relation to that. We’re hopeful that will to get up. We think  this is an expeditious way and an appropriate way to deal with these allegations,  along with an independent Children’s Advocate, which we urge the Government to  adopt. And also to support the Private Member’s Bill, which we propose to  reintroduce in this Parliament, for mandatory reporting in relation to child abuse and  other matters concerning minors, both offshore and onshore as well.

GILLON: I spoke with the Finance Minister, Mathias Cormann a little earlier in the  program and he pointed out that the Immigration Department is already examining  and investigating these allegations we’ve seen this week. So what would a  Parliamentary Inquiry actually achieve?



NEUMANN: If they are doing that, we don’t know anything about because the  Government hasn’t told us anything about it. This is where we need to get rid of the  veil of secrecy. There needs to be more transparency and accountability across this  space. If there’s going to be integrity in relation to offshore processing - and Labor  continues to support offshore processing, because we want to make sure people  don’t die at sea - then indeed there needs to be greater accountability. And the  Government’s failed monumentally. The culture, the thinking, the mentality revealed  by the Minister in his one media transcript this week, in his one interview on radio,  reveals they’ve got a blame the victim mentality. So we don’t have any confidence  the Government has done this properly, so we want a proper Parliamentary Inquiry  in relation to it.

GILLON: You mentioned the Immigration Minister Peter Dutton, he was right, though  wasn’t he when he claimed that the files released last week do contain some false  reports? He also claimed that they have mostly been reported before. They’re fair  points for the Immigration Minister to make.

NEUMANN: Well he says that. But what actually has happened? We don’t know that  because the Government reveals selectively information. But also, his response  instinctively was to blame the victim, blame those people who have been involved in  child abuse, who have been unfortunately victims in relation to that. There’s reporting  there of a very disturbing and shocking nature in relation to children, revealing not  only that 18 percent of the people on Nauru actually are children but about 50  percent of the allegations reporting involves children. But the Minister’s response has  simply been to blame the children and blame the individuals concerned who actually  are reporting these things. So that’s the wrong attitude we believe and we have a  responsibility ethically, morally and I think legally to do much, much better in this  country for these people that are in our charge. And I think the Minister needs to  have a really good look at himself in relation to this thinking on this aspect.

GILLON: Critics have suggested that this push for a Parliamentary vote is really just  something  to wedge the National Party MPs and Liberal backbenchers. I’m  wondering if the Inquiry goes ahead as you want and if the upshot of that is  essentially a damning conclusion about the offshore processing system, what would  Labor do then? Would you actually reconsider your stance on offshore detention?  Because your policy as it stands of course does support offshore processing.

NEUMANN: Well you’ve got a number of leaps of faith across that area. Look  honestly we think the Government should do much better. So we are hopeful that the  Government will adopt Labor’s policies. If you want a bipartisan approach here, I say  to Peter Dutton, support the independent Children’s Advocate, support the Private  Member’s Bill of the Labor Party, support a Senate Inquiry. Let the sun shine in on  this issue. Treat the allegations seriously and let’s do much better. We have an  obligation as a country that has responsibility and we are funding these offshore  detention places. We have a responsibility to do much better and the Government  has failed. As for the historical aspect, many of these allegations happened last year.  Last year. You’d think the way the Government is speaking it happened 40 or 50  years ago. These people -

GILLON: What I’m trying to clarify is whether Labor is open to reconsidering your  stance on offshore detention, if you do get a result from the Parliamentary Inquiry  that you are pushing for, that tells you that there is a serious issue here; that there  are serious problems; that there are cases of abuse going on there. Is that enough to  make Labor reconsider your view on this?

NEUMANN: For a start, we want to stop people getting on those leaky boats,  engaging with criminal cartels, putting their lives at risk on the high sea. So Labor’s  position is crystal clear; we will have a strong border protection approach, we want to  protect people. But when people are in our charge, when people are in our care,  when we’re engaging in Australian taxpayers’ dollars and cents, we have an  obligation to do much, much better. Labor’s position was settled at our National  Conference. We settled Labor’s position in relation to turn-backs, offshore  processing, and regional resettlement. Yet my submission to the Minister is, get  these people processed and engage with third party options to make sure they leave  Manus and Nauru and are resettled. The Government seems to be doing nothing  across this space. And that’s the answer in this area. But while people are in the  care of Immigration and Border Protection people; while the Australian taxpayer is  paying money in relation to this; make sure we treat these vulnerable people with  respect, safety and humanity. And that’s why the Minister should support Labor’s  position in relation to a Senate Inquiry as well.

GILLON: Just finally, The Guardian has today published graphic photographs of two  refugee men being attacked on Manus Island by local men who, according to the  report and the photographs that accompany it, have been beaten with an iron bar.  The Greens are arguing the time has come to bring these people to Australia; that  they’ve been in there too long. What do you think should happen in the meantime to  protect these people, because an Inquiry - the one you’re talking about - is a  lengthy process? What needs to happen right now to stop these sorts of incidents  from occurring?

NEUMANN: Well I’d love to be asked to be the Minister because I can tell you what,  they’ve seriously, the Minister needs to engage with the Department in relation to  this. If people are at risk, they should be protected and taken away from  perpetrators. The perpetrators have committed criminal acts, they should be  prosecuted with the full extent of the law. And we need to make sure these people  are processed and resettled. And resettled in third party options. We remain  absolutely committed to making sure people are protected and it is simply not good  enough what’s happening in relation to offshore processing in this country. And I  think the Australian public is repulsed by the attitude of the Minister and by the  Government in this area. I think certainly these people need to be processed. And  while they’re in the care of Immigration and Border Protection people, whether on  onshore and offshore, people need to be treated with safety and humanity.

GILLON: Shadow Immigration Minister Shayne Neumann, we are out of time.  Appreciate you joining us on Weekend Live

NEUMANN: Good to be with you Ashleigh.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT:  MADONNA OLIVER, 0416 199 808



