

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION SHOW  AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 31 MAY 2017

SUBJECT/S: Car bomb attack in Baghdad; Additional ADF support for  Afghanistan; South China Sea; Duncan Lewis comments on refugees and  terrorism.

KIERAN GILBERT: Welcome to AM Agenda, with me now for reaction to a few of those  stories, the Shadow Defence Minister Richard Marles, first of all the sad news of a  young Melbourne girl in Baghdad visiting her sick grandfather, killed in that bomb blast.

RICHARD MARLES SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: It’s just tragic news and  highlights that this is a very dangerous part of the world. I was in Baghdad two weeks  ago today, visiting our troops there. I think it’s a reminder of how dangerous the place is  and how important is the work that our forces are doing over there in trying to make Iraq  a safer country, but your heart goes out to her family, visiting a grandfather, a sick  grandfather, to have this occur, it’s just a terrible tragedy.

GILBERT: On the related matter I guess in the region, Afghanistan the Chairman of the  Armed Services Committee in the United States, Senator McCain has been in Australia  for the last few days, he flew out last night, but at the US Studies Center he spoke of the  imminent surge of troops in Afghanistan and that Australia will be asked to contribute  more, should we?

MARLES: Well, there is an additional commitment that we have made as a result of a  NATO request and that’s supported in a bipartisan way across the board. I think what is  clear is that Australia is playing a very significant role both in Afghanistan and in Iraq;  there is no question that we are pulling our weight in the Middle East Area of Operations  and against the threat of ISIS which is now in Afghanistan -

GILBERT:  So you don’t think it’s necessarily incumbent on us to do even more?

MARLES: Well firstly there isn’t a request that’s come through, but if the general  question is, are we pulling our weight? There is no question that we are, we are doing a  lot in Afghanistan, both in terms of the number of troops we are committing, the aid that  we are committing, the financial commitment that we are making to that country, so I  don’t think there is anyone out there suggesting anything other than Australia is one of

the key players and leading players given our size. And it is important that we are there  and it is important that we are playing our part on the global stage, but it’s also  important that we are doing it in a commensurate way to the size of our defence force,  the size of our economy and I think we are doing that at the moment.

GILBERT: The other comment Senator McCain said last night was that Australia, well  one thing that we should consider is a multilateral exercise, military exercise through the  South China Sea; specifically asked should Australia follow the US lead in a freedom of  navigation exercise.  Julie Bishop was very general in her response just now, saying,  we will continue to exercise our rights and freedom of navigation both in flight and at  sea, but specifically should we engage in an exercise within twelve nautical miles of the  reclaimed Chinese territory, because that’s what we are really talking about when it  comes to freedom of navigation exercises here.

MARLES: The specifics of any Australia operation are best determined from  government, when you have all the information in front of you, but speaking in principle,  we need to be clear about what our interests are in the South China Sea, and we  definitely have interests in the South China Sea, by some reports 60 per cent of our  trade goes through the South China Sea, what that means is that our interest is  about…it is about freedom of navigation, it is about the freedom of commerce through  the South China Sea, it’s of course not about the various sovereignty disputes between  countries of the South China Sea and China itself.  We have had a very consistent  position that actions which support the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea which  underpins Australia’s commerce through the South China Sea should be supported, and  freedom of navigation -

GILBERT:  So does that mean you support the McCain idea of a military exercise, like  the PACRIM that he was talking about?

MARLES: Freedom of navigation operations are part of actions which assert the UN  Convention on the Law of the Sea and we have made our position very clear in relation  to freedom of navigation operations, why they have a purpose and the national interests  that we have which they would serve and that is the UN Convention on the Law of the  Sea -

GILBERT: But what do you think about the idea that we do it as part of a multilateral  military exercise, a much larger initiative?

MARLES: I think all those things can be considered and to be honest it is hard to  answer that question without the detail that you have in government in front of you, but I  certainly think all of those things should be considered.  I mean there’ll be reasons why  you might do it in conjunction with others, there might be reasons why we should be  acting on our own, but it’s difficult to answer those questions from opposition. But the  principle that we need to be taking action to assert the UN Convention of the Law of the  Sea is really important. And it relation to -

GILBERT: Do we need to; in the sense the Chinese are already undertaking bilateral  agreements with the likes of Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia are already doing one  on one deals with those particular countries, so why does Australia and the US have to  buy into that regional dispute?

MARLES: Well it’s not about buying into the sovereignty disputes and I’ve made that  clear, I mean our interest is not around the sovereignty disputes between those  countries and China, but our issue is in respect of freedom of navigation through the  South China Sea, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the point to be made  here is that the Court of Arbitration made it clear that the artificial islands that are being  constructed by China are in breach of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.  Now  that decision by the Court of Arbitration has meaning and it is important that we assert  our national interest which is freedom of navigation.  So our principle position here has  been clear.  I make this point though Kieran, the Government’s position has not been  clear, they have sought to chop and change in relation to this based on whatever  political point they seek to make about Labor or the domestic politics of the time. That is  a hopeless way to go about foreign policy and defence policy. I mean we need to see  our government acting above partisan politics when it comes to these issues and having  a clear and consistent view on this.

GILBERT:  Let’s talk about a couple of other issues, Duncan Lewis the ASIO Director-General has spoken on the radio this morning, given a rare interview in which he says,  has defended his comments about refugees and the fact that he doesn’t believe that  there is a link between refugees and terrorism; where there is a link he says is between  radical sect of Sunni Islam and terrorism, not specifically refugees, that we have had  tens of thousands of refugees to Australia and that vast bulk have had no link  whatsoever to this issue.  What do you make of the comments of Lewis and then the  reaction, is some of the criticism fair here?

MARLES: Duncan Lewis has called it as it is here, he is, firstly we ought to be listening  to experts like Duncan Lewis, but he is making what is absolutely apparent, clear. This  is not a question of refugees coming to Australia, people should know and take comfort  from the fact that we do rigorous security checks in relation to those coming to Australia  on the humanitarian program that’s important and it’s important to keep us safe.  But  Duncan Lewis makes the point that you look at all the refugees who have come here,  there is no heightened concern associated with people by virtue of the fact they have  come here as refugees.  Radical Islam is the driver in respect of the terrorism that we  have seen, that’s where people need to focus, we actually need to be working with the  Islamic community , I mean they are on the front line of this, a point that has been made  with ASIO previously -

GILBERT: Is the point as well that a lot of those who have either been arrested or been  found to be suspected of terror related activities where born and bred here?

MARLES: Exactly and it’s not to do with whether or not you’ve come here as a refugee  there are a whole lot of other issues at play. I think what is concerning is the reaction  that we have seen from some in the Government, I mean we know the pretty ugly  politics which goes on in relation to this issue, to refugees coming to Australia and  seeking to twist facts, and that’s what’s going on here, to demonise refugees, to put  them in the frame of this issue, I think is an absolute disgrace.  We ought to be -

GILBERT: What specifically are you talking about here?

MARLES: Well, the idea -

GILBERT: From who?

MARLES: We saw it in Senate Estimates in relation to One Nation, I think there is -

GILBERT: You said the Government.

MARLES: Well because I think there is silence on the part of the Government in relation  to this, I’d like to hear from our Immigration Minister asserting that Duncan Lewis is right  in relation to this, it would be nice to hear from him on this question. Duncan Lewis  makes a very sober, sensible point here -

GILBERT: To be fair Alex Hawke, the Assistant Minister, made a similar point  yesterday.

MARLES: So some in the Government have, it would be nice to hear from our  Immigration Minister, because he manages the refugee program, on this question and I  think it is important that Peter Dutton make clear that there is no issue in terms of  refugees coming to this country and giving rise to a heightened terrorist threat.  That in  fact his department does a very good job in providing security checks in relation to  those who come under our humanitarian program. Today is a day for Peter Dutton to  talk on this issue, but what we saw in Senate Estimates was pretty ugly politics on the  part of One Nation; it should be eschewed by all of us, including the Immigration  Minister.

GILBERT:  Richard Marles, thanks for your time, appreciate it.

MEDIA CONTACT:  SIMON FUREY 0410 532 732

