



CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR McMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC RADIO AM WITH KIM LANDERS  FRIDAY, 21 APRIL 2017

SUBJECT/S: Paris attacks; Labor’s Plan for Housing Affordability; Murray’s  Financial System Inquiry; explosion of borrowing for property by SMSFs; COAG  process for uniform vacant property tax arrangements; foreign investment in  residential real estate; citizenship; violent incident at Manus Island processing  centre.

KIM LANDERS, PRESENTER: Foreign home buyers and investors who leave  properties vacant are being targeted by Labor’s expanding housing package. On top of  the plans to curb capital gains tax concessions and negative gearing, the opposition  wants a nationally consistent tax on vacant properties, increased fees for foreign buyers  and a ban on self-managed superannuation funds from investing in property. The  Shadow Treasurer is Chris Bowen and he joins me on the line now.

Chris Bowen, good morning.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning to you Kim.

LANDERS: Before we talk about your housing ideas, what’s your early response to this  French attack?

BOWEN: Well obviously Kim I’ve listened to your reports and other reports this  morning, any attack like this is an attack on all of us. Of course we don’t know the  details. But our condolences would go to the French police, all involved in France and  we will await further advice, but of course this is a time for mature and sensible  contributions as we are waiting for all the facts.

LANDERS: Now if we can turn to your housing policy, how much are these measures  going to drive down prices?

BOWEN: Well of course what we are doing today Kim is announcing the next tranche of  our reforms. We’ve been leading the debate on housing affordability as the Government  has been stuck in its internal dysfunction and we are continuing to do that today. These  are holistic reforms which should be seen as part of our entire package and of course  we will continue to have more to say.

At the centrepiece of our housing affordability reforms are negative gearing and capital  gains tax reform. Any plan which does not involve those two things is a sham. But what  we are announcing today is a financial stability measure as well as a housing  affordability measure, dealing with the David Murray recommendation…

LANDERS: But before we talk about some of those specifics, I’m just looking for an  overall sort of indication of what effect do you think this might have on prices?

BOWEN: Well I think what it will do, is together with our other reforms, take some of the  heat out of prices going forward. That’s what it’s designed to do as well as improve  financial stability. And importantly financial stability means that those who have their  wealth tied up in housing, who are usually the least wealthy, exclusively tied up in  housing because they don’t have the opportunity to diversify their portfolio are the most  effected. And the Government’s been asleep at the wheel here. So it’s about housing  affordability, taking the heat out of future rises.

LANDERS: But you can’t give us any idea of, you don’t have any modelling of how  much heat you might take out of the market?

BOWEN: Well I mean I refer you to the modelling that’s already been done by Grattan,  by McKell and by the University of New South Wales for example on negative gearing  changes. Now measures that we are announcing today are part of a holistic reform, so  take self-managed super for example, it’s a relatively small segment of the market but  it’s been growing exponentially. It’s up 860 per cent in four and a half years, from $2.5  billion to $24 billion. It is an explosion in borrowing in self-managed super.

Now that’s not what superannuation was designed for, and in addition it is one of the  elements leading to overheating the market. I wouldn’t say it’s a major element, it’s one  of the elements. And what we are doing in these very well thought out, well calibrated  announcements that we are making, is going through and ticking the box of each factor  in the housing affordability crisis. You know since the Liberals were elected Kim, since  the Liberals were elected, house prices are up 30 per cent, and nearly 50 per cent in  Sydney. And they have made the situation worse, not just but asleep at the wheel, but  they’ve made things worse.

LANDERS: Let me just ask you about some of the specifics then, Victoria has already  announced that it’s introducing a tax on vacant properties, that’s going to be 1 per cent  of the property’s capital improved rate. How are you going to get all the states to do the  same?

BOWEN: Well what we are doing here on this particular matter, to be clear, this is a  state tax and we welcome Victoria. We think that’s a good initiative, and we think it can  play a role across the country.

And what we’ve said is other states might not have the same capacity to implement it. It  would be best done uniformly and consistently across the nation if possible. We’d  facilitate a COAG process to help achieve that if the states were interested in doing that.  It’s something that we would want to work cooperatively with the states on. To be clear  it’s not a federal tax, it’s a state tax and the revenue would continue to go to the states  as it does in Victoria. I would hope and imagine that other states and considering doing  something as one of the factors in the jigsaw puzzle of solving housing affordability. I  think it would be most efficiently done on a consistent basis across the country and so  we are offering to use the COAG process to assist in that.

In addition we are increasing the foreign investment review fees, again that  complements what many states have done and sends a price signal. You know again  foreign investment Kim, is a relatively small segment of the market but it’s going  strongly. And so these are sensible measures in light of that strong growth.

LANDERS: If I could turn to the Government’s citizenship changes, let’s run through  some of the specifics quickly. Do you agree with having to be a resident for four years  before you can apply?

BOWEN: Well Kim, can I just with due respect to your question can I please take you  back to first principles here? I mean the Government made an announcement  yesterday, they are frothing at the mouth demanding that the Labor Party responds-

LANDERS: I’m asking, for your response, the Labor Party’s response.

BOWEN: And I’m responding Kim, by saying that we will take time to look at the,  consider these proposals in some detail as you would hope and expect we would do as  the alternative government. In principle, obviously we support English language testing,  we consistently have. But we want to look at the detail, good grammar doesn’t  necessarily make a good citizenship…

LANDERS: Do you have any objection to the increased background checks and  vetting?

BOWEN: Well there are already background checks, if they are sensible, we have  always supported sensible changes. But we want to look at them Kim. With due respect  the Government could have engaged in a bipartisan process with Labor here, they  could have consulted us in advance, they could have provided the information in  advance, if they were really interested in proper bipartisanship here. What they are  actually interested in is an attempt at a wedge politics to try and lift Malcolm Turnbull’s  poll numbers. We are not going to engage in that sort of game. We will take our time for  our normal processes, seek briefings from the Government, have a look at what they

are proposing and respond in a mature way in due course. We won’t be jumping to their  timetable. I saw Malcolm Turnbull chose to announce on our behalf that we were  opposed to these changes, I’m not sure where he got that. We will take our time to look  at them carefully and deliberatively.

LANDERS: Okay final subject if I can ask you to put your former Immigration Minister’s  hat on. If I can take you to the violence on Manus Island last week. Shots were fired into  the detention centre. The Immigration Minister Peter Dutton says it may have been  sparked because three asylum seekers were alleged to be leading a local five year old  boy back towards the facility. Now PNG authorities have said that defence force  personally allegedly fired shots after a fight with asylum seekers.

So what can Labor do to get to the truth?

BOWEN: Well I think it is concerning that we have these mixed messages and  contradictory, frankly, stories. And that is the most concerning thing here. Difficult  situations do arise in offshore detention and onshore detention. The key is to be honest  about what’s happening and to be as open and transparent as possible. And  sometimes, and sometimes, it takes some time for details to emerge. And it’s  particularly important then for Ministers to only speak when they have the full facts at  their availability. Now Shayne Neumann has called for an independent inquiry here of  the full transparency. At other times we have looked at Senate processes.

But I think it’s really incumbent on Peter Dutton here to come to reveal the full facts as  openly and transparently as possible, not engage in politics but provide as much of the  unvarnished truth as is available to him at the earliest opportunity.

LANDERS: Okay Chris Bowen thank you very much for speaking to AM.

BOWEN: My great pleasure Kim.

LANDERS: That is the Shadow Treasurer, Chris Bowen.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

