

SENATOR THE HON KIM CARR

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INNOVATION, INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND  RESEARCH   SENATOR FOR VICTORIA

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2017

SUBJECTS: Advanced Manufacturing Future Fund, Energy crisis, Higher  Education, UN Human Rights Council, Newspoll.

SENATOR KIM CARR: Today I would like to talk about the Labor party’s plans to  p  rovide $1 billion advanced manufacturing fund to support Australian jobs in

manufacturing on the weekend we announced support for manufacturers.

The two biggest issues facing Australian manufacturing at the moment are the price of  energy and access to finance, the Labor party has a strong commitment to ensure  support for Australian manufactures on both those matters.  We have made the policy  clear in the week in which General Motors is shutting it’s Elizabeth plant, a decision that  has been taken, that need not have been taken,  a decision to shut down the motor  vehicle manufacturing plant is force upon this country by the stupidity of this  government when it came to office by hounding General Motors out of Australia.

We now have a situation where tens of thousands of jobs are put at risk and  many of  those supply chain companies are facing acute difficulties getting access to finance  because there is a failure of the banking systems to support Australian manufacturing.

Now on top of that we have a government not have any idea deal with the rising cost of  energy which is also placing jobs at risk and the Grocery Council of Australia today has  highlighted the risk to grocery manufactures of the dangers of increasing energy prices.

The Government talks a lot about the way in which the price of electricity has gone up in  recent years which has accelerated dramatically under this government, but fails to  point out what BlueScope pointed out just last week that the next two years  BlueScope’s energy prices will gone up 93 per cent, that’s a 93 per cent increase in  prices for BlueScope.  We are seeing the growing number of companies who are talking

about job losses as a result of the government’s failure to deal with the energy crisis in  th  is county.

Now the combination of both those factors, the energy pricing and a failure to get  access to finance is putting many, many Australian manufactures at great risk and this  is a government that has put the Chief Scientist in an untenable position.  The Chief  Scientist has been asked to come forward with a report,  a specially commissioned  report, told to come forward with the report on  the future of Australian energy  systems,  he has highlighted the fundamental failure of the market in energy in this  country he has brought forward a credible plan in terms of the clean energy target and  this government has abandoned him.



This government has essentially turned its back on  this key recommendation of the  Chief Scientist and it has left him high and dry when it comes to looking to the future.  The Chief Scientist has pointed out that under his plan energy cost will actually  decrease by $160 a year,  this government of course is in the process of completely  capitulating to Tony Abbott and the extreme right wing of the Liberal party because  it  has no plan for the future of energy prices in this country,  it has not plan for the  future of manufacturing in this country.

This is a government that is in fact hostile to manufacturing because it is not able to  deal with the problems of the country, it is not able to deal with national interest because  it is so preoccupied with dealing with its internal problems and it’s crisis of leadership  within the Liberal party itself and as a consequence the Australian people are looking in  vain for this government to provide the security that they need to protect their jobs and  protect their standards of living.



JOURNALIST: What do you anticipate will come out of the Cabinet meeting today, will  that be the end of the CET?

CARR: It is quite clear that the government is positioning itself to abandon the Chief  Scientists report. A report that they have commissioned,  a report that the Chief  Scientist has laboured on for some time, a report that has gathered support more  broadly amongst industry players , across this parliament,  a report that has failed to  attract the support of the right wing of the Liberal party.  I mean that is his major  problem.

The political fix that the Chief Scientist was asked to come up with has failed to meet  the criteria set by Tony Abbott and his friends and so the Prime Minster from the  security of Sydney Harbour he is able to talk glibly about the future of energy prices,  he’d never had to face the problem of meeting energy bills the way most Australians  have. He has never had to face the real difficulty that manufactures are facing at the  moment where their price of electricity has been up two and three times, where we are  faced by the extraordinary power of these market dominating energy generators who  are now saying to take it or leave it to our major manufactures, who are saying in turn  they are being forced off shore.

Now just as our major automotive companies are being forced off shore, we’re exporting  jobs this is a government that is not really about understanding the problems of ordinary  Australians.  So yes, what we will see today is a government that is in the process of  capitulating to Tony Abbott and his right wing mates in a bid desperately to try maintain  some sort of internal arrangements within the Liberal party the sort of arrangements that  lead the Prime Minster to get the mortgage on the Lodge which is now being extracted  in full measure by the right wing of the Liberal party.

JOURNALIST: What do you expect on the debate on higher education this week and  what will Labor’s strategy be opposing those changes?

CARR: We made it quite clear, we don’t think that ordinary Australians should have to  foot the bills that this government asking of them when it comes to higher education.

What this government is doing is trying to force people who are on ordinary average  weekly earnings to pay increasing costs of education, we are now asking people to  meet the costs of their higher education contributions. These will be cleaners; these are  people who are on part time work being obliged to meet their repayments for their  education well before their able to afford to do so. We have had a good education  system in this country; we are a world leader in education this government is in the  process of dismantling it.

Now we know the problems of privatisation, we know the problems of deregulation; we  know what the cost is to the economy. Surely this government has learnt the lessons  but I’m afraid they keep pressing on with these policies and it looks to me as if it is  unlikely that they will attract the support of the Senate for those measures which I am  very pleased to reflect upon and we will look forward to a Labor   Government having to  deal with the problems in terms of higher education system.

Just as we will have to look to a Labor Government to deal with the problem of energy  p  ricing, just as we will have to look to a Labor Government to deal with the questions of

the manufacturing sector in this country that is able to get access to finance and able to  get the support from a national government that is committed to the future of an  economy where everybody gets a fair go, an economy where people can look with  confidence to the future.

Real wages now have been pressed for some time the price of energy has been out  stripping that to some considerable degree and we know that people are not able to  meet these sorts of cost on their households.

JOURNALIST: Australia is due to be elected uncontested to the UN Human Rights  Council for the first time today, at the same time as we are being grilled on our human  right record when it come to asylum seeker policy and indigenous affairs.  Do those  areas concern you? Are there human rights concerns that might delegitimise our claim  to that seat?



CARR: I think we do have some real questions about the way in which people are being  treated in these detention centres, the conditions of confinement should never ever be  used as a mechanism as deterrents.  We have to ensure that we treat people decently  and we have full respect for human rights I’m afraid that the present Immigration  Minister - whatever you call him no matter how many uniforms he struts around with -  will not change the fact that we have international treaty obligations and we should  respect them.

JOURNALIST: At the same time what do you think it means for Australia to have a seat  on that council?

CARR: Well of course it is important for us to engage internationally, it is very important  for us to be part of an international system that does understand the importance of  human rights but it also lifts the bar for us it means that we do have to take an  increasing role in terms of making sure we are model citizens.

JOURNALIST: Just finally on the NewsPoll, can I get a comment on that?

CARR: The Prime Minister set the bar didn’t he? He said that the reason that they said  they got rid of Tony Abbott was that there had been 30 NewsPolls in a row that had  gone bad for the Abbott Administration, we are now on 21. So the Prime Minister has  set that bar himself, we are now in the very nervous twenties for the Prime Minister.

Look the polls are so bad that even The Australian don’t try to hide how difficult it is for  the government at the moment.  We have got a situation where the government is  frankly not able to sustain proper national leadership because it is preoccupied. Now no  matter how much government advertising they try to run in the week leading up to a  polling period - which is very noticeable - no matter what they try to do in terms of  manipulating the news cycle, the Australian people are making it very clear what their  attitude is,  you don’t really need a poll to determine that this is a Prime Minister that is  out of touch,  that is aloof ,  that is arrogant and clearly not able to do the job.  He is not  a very good politician,  he is not very good at his job and it is increasingly clear  the  Australian people are a wake up to him.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: THOMAS MOORHEAD 0427 126 355

