

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  WEDNESDAY, 20 DECEMBER 2017

SUBJECTS:  Wayside Chapel; Cabinet Reshuffle; Liberals’ cuts to universities.

REV GRAHAM LONG, PASTOR AND CEO WAYSIDE CHAPEL: I wanted to welcome  our good friend Tanya Plibersek. She's been a good friend to Wayside over many years.  Even down to little things like, I remember once we had a towel drive, we called it  “Throw in the towel for Wayside”. And Tanya arrived with her children with some towels  and I just think that says a lot. So we've been good friends over lots of years and we  appreciate the friendship and we welcome you to Wayside today, thank you.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Graham. I do  really want to thank Graham Long and the staff and volunteers at the Wayside Chapel  for the incredible job they do in the local community. This is a place that everybody in  Sydney feels welcome at. And one of the magnificent things about it, I've been talking to  volunteers this morning about the work they contribute to Wayside and I think the  volunteers get as much out of their contribution to Wayside as the visitors to Wayside  get from the love and care they're shown by the volunteers. And I did really want to just  come out at this time of year as Christmas approaches and remind people that,  although this is a joyous time for most people and most families in Australia, there are  always people doing it tough in Australia and at this time of year that is bought into  particularly sharp focus. Wayside and organisations like Wayside right across Australia  rely on the generosity of donors to make sure that Australians can have a decent  Christmas, that they can have a Christmas lunch and some modest presents under the  tree. So it is really a plea to Australians to remember that giving is as important as  receiving this Christmas time. This is a great opportunity to teach children to be  generous, not just to think about what they will be receiving but what they can give and  what they can do for our community. If you look around the world it’s a time of conflict,  it's also an opportunity to give generously to appeals that are supporting Rohingya  refugees feeling Myanmar into Bangladesh, continuing conflicts in Syria and Yemen,  famine in parts of Africa, there is so much need in the world and it's a very important  time of the year to remind ourselves of our great good fortune, and our opportunity to  share some of that good fortune with others.

Any questions?

JOURNALIST: Tanya, could we get your reaction first of all to the Government's  reshuffle?

PLIBERSEK: Well, this Government’s reshuffle is like everything else they do, just a  chaotic mess. And this is supposedly an opportunity for Malcolm Turnbull to reset  before the new year. And yet all we've seen is a reshuffle that doesn't promote talent,  that doesn't reward effort, that is instead a series of payoffs and paybacks depending on  who people supported in recent times politically. And that is particularly obvious in the  National Party, where Barnaby Joyce had just taken the sledge hammer to dealing with  people who didn't support his choice as deputy. Now Darren Chester he's a good guy,  there is actually no one who would think that he was not doing as good a job as anyone  else on the Coalition front bench and this nonsense that his demotion is somehow about  geography? We have Government that says that they can't deal with the gender  imbalance in their party or on their front bench, because the only principle that should  matter is merit. And now they're trying to convince Australians that what matters most is  what State you come from, whether you'll be promoted or not to the Coalition front  bench.

It's just so very disappointing that instead of focusing on the great need in Australia,  instead of thinking about the fact that 700,000 Australians are facing penalty rate cuts,  that wages growth is at historic lows, that household confidence to spend is low  because of those low wages, instead of thinking about the people who will be homeless  at Christmas, instead of doing something about the chaos of the cuts inflicted in health  and education, instead of doing something real on climate change. We now see this  report sneaked out five minutes to midnight showing that we're actually going  backwards on pollution reduction and emissions are increasing in every sector of the  economy, instead of addressing any of these critical issues we are once again talking  about Coalition internals. It is disappointing in the extreme and really, I think, lets down  our nation.

JOURNALIST: What about the new Home Affairs portfolio? Is there a potential for  abuse of power there what sort of scrutiny do you think will be needed?

PLIBERSEK: Well I wouldn't trust Peter Dutton with anything as sensitive as the sort of  powers he'll have as Home Affairs Minister. Remember this is the man who was making  hysterical accusations about Sam Dastyari being a double agent. He's now got added  responsibility that gives him really quite unprecedented rolled together set of powers  and access to our security and intelligence agencies. I think he's demonstrated that he  is not the person for this job on more than once occasion.

JOURNALIST: Could I ask you, would Labor reverse the freeze on commonwealth  university funding?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we'll fight to the very last moment to prevent these cuts because we  know the effect of these cuts. University cuts mean that students who have worked hard  this year, and struggled to get into university, done their very best, who would have  been up for the place under the existing arrangements might miss out under these new  arrangements and that will just get worse in future years. Universities are already saying  that they will have to cut courses, that they will have to cut places, that they will struggle  to address issues like the under representation of regional and rural students in our  universities, the under representations of Indigenous students in our universities. You  can judge Labor on our record. When we came to Government in 2007 we were

spending about $8 billion a year on universities. When we left government we were  spending $14 billion a year in universities. We uncapped university places because we  want every student who is prepared to work hard, who wants to get a university  education who has the brains and the sticking power to do it to be able to go to  university. Every single thing this Government has done has pushed back on that  increasing access to university, has made it harder for students to get into university.  You can judge us on our record, you can see their record in action. We open up  university education to make it more affordable and more available and the Government  closes down opportunity. It slams the door in the face of students who want to get a  university education.

JOURNALIST: So would you give a commitment that Labor would reverse that?

PLIBERSEK: Well, we go through all of our proper internal processes when we're  responding to things like the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook. But judge us on  our record. We uncapped access to university places 190,000 extra students at  university because we uncapped access to university places. We almost doubled  funding to universities during our time in Government. We introduced terrific programs  like HEPPP that reached out to students in underrepresented communities, so that we  saw an increase of about one-third in students from regional and rural backgrounds and  close to one-third increase in the number of Indigenous students going to university.  These are fantastic achievements opening up our university sector.

And this is not just good for individual students, this is really important for the future of  our nation. The best investment we can make to ensure that Australia is a successful  wealthy country, is to have a highly skilled, highly trained, highly educated workforce.  That starts from early childhood education, where we need to make sure that kids have  access to top quality care. It goes right through our schooling years this Government's  cut $17 billion from our schools and they've slammed the door on reforms that Labor  had already legislated. It goes to TAFE education where we see close to $2 billion cut  from TAFE and training, meaning we've got about 140,000 fewer apprentices and  trainees today from when Labor left office. And now this further attack on universities  that means committed hardworking young Australians will miss out on universities. And  universities are already saying that they will reduce the number of courses in things like  nursing, where we've got an emerging skills shortage because nursing is more  expensive to teach and they can't continue to offer it with these budget restrictions.

JOURNALIST: Is George Brandis the right choice to be the High Commissioner to the  UK?

PLIBERSEK: Again the appointment of George Brandis to the job in London is an effort  to fix an internal problem in the Liberal party, this is about personnel management on  the Coalition front bench. How very disappointing that instead of putting the national  interest first, we are once again dealing with the Prime Minister's political interests. I've  got nothing against George Brandis, I wish him well, for the sake of the nation I hope he  is a great success in this job. But isn't it a terrible indictment on a Government, that  instead of focusing on all of the issues that beset us as a nation they're once again  focused on managing their internals.

Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

