

SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC

ATTORNEY-GENERAL

LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE

TRANSCRIPT - Interview with Peter van Onselen - Sky News

31 May 2017

Topics: Director-General ASIO, Hizb ut-Tahrir

E&OE…………………………………………………………………………………………



PETER VAN ONSELEN: Attorney-General George Brandis, thanks for your company.  The comments from the head of ASIO, there have been some criticisms of him ruling out  refugees being party to terrorism. Can you clarify for us what he meant? Is there a need for  him to clarify?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well the Director-General, Duncan Lewis, has clarified this  morning remarks he made at Senate Estimates on Thursday night and I think it’s important to  understand what the Director General was saying. He certainly wasn’t saying that no refugees  have been involved in terrorist events in Australia, because it’s a matter of public fact that  some of the people who have been involved in terrorism were refugees. But his point was a  different point, and that is that the source of the problem is not the fact that Australia has,  takes a large number of refugees, including from the Middle Easter under various  humanitarian program. It is the fact that there are certain individuals, particularly within the  Muslim community, and particularly young men, who are susceptible to being radicalised,  and whether they may have been refugees or not is not the reason they were radicalised and  turned into terrorists.

PETER VAN ONSELEN:  I can see the distinction in the point that you’re making but can  you also understand why some people read his remarks as actually being what you’ve  clarified they are not - his remarks - I have absolutely no evidence to suggest there’s a  connection between refugees and terrorism. It’s an understandable error isn’t it that some  people would hear that and think that he’s just saying refugees haven’t been involved in  terrorism in Australia?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well I think it’s better to look at Mr Lewis’ fuller remarks in his  radio interview this morning. I mean, the remarks that’s attracted some controversy, were  brief remarks made late at night during a Senate Estimates hearing and I think it’s never wise  to interpret answers to questions in Senate Estimates after a long estimates hearing, as an  exercise in scriptural exegesis, or to parse those words within an inch of their life. But the

Director-General had a much fuller opportunity to explain both his view and the reason he  arrived at that view on the radio this morning, and he did so. And the other point I make here,  Peter, is let it not be forgotten, the Director-General is speaking not just as an intelligence  specialist himself, but on behalf of ASIO. So the specialist professional’s point of view is the  point of view that was explained by the Director-General this morning.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Do you think it’s perhaps the case that because it was an  engagement with Pauline Hanson, and we all know that she tries to put two and two together  and get five or six as an answer to that. Is it possible he was trying to ward off where he  thought she was going and that’s one of ways that his phraseology came out the way it did?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Look I don’t know and I think it’s really idle to speculate. I  mean Senator Hanson asked the sort of questions she’s accustomed to ask and are of interest  to a particular constituency. The Director-General answered those questions very briefly.  Because of the brevity of his answer he didn’t have the opportunity to explain or elaborate  upon it, but he’s done that now.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: So what would you say to those colleagues of yours, because the  reports in The Australian on the front page today are that there are some Coalition colleagues  that have been concerned about this and they would like further clarity? I know you’ve  referred to some of what has already been said by the head of ASIO just today, but what  would your answer to them be if they come to you and start expressing their concerns?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well I should say that hasn’t happened, by the way. But what I  would say to them is to look at what the Director-General said when he was afforded the  opportunity to fully explain both his professional conclusion and the reason for that  conclusion in his interview today. And I would also remind those colleagues that Australia, as  the Prime Minister has said time and again, and it’s true, Australia has the best intelligence  and law enforcement agencies in the world keeping us safe. And since September 2014, when  the National Terrorism Threat Alert Level was raised to the current level of “Probable”, there  have been four attacks by lone wolf actors, but there have been 12 attacks, 11 of them  conducted by Islamist terrorists, that have been interdicted and prevented by the authorities.  Most recently, the attack that was planned for St Pauls Cathedral in Melbourne evidently on  Christmas Eve would have been, had it been successful, had it not been interjected, the kind  of mass-casualty attack that we saw in Manchester.

PETER VAN ONSELEN: Just finally Attorney-General if I can, one final question about  Hizb ut-Tahrir, there’s been some concerns in the Coalition why it hasn’t been listed or  included formally as a terrorist organisation and can therefore be banned in this country. We  here on Sky News spoke to Sarah Henderson about that yesterday, I know she’s one of  people that’s expressed concerns. What can you tell us about that? Is there any move to do so,  what are the impediments why it hasn’t already happened?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Well in Australia we ban or proscribe, under the Criminal Code,  a large rage of terrorist organisations. That’s done by me, it’s done on advice from ASIO who  assess the conduct including the public declarations of the spokespeople for those  organisations. But the test is whether by their conduct these organisations answer the  Criminal Code’s definition of terrorism, which is defined in terms of engaging in violent acts  for a religious, political or ideological cause. Merely to, as Hizb ut-Tahrir has done, to make  scathing remarks about western civilisation, merely to make disgusting anti-Semitic remarks,

merely to talk about from an ideological or religious or cultural point of view the Islamic  faith is not of itself to engage in the advocacy of violence. Now of course we keep all  organisations, including Hizb ut-Tahrir very carefully under review. As recently as last week,  I asked the Director General to ask ASIO to refresh its advice on Hizb ut-Tahrir, but the  advice that’s came back to me, from the professionals, from the people with specialist  intelligence knowledge, is that Hizb ut-Tahrir does not meet the threshold.

And the last point I’d make Peter, is that it’s not just Australia that doesn’t ban Hizb ut-Tahrir. It’s not banned in the United States, it’s not banned in the United Kingdom. The only  European nations in which it’s banned are Russia, the Netherlands, and Germany, and in  Germany it’s banned not because it’s a terrorist organisation, but banned under the specific  German laws which prohibit anti-Semitisms or the expression of anti-Semitic beliefs. So the  Western democracies, the English-speaking democracies have not formed the view  individually or collectively, that this particular organisation, noxious though some of the  views it espouses undoubtedly are, is not a terrorist organisation.

PETER VAN ONSELEN:  Attorney-General George Brandis we appreciate you finding the  time to talk to us.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thank you, Peter.

ENDS

