



THE HON STEVEN CIOBO MP   Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment



TRANSCRIPT

CNN, QUEST MEANS BUSINESS  WEDNESDAY, 3 MAY 2017

Subjects: Trans-Pacific Partnership; FTA with the UK; Multilateral Trade Deals

E&OE….

RICHARD QUEST:  Australia's Trade Minister is already in the United States.  Steven Ciobo joins me now from Los Angeles. Minister, good to see you. Thank you  for coming in and talking to us tonight. On the trade front, I mean, you know, the  Vice President's visit to Australia recently, the US Vice President's visit, cleared up  the question of the deal over refugees and migrants. So that has been cleared up, to a  large extent. A bad deal seen by the President's point of view, but one that they will  stick by. So for you, what can be gained on the trade front?

STEVEN CIOBO: Well look, I think there's terrific opportunity still for Australia  and the United States. We're very focused on continuing to build the relationship.  We've been allies for many decades. We've got a really strong investment stock, both  Australian stock in the US as well as American stock here in Australia. So there's  terrific opportunity to keep building on that relationship, keep driving trade. For both  countries the more trade and investment we have, the more economic growth, and the  more jobs we can drive.

RICHARD QUEST:  Are you going to use this opportunity to get TPP, I was going  to say, back on the rails again, but only a fool believes that the President would ever  put it back on the rails again. Or at least try and get the President back interested in  getting some Trans-Pacific trade deal going. Or am I just whistling in the wind here?

STEVEN CIOBO: Well, I mean, look realistically we were disappointed with the  decision the US Government took to withdraw from the TPP, but it wasn't  unexpected. President Trump made it very clear that he was going to be withdrawing  from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. From Australia's national perspective we are  continuing to focus on opportunities to bring the TPP into force. We think there's a lot  of benefits for the region. We think there's a lot of benefits for the 11 countries that  remain. So I'm focused on trying to build consensus together with New Zealand,  Canada, Japan and others for it to still happen.

RICHARD QUEST:  Right, so that's - and would you try and encourage the US to  re-engage on TPP?

STEVEN CIOBO: Look, I think there's merit to do that, but as I said, I'm also very  respectful and mindful of the fact that this Administration has made their position  very clear.

RICHARD QUEST:  Need to ask you, on a different area, but you know, never miss  the opportunity when you've got a Minister in the chair. Brexit. Brexit and the UK.  Now obviously a deal with the US is larger and more significant and probably would  take precedence. Are you ready to negotiate with Britain the moment the UK is  allowed to negotiate, or are you -

STEVEN CIOBO: Absolutely

RICHARD QUEST:  Or does the UK go to the back of the line?

STEVEN CIOBO: No, no, look, absolutely we are ready to negotiate. In fact, we've  already started down the path. We've set up a working group between the Australian  government and the UK government. I've had a number of meetings with Liam Fox  the UK Secretary for Trade. As well as, the Minister Lord Price. We have had really  warm, cordial discussions, and of course there's a really strong track record there - a  historical relationship between the UK and Australia, which we want to build off

RICHARD QUEST:  On this question, this larger question, I mean we saw the Doha  Round ... I've still got the scars of the Doha Round, which went nowhere. Bilateral  trade deals, TPP is gone, TPAC probably won't happen, TTIP won't probably won't  happen. Do you think the era of the large multilateral deal has gone? It simply can't be  done?

STEVEN CIOBO: Well look, multilateral is hard. From our perspective it's still the  Holy Grail. I mean if we can get an agreement in place among many countries than  that's terrific. It's especially good for small to medium sized businesses who want to  export, because they get one common set of rules across the board. But, they are  really hard to do. In terms of my arsenal, as Australia's Trade Minister, I'll do bilateral  deals, I'll do plurilateral deals, I'll do multilateral deals. I want to get the best outcome  that we can. And Australia’s fortunate because we sit in the fastest growing region in  the planet in Asia. We've locked away three really strong and important bilateral trade  deals with China, with Korea and with Japan. I'm looking now at parlaying up on that  with a trade deal with Indonesia. You know, a very fast growing country, 250 million  people, our very near neighbour. As well as putting in place the formal  commencement of negotiations with the European Union and the UK.  So a lot  happening.

RICHARD QUEST:  If you're coming to New York to meet the President with your  Prime Minister be prepared for the gridlock tomorrow. It will be horrendous in New  York. Minister last seen heading in from the airport. Good to see you sir. Thank you.

[ENDS]

