





THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  THE PROJECT  31 JANUARY 2017

SUBJECT: Malcolm Turnbull’s failure to respond to President Trump’s  Executive Order on immigration

WALEED ALY: Malcolm Turnbull and the relevant ministers declined to appear on  the show tonight. We are joined now by Shadow Defence Minister Richard Marles.  Richard, do you agree that speaking out would jeopardise the freedom of the  refugees involved in this settlement deal?

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Look, I would be  astounded if anyone is putting it in terms of there being some kind of deal that  Australia needs to be silent in order for the Trump Administration to pick up on the  refugee resettlement deal.

The fact of the matter is it's a good thing that America is following through on that  and the Trump Administration is doing it, but at the same time it's really important  that Australia speaks to its values and that we hear that from our own Prime Minister.  I don't think it would be putting people in jeopardy at all.

In fact, I think there is a whole lot of Australians, as I said earlier, who want to hear  from their Government today, from their Prime Minister, about what his views are in  respect of a decision which really is deserving of strong criticism.

ALY: You seem very certain it wouldn't put the deal in jeopardy. I mean, we are  talking about a very unpredictable president in the early days of the presidency. Do  you accept there is at least a serious risk that, if the Government had spoken out,  that that deal would be off the table?

MARLES: No, I don't accept that at all.

ALY: On what basis do you say that there is no serious risk, given the factors?

MARLES: I cannot imagine a conversation between the US and Australia where it's  put to Australia "You need to be quiet in order for us to go through with this deal".

ALY: No, but it wouldn't be a conversation. It would just be a calculation the  government makes. They would have had a conversation with Donald Trump who  says "You know what, I will honour the thing", and then Australia would, in the  aftermath, say "This is a very rocky boat, let's not rock it".

MARLES: The American Government had committed to the resettlement  arrangement. It would have been a huge call for the Trump Administration to go in a  different direction.

I think there are a whole lot of reasons why the Trump Administration want to follow  through on the decision that President Obama made in relation to the refugees on  Manus and Nauru. I think whether or not Australia spoke up in respect of this would  have made no difference whatsoever.

I mean, Waleed, I hesitate to say it knowing that your authority on this issue is  obviously much greater than mine, but I would have thought Muslim Australians  would want to know that their Prime Minister has something to say at a moment  when decisions are being made which fuel Islamophobia.

CARRIE BICKMORE: So why is it do you think Malcolm is being silent on the issue,  Richard?

MARLES: I think we have a Prime Minister who is insipid and weak, who struggles  to say what it is that he's about, and who, to be frank, struggles to speak from the  heart about what makes him tick and why he's in this job. I think this is just another  example of it but this is a moment for criticism, and it's really critical that Australia  gives it.

BICKMORE: But Richard, is it easy to be critical and easy speak out when you are  in the position you are in versus the position Malcolm is in? If the Nauru deal had  fallen over, if Australians were denied entry into the US, I'm sure you guys would  have had something very strong to say about it and Malcolm probably never would  have heard the end of it?

MARLES: I don't for a moment suggest it is easy for the Government or easy for  anyone in these circumstances, but I know this: President Trump is playing from a  different play book. Because he's doing things in a different way, he's throwing up  circumstances that we haven't seen or had to deal with before. It's, therefore, I think  important that we do follow through with what we believe and this is a moment where  you need to have the courage to actually come out and say what's important.

BICKMORE: Richard, we appreciate your time tonight, thank you.

MARLES: It's a pleasure.



MEDIA CONTACT: SIMON FUREY - 0415032732



