

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC MELBOURNE MORNINGS WITH JON FAINE  TUESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2017

SUBJECT/S: Trump Administration, US resettlement deal, pregnant asylum  seeker

JON FAINE: Shayne Neumann is the Shadow Minister for Immigration and Border  Protection in the Federal Opposition.  Mr Neumann, good morning to you.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning to you Jon and good morning to all your listeners.

FAINE: There’s a certain hypocrisy, is there not from both the Labor and Liberal Party  with people criticising what’s happening in the America.  Our own draconian efforts in  relation to immigration and asylum seekers and refugees are really pretty much  equivalent aren’t they?

NEUMANN: I wouldn’t accept that criticism Jon.  I think maintaining strong borders is  critical, but protecting our citizens is not achieved through divisive or discriminatory  practices and what we’ve seen by President Trump is, I think, appalling and has  resulted in criticism, not just in the United States from leading Republican Senators  such as Lindsay Graham and John McCain but around the world from governments in  Europe and elsewhere.

FAINE: Do we not have to respect the fact that the American constitution provides a  process for electing their president and that has resulted in this man being elected to  carry out the policies that he promised to carry out; and this is but one of them.

NEUMANN: Of course we respect the America political system and we respect our own  and that around the world in other democracies; but we’ve had a non-discriminatory  immigration policy for more than four decades and I think it has made Australia a  stronger a better place; a more multicultural and diverse place.  What we’re seeing at  the beginning of the Trump Presidency is very troubling signs.  We think, and it’s been  interpreted by many people, that the ban on people is based very much on country or  religion and we think that’s appalling.

FAINE: It can’t be based on religion if indeed some of the most populist Islamic  countries in the world, including Indonesia next to us are not included.  There’s clearly  any number of countries that are predominately Muslim where people are not banned.

NEUMANN: And that’s so.  There are a number of countries mentioned, Indonesia and  Saudi Arabia, but this is quite extraordinary the way they have gone about it.  We think  this is clearly evident by these comments in the campaign and it’s been backed up by  the actions they have taken now.

FAINE: So if the Labor Party was in power, would Australia be criticising our close  friend and ally the United States, because that would be unprecedented too in  diplomatic terms.

NEUMANN: Well we’ve criticised the United States.  We’ve departed from them in  certain wars, Vietnam, Iraq and we’ve also been prepared…

FAINE: Iraq? We were part of the invasion.

NEUMANN: We’ve been critical of what they’ve done in relation to conduct in the  Middle East and well and we’ve departed company on numerous occasions when Labor  were in Government and Opposition.  The United States relationship with Australia has  survived Presidents and Prime Ministers Labor, Liberal, Republican and Democrat  Administrations since John Curtin took our eyes towards the United States in the dark  days of World War II.  Labor believes the United States is a great friend; it’s a pillar of  our foreign policy in the Labor Party; our engagement with the United Nations, our  engagement with the Asia Pacific region and also a strong alliance with the United  States.  Good friends can say they disagree respectfully at times and we respectfully  disagree with the United States across this space; particularly President Trump’s recent  immigration bans.

FAINE: Yesterday we were asking President Trump to honour an agreement his  predecessor Obama had set.  An agreement with Australia over transferring people  from Manus and Nauru, we can hardly the very next day after President Trump says yes  I’ll honour that agreement, turn around and give him a bit of a clip behind the ears, can  we?  We’re indebted to him for that and there it stands.

NEUMANN: We appreciate the United States undertaking this.  We support third party  resettlement of refugees from Manus and Nauru and appreciate the Trump  Administration for honouring that agreement that was achieved by the Turnbull  Government with the Obama Administration and we want to see that agreement go  ahead.  We want to make sure that agreement doesn’t discriminate based on race,  religion, country of origin…

FAINE: In which case you keep your head down and you don’t kick the President who  has just agreed to comply with it, do you?

NEUMANN: You can respectfully disagree Jon.  We are grownups; we can disagree  with Governments from time to time.  It’s not a matter of school-yard analogies.  I really  think as a country the United States is a great friend and ally of ours, but we don’t  always agree with every administration and every policy and neither do the American

people and you can see the events that have happened at airports and other places in  the demonstrations around the United States.

FAINE: Just before I let you do, do you have a view on whether or not the Government  are right to maintain a ban on a pregnant woman on Manus Island coming to  Australia.  Does the Labor Party depart from the Government despite your differences  on some policy positions; you’ve been staunch supporters of some aspects of the  offshoring and outsourcing of asylum seekers and refugees.

NEUMANN: We do agree with turn backs when it’s safe to do so.  We agree with  offshore processing and regional resettlement.  We’ve got to make sure people who are  in Australia’s care are treated with dignity and respect and get the help and treatment  that they do…

FAINE: Should this woman be allowed to come to Australia?

NEUMANN: Well depending on the medical advice that’s done, there are people who  come to Australia from Manus and Nauru to get the kind of help they need from medical  places like BITA and MITA and other places like that around the country.  If it’s required  to get health treatment in the country then of course it’s possible for that to  happen.  We’ve done that on numerous occasions in the past and the Turnbull and  Abbott Administrations have done that.  I’ve met people who have come to Australia for  health treatment at places like the Royal Brisbane Hospital from Manus and  Nauru.  This has happened in the past but I would look at what the doctors say in  relation to this and for the medical treatment and take the advice of the health  specialists who are looking after this woman; not necessarily make a decision on the  basis of politics, but make a decision based on what’s necessary in terms of her health  and the health of the child that she’s carrying.

FAINE: Thank you for your time this morning.  Shayne Neumann is the Shadow  Minister from the Federal Labor Opposition. He’s the representative on Immigration and  Border Protection.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529

