

THE HON. LINDA BURNEY MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON

E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   KARVELAS, SKY NEWS   SUNDAY, 27 AUGUST 2017

SUBJECTS: INCOME SUPPORT FOR ASYLUM SEEKERS; DRUG TESTING  INCOME SUPPORT RECIPIENTS; CAPTAIN COOK STATUE

PATRICIA KARVELAS: My next guest is the Opposition Human Services  Spokeswoman Linda Burney, and I know she’s been listening in. Linda welcome.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES: Good afternoon,  Patricia.

KARVELAS:  We’re actually in the evening Linda. The day is over but the Government  will cut income and accommodation support for up to 100 asylum seekers, we’ve heard,  to be transferred to Australia from offshore detention for medical reasons. What is  Labor’s position here? The Greens want to find a way to stop this in the Senate. Would  Labor join them?

BURNEY: Well, this is one of the cruellest thing I have seen any government do in this  country. The idea that there are asylum seekers in Australia seeking medical attention,  to be told that tomorrow you’ll lose any of your benefits and you’ve got three weeks to  get out of your house, and by the way you’re allowed to work now. I mean it is just  atrocious, that the Government is pursuing this. And for me it’s a distraction. They just  want to get all their troubles off the front page and they are going around picking on the  most vulnerable and this is just an example.

Shayne Newman our spokesperson put out a statement today reflecting how disgusted  we are in this measure, also reflecting on the fact that the Government will not allow  these people to be part of the US asylum placement and questioning why that is the  case.

KARVELAS: So will you help the Greens in trying to stop it or is it just about  positioning? Will you actually do what you can to make sure this does not happen?

BURNEY: I know it just broke today and it’s very unclear to me whether or not it  requires legislative reform. And clearly Labor will discuss it when we return to  Parliament next week. But I can say that the indications that I have, and my personal  view is, that this is just one of the lowest things this government has done so far.

KARVELAS: On the drug trials, the Prime Minister has just spoken and said he is not  sure if it will get anyone off drugs, but that it is worth trying. Now, I know you’ll probably  mock that but before you do, doesn’t he have a point that you do need to try different  things to try and shift people out of this situation?

BURNEY: Patricia, this requires a medical response. A punitive approach in pursuing  people on welfare, that may or may not have a drug issue, is not the way to deal with  this particular point. There is not one additional cent in the health budget for any of the  trial sites to provide more support for addiction, more beds for people that need them.  There is not one single medical expert, addiction expert or community group that the  government can point to, to say this is a good idea.

In fact, the head of the AMA, Mr Gannon was in Canberra last week at the Press Club  urging the government, pleading with the government, to review this, to not pursue it. To  say that it is going to have negative outcomes. We have listened to the experts and  Labor, as you know, has opposed this, this particular exercise.

The overseas experience, we’ve had a good look at it. It will not go anywhere near what  the Prime Minister wishes it to, and that is of course getting people off drugs. It will not  do that.

KARVELAS: (I’d) just like to move to the big issue - the New South Wales Police.  have launched an investigation after the statues of colonial figures, including Captain  Cook were vandalised. The PM’s post, I want you to respond to if you can. He says  calls to replace or modify the statues of these colonisers, including explorer Captain  James Cook, were like a Stalinist rewrite of history. Is he right? Is it a Stalinist rewrite  history?

BURNEY: No, that is once again a Prime Minister that has completely lost his way. I  have spent most of my working life, as you know Patricia, in the education space  working on curriculum; working on these particular issues. My view is that the statue  should remain. We reject absolutely the graffiti and the damage to both Macquarie and  the Cook statues. But the plaques are inaccurate. They are historically inaccurate and I  would argue strongly that the plaques need updating to tell the truth. And that’s all we  are talking about here. (I’m) not sure why there is such excitement around the fact that  we are a nation that is moving towards being much better at telling the truth. And part of  that truth is certainly not that Captain Cook discovered Australia.

KARVELAS: So you would like to change those plaques. Do you think it needs to  happen in more than just this case?

BURNEY: I’d like to change those particular plaques and I think that it would be useful  for local councils in particular, to have a look around their local area, to see whether or  not those historical inaccuracies are perpetrated anywhere else.



But the other point that I had been making Patricia, over the last couple of weeks on  this, and the New South Wales Labor Party moved it in their Shadow Cabinet just  recently, is the establishment or the creation of a new public holiday or a replacement  public holiday to celebrate Aboriginal Australia; to celebrate the incredible history that  we all share.

I’ve also made a strong argument that it would be useful I think, and very appropriate  that much of the historical massacres and things that happened to Aboriginal People  which were really awful, including my own people, they need commemorating and  marking much better than what they are.

They’ve got one massacre site in New South Wales at Mile Creek and I think that is  about the only one. They are wonderful places of healing and there needs to be more of  that invested in this country.

KARVELAS: The Prime Minister actually in his post - and I’m sure you read it, it was a  long Facebook post, and I urge people to read it. It was interesting. Other than the  Stalinist grab and I did go with that. There was a lot more to it - He did acknowledge the  difficult past in Australia and in Australia, there were people here for 65,000 years. But  he says to change the plaque is kind of, to basically change that point in time in history  -  Do you concede that? Do you think it that statues and even their plaques are about  that moment?

BURNEY: Well I was driving through Wiradjuri Country, which is my country of course,  and went over a bridge and the creek that ran under that bridge Patricia was called  Murdering Island or Murdering Creak. That was where Wiradjuri People were rounded  up and driven up river, forced onto an island and massacred on the island.

Those names are all over this country and I do not ever recall anyone saying to me, well  how do you feel when you see those sorts of names? Black Gins Leap for example is  just a disgusting name. And I do think it is important that we have a discussion about  those names remaining, to remind us of the history and if the Prime Minister, and I do  not doubt him at all, believes that that plaque should stay at in situ and not be changed,  that’s his view.

But there needs to be another plaque saying that there is another point of view. There is  another historical reality that needs reflecting. Whichever way you do it there does need  to be the notion of truth and truth telling done much better in this country that we’ve  done in the past.

KARVELAS: Just a quick answer on this, the Northern Territory Chief Minister, in the  Northern Territory, has spoken today. He wants to change the way Australia Day is  celebrated to acknowledge the frontier trauma passed from generation to generation.  He makes other comments as well. Do you support that? A change in the way that  Australia Day is actually celebrated?

BURNEY: Look, I actually think that it’s a really important point that you are making, and  the question that you are asking.  What I have noticed Patricia, over the last 10 years or

so, is that Australia Day official events are much more cognisant of Aboriginal People.  Most events begin with a Welcome to Country. In the Parliament of New South Wales,  for example, in both chambers the Aboriginal flag is permanently displayed. You go to  schools and you will see Aboriginal flag flying in most schools.

But the importance of Australia Day to many needs to be respected, and it also needs to  be understood that it is not a unifying day. And there needs to be a much better  recognition on Australia Day by all people of the fact that that it has not been a great  day for Aboriginal People.

KARVELAS: Linda Burney, thank you so much for your time tonight.

END

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222

