

THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC INSIDERS   SUNDAY, 23 JULY 2017

SUBJECTS: Tackling inequality: a Labor mission; tax reform; asylum seekers;  four year, fixed terms.

BARRIE CASSIDY: Bill Shorten, thanks for coming in.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, Barrie.

CASSIDY: So the Prime Minister says that the economy is recovering and  recovering strongly. Do you agree with that?

SHORTEN: I don't think that most Australians think that they're doing very well at the  moment. I'm not talking about Government, I'm talking about how Australians see their  own lives. I hear what they're saying and I agree that they're hurting. The most common  sentence I get from people is they say that the price of everything is going up, except  of course, their wages and people want to see a government who is acting for them. I  think that people think that this Government has stopped working for them, and what  they ask me as the head of the Labor Party is do we get it? Do we understand what's  happening in the lives of people and are we willing to do something about it?

CASSIDY: The other point that the Prime Minister made there is, where are your  policies that boost jobs and investment and at the same time you want to boost wages?

SHORTEN: Well, I think we've ripped up the rule book as an Opposition by not being a  small target. We've already made it clear that we think that one of the biggest problems  in this country is a massive loss of confidence. And at the heart of this loss of  confidence by many Australians, is a sense that inequality is increasing and  that fairness is going out the back door.

CASSIDY: We'll get to the inequality, but what boosts jobs and investments?  Your policies - from your policy, what really does boost jobs?

SHORTEN: Confidence is what boosts economic activity and what boosts confidence,  for example, is making sure that whenever we spend money, we spend it  on infrastructure, which is job creating. Not by handing away big, unsustainable  corporate tax cuts to large profitable companies who will just put them into bank  accounts and take them as profits.

CASSIDY: When you talk about inequality what's the problem here, is it flat wages, is it  the high cost of energy, housing?

SHORTEN: All of the above Barrie, but let's go to jobs. The reality is that nearly a  third of Australians are in casual employment. They could be dismissed at a minute's  notice. We see growth, which is happening, but it is not generating new jobs. With  the technological revolution that we're living in, the gig-economy, we're seeing lots of  jobs replaced by very few. And inequality isn't just a problem for young people. We keep  telling our young people that if they go to university and they study in nursing  or engineering or teaching, there will be a full time job at the end of it. But the reality is  that the full time jobs are not what the promise is. And as I said, it's not just young  people. Older Australians, people in their 50s and 60s, go to job interview after job  interview and get the knocks backs. Women aren't paid the same as men and if you  look at the regions they are getting a second class NBN.

I mean if you want an example of inequality and how this country is not working for  people, we're contorting ourselves about having a plebiscite on marriage equality when  the LBGTI community say why do we have to have a separate law making process for  us. There is too much inequality, we are an energy rich country yet our energy prices  are going up. We're telling people we've got to act on climate change yet this  Government can't even agree on the science of climate change.

CASSIDY: You spent a bit of time though in your speech the other day on inequality  and it's about the tax structure. Now that's a real challenge because it is one thing to  raise it as an issue, it's another to fix it.

SHORTEN: Well, first of all you've got to agree that it is an issue and we do have a two-class tax system. For most Australians, you know we're now heading towards the end of  July, many of them will have filled in their tax returns you know, they'll claim a couple of  vanilla deductions. Maybe a salary sacrifice motor vehicle if they're lucky, maybe some  work costs. But then there is another tax system where if you have enough money, you  can basically choose to opt out of many of the taxes.

Now Labor is already tackling this. We defied the critics and we've now said that we  want to reform negative gearing and capital gains tax concessions. In the my Budget  Reply, I said it's a joke that people can claim limitless amounts for paying their  accountants for providing advice on how to deduct tax - it's a double dip. So why should  someone be able to claim $1 million for the cost of going to their accountants because  their accountants managed to make them pay no tax at all.

CASSIDY: You have talked about negative gearing, capital gains tax, you've mentioned  you'd restore the Budget Repair Levy but what else? Where else can you go in the  tax area?

SHORTEN: Well there are areas we can go but I just want to go to that point that  you said about the Budget Deficit Repair Levy. We've taken a different approach  already on the Budget. We think this is exactly the wrong time to give a tax cut to  millionaires. I mean if you earn $1 million in this next 12 months, courtesy of the  government you will get a $16,400 tax reduction, yet this Government want to increase  the taxes, income taxes through the form of a Medicare levy by half a per cent on  people who earn $60,000.

CASSIDY: You're the one increasing the tax because you're taking the top threshold to  49 per cent because of the Budget Repair Levy.

SHORTEN: We want to keep the Budget Deficit Levy on because there is still a  budget deficit, but we're the only party who are opposing increasing taxes for 800 million  Australians. It is a matter of deciding what your economic plan is. This is a government  whose only economic recipe is to give more help to the people who are already at the  front of the queue, who are already very well off. I'm going to take a different attitude,  my party is taking a different attitude. We want to help and put the emphasis on middle  class, working class salary earners, wage and salary earners and small businesses.  People who are not at the front of the queue.

CASSIDY: But I invited you to talk about initiatives beyond those that we've already  mentioned and you haven't come up with any.

SHORTEN: Well, let's be very clear here, we are very close to announcing some  further initiatives.

CASSIDY: Around what area?

SHORTEN: The tax system.

CASSIDY: Yes, but what area of the tax system?

SHORTEN: Well Barrie, I'm going to check our detail and the devil is always in the  detail, but watch this space. Very soon we're going to make further tax  reform announcements. But what I'm also prepared to say here, is that we as a party  are doing the hard work to try and create one tax system for all. The fact of the matter is  that people want a change of attitude from their government. They want a government  who is acting in the interests of people, not just themselves.

CASSIDY: Until you come up with the details, it's just words and in the meantime, Scott  Morrison yesterday talked about Labor introducing death duties and inheritance taxes,  those kinds of things.

SHORTEN: Oh well, we'll put Scott out of his misery soon, we'll announce further  policies. But let's be straight here, when in your time of surveying politics have you seen

in the last you know, 10 to 15 years, people actually putting policies out well ahead of  an election? But what I'm doing, as my whole party is in fact doing, is we're saying that  the challenge in the Australian economy is to get the government working for the  people. We've got to rebuild confidence, at heart of confidence is dealing with inequality  and a lot of people don't think that they're getting a square go. Look at the wages  system, most Australians haven't had a wage rise for two or three years.

CASSIDY: What about family trusts? Now this is the system where profits can be  shared around the family to minimise taxes in effect, what do you think about the  principle of family trusts?

SHORTEN: Well, trusts as a legal protection, I think sound but I've made it very clear  that I do have a principle which says that we should have one tax system for all.

CASSIDY: So you can make changes around family trusts?

SHORTEN: Well no we're not going to announce our policies on this very, very good  show Barrie. But I will just remind people that when it comes to tax reform, I mean I'm  not even bothering in this interview to talk about the other side of politics,  they're consumed by themselves. What I want to do is do what Australians want from  both sides of politics. What is it that we're going to do for them. And I've made it clear, I  want to put the dream of being able to afford to buy your first home back within reach of  working and middle class Australians. I want to see us have a bipartisan approach on  the problems of climate change and energy prices. The single greatest driver of  energy prices in this country going up and up and up is a lack of national policy  certainty, and yet the government is still struggling over the Chief Scientist report.

CASSIDY: Reading your speech, it does seem to be a total rejection of trickle-down  economics, market driven economics and it's heavy on intervention, government  intervention.

SHORTEN: Well, the Government's basic economic policy for the people is that they're  going to give an unaffordable tax cut to large companies which will explode the national  debt. They've decided that the best thing they can do is give a tax cut to millionaires, at  the same time they are cheering the cutting of penalty rates. They want to increase the  taxes on people who earn $40,000, $50,000, $60,000, $70,000 a year. Their policies  are all about looking after people who are already doing very well. I'm interested in  everyone else and what people want is a change of attitude. This Government is not  going to change its attitude so my message is that if they change the government, we  will make sure that we stand up for these people.

CASSIDY: Do you resent the wealthy?

SHORTEN: No.

CASSIDY: Because, it just seems here that you're tracking Jeremy Corbyn, Bernie  Sanders, or both of them?

SHORTEN: No, I've made clear in my speech, which you've quoted from already, that I  respect wealth. It is good that people make money in this country, but they're not the  reason why I get out of bed every morning. The people I want to help are the people for  whom the link between hard work and reward seems to be fraying.

CASSIDY: But are you impressed by Jeremy Corbyn and Bernie Sanders? Are  you influenced by them?

SHORTEN: I'm not influenced by them. I am influenced by the hundreds of thousands  of conversations from people I've met since I've become leader of the Labor Party.  What people tell me in the supermarkets, at my Town Hall meetings, in work places is  that they're hurting, they're doing it tough. They're having to dip into the savings just to  make ends meet. Wages are flat-lining, penalty rates are getting cut, energy prices are  out of control and they worry about whether or not they're going to hand on a better  standard of living to their kids. The fact of the matter is that the most likely predictor of  whether or not you're going to be able to afford to buy a house at the moment is do you  have rich parents. That isn't good enough is it, that's not the deal which we promise our  kids, that's not the deal we promise Australians for working hard.

CASSIDY: Kevin Rudd was back in the news this week and he once said of asylum  seekers on Manus Island and Nauru that they would never, ever be resettled in  Australia. Now he says they should have been resettled in Australia or New Zealand  three years ago. Which one is the Labor policy?

SHORTEN: Well we've made it clear that we're not going to see the people smugglers  back in business.

CASSIDY: Never, ever?

SHORTEN: We don't want these people smugglers back in -

CASSIDY: Is your policy that they would never, ever return to Australia?

SHORTEN: Let me explain our policy. That is part of it, yes, just to go to the  short answer but the longer explanation is this. 1,200 people that we know of drowned  at sea. I don't ever want to see that happen again. This is not a matter - and the  Government would love us to -

CASSIDY: And that was under Labor's watch.

SHORTEN: Well the Liberals could have helped with the Malaysia Solution, that would  have I suspect,  prevented some of those deaths, let's call it as it is. But let's be really  straight, the Government want to say that Labor wants to see the people  smugglers back. We absolutely don't. I think it's shameful that Dutton and the rest of the  crew are trying to encourage the people smugglers by saying that Labor wants to see  them back in business. We don't.

But what I do respect is the legitimate concerns, not just of former Prime Minister Rudd,  but a lot of people, that this Government has been so derelict that there's still a lot

of people in these facilities in what is now seemingly indefinite detention. I for one, want  to see this Government succeed in its arrangements with the United States, and I would  like to see them do more to tie up arrangements with other nations. There's got to be a  way that we defeat the people smugglers, avoid the terrible deaths at sea without  keeping people in indefinite detention.

CASSIDY: There are reports already, there are moves a foot within the Labor Party to  tackle this at the National Conference and that they'll want a softening of that "never,  ever" policy.

SHORTEN: Well, I know the Labor Party as least as well as anyone else and I respect  the concern that people have about indefinite detention. But I also know that people  never, ever want to see people drown at sea in the manner in which happened  courtesy of the criminal syndicates and people smugglers.

CASSIDY: When do you think that the next election will be, and what are you preparing  for?

SHORTEN: I don't know when the next election will be, I actually - that's up to Mr  Turnbull and his team. What we're preparing for is to have policies which speak to the  lives of middle and working class wage and salary earners and the small businesses.  I've said that we wanted tax reform, infrastructure, we want to make sure that we've got  an energy policy which puts downward pressure on prices and of course, we want to  make sure that we have the best education system.

CASSIDY: But you see, there's no certainty around elections either and every state  now, Queensland has now signed up beyond the next election. Every state in Australia  now has four year terms.

SHORTEN: Yes, I think that you make a good point and a lot of people do raise this  with me. The federal political system seems out of whack in that everything is so short-term. The average life of a Federal Government is two and a half years it’s not even  three years. I for one, would be happy to see four year terms. I believe that if -

CASSIDY: Are you prepared to put it out there as a referendum proposal?

SHORTEN: Well, let me put it out there on this show then. We need both Labor and  Liberal to cooperate on four year terms. If Labor just said we wanted four year terms,  it would fail. But I think that it is not about Labor or Liberal, I think it's about the nation. I  think that the nation needs four year terms. Governments can be more daring and more  determined if they're not constantly thinking about the next election. If Prime Ministers of  the day don't have the tempting trigger to pull that if they have an improvement in the  short-term position, they race to the polls.

What this country needs is long-term policy making, over the cycle of polls and two and  a half year cycles. Now, I'm saying that I would be prepared, and it is Labor policy to  have four year terms, to say that before the next election, why couldn't the government  of the day, Mr Turnbull and whoever is in charge, and myself, agree that whoever wins

the next election, that together, we would have an agreed change to the Constitution  which we would put to the Australian people of four year terms.

CASSIDY: Now you know the problem with this in the past though is that four year  terms in the House of Representatives means an eight year Senate. That's always been  the sticking point.

SHORTEN: Well, I think that there's two steps. If the Liberals would agree with the  proposition which Labor has for four year terms, if they'd agree that is the target, then  let's work out how we deal with that Senate question. It shouldn't be a deal killer in my  opinion, but what I'm saying is that before the next election, when we're not sure  who's going to win or lose, but what is more important is that we want to have long-term  policy, certainty builds confidence. Perhaps both sides of politics could sign up to  a commitment to jointly  support, regardless of who is in charge after the next election,  four year terms in the Constitution. That's that sort of certainty which I think people  are looking for. You know, we opened up with that discussion about what's Labor's  policy. We want to put confidence back into the system, we want people to think that  the government is working for them. That's why we think that tackling inequality is  fundamental. But a measure such as four year terms, well that also adds certainty,  confidence it just - people can get on with making decisions.

CASSIDY: Thank you for your time this morning. Appreciate it.

SHORTEN: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

