



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC 891 BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2017

Subjects: US Secretary of State Confirmation; Visit to the US with  Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security; US refugee  resettlement deal; War On Terror.



MATT ABRAHAM: Penny Wong we are learning this morning on our news that  Donald Trump’s nominee Rex Tillerson has been confirmed by the US Senate as  Secretary of State. Do you welcome that appointment?

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: I  absolutely welcome the confirmation. Ensuring that key positions are filled - and  obviously Secretary of State is one of the most important positions in the  Administration - is important for stability and important to ensure that the  Administration can operate effectively. Yes, we do welcome the confirmation and we  look forward to the Government and the Opposition working with Secretary Tillerson.

ABRAHAM:  Senator Ben Cardin, the Foreign Relation’s Committee’s top Democrat  said he feared Mr Tillerson would be a ‘yes man’ and he would not be able to  prevent Mr Trump from pursing a misguided foreign policy that leads the country “on  a march of folly”. Is there any substance in those fears?

WONG: Obviously domestic politics here is pretty, what’s the word?

ABRAHAM: Fraught?

WONG: That’s a good word. Domestic politics in the US is obviously, there’s a fair  amount of argy bargy at the moment, which you would expect in the US system, as it  goes through this process of confirmation of various individuals after what was a  hard fought election. But ultimately, we, as Australia, will work with whomever is  confirmed and I think it is a good thing, at this point in time, particularly as there is a  lot of change, for there to be a confirmation in a key position.



ABRAHAM: You are over there as part of a Parliamentary intelligence committee?

WONG: Yes, the Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, meeting with both  elected people as well as agencies.

ABRAHAM: So, the FBI, the CIA?

WONG: Correct

ABRAHAM: Are they in a state of sort of suspended animation? Or is that the  impression you get but behind the scenes when you meet these people is it just  carry on as normal?

WONG: There’s obviously a lot of change in place at the moment with the change in  the Administration. And of course the American system has a lot more changeover  than the Australian system. We have a public service which is essentially apolitical.  You might get some change at the top, but not much, whereas in the American  system a lot more of what we would regard as the public service changes over at the  top levels. So, you do get a lot more change upon a change of President and  particularly a change of party.

ABRAHAM: I wouldn’t think you would see that with FBI operatives though would  you?

WONG: No, but there is obviously a change in direction and a change at the top. But  in the interim these positions are filled and things continue to proceed operationally  in terms of intelligence and security matters.

ABRAHAM: I was going to say they’re not guns for hire, but in a way they are I  suppose.

Senator Wong, we are getting on our news last night conflicting signals about the  status of the deal to transfer refugees who are trying to get to Australia, who are on  Nauru, to the US, and whether that would survive the first few weeks of the Trump  Administration. We’re told on one hand that yes, it is all go, but there have been  concerns that no, it is uncertain. Do you regard that deal as locked in?

WONG: No, I don’t think you can say that on the basis of what has been said  publicly. What we did see was a reporter asked Mr Spicer, the President’s Press  Secretary a question about the agreement, was given a particular answer which  suggested the agreement was proceeding. But then, and this was all reported, an  ABC reporter was contacted by another White House spokesperson to suggest that  there was some doubt about whether the deal would proceed.

Now I understand that the Prime Minister made some comments at the Press Club  yesterday saying that he had been given an assurance. Certainly we have some  contrary messages coming out of the Administration here today. I do think that the  Government does needs to clarify what the actual position is.

ABRAHAM: So, you’re in Washington and you’re saying there are contrasting  messages still?

WONG: Certainly I haven’t seen anything today which resolves the double message  that was given late yesterday when you saw one message being given by the press  secretary and then the ABC reporter told something different. Now, it may be that’s  been clarified but I haven’t seen that reported publicly.

ABRAHAM: This is being seen as a bit of a favour to Australia. Do you think that’s  almost small cheese, is it not, compared to the millions of dollars and the lives and  the troops we committed to fight with America in the War On Terror?

WONG: We fight with America in the Middle East and across the globe, in terms of  our co-operation against terrorists because they are a threat to Australians and their  security. We don’t do it because they are going to do us favours and that shouldn’t  be how we think about it.

In terms of this agreement, we want the agreement to proceed. It’s taken a very long  time and it is disappointing that we have such little detail from the Government about  what is going to happen under this agreement and I’d certainly encourage the  Government to be more up front with Australians about what will actually happen.

ABRAHAM: Senator Wong, thank you for talking to us from Washington.

WONG: It’s good to be with you, have a good day.

[ENDS]

THURSDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2017

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

