



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health  Minister for Sport



MEDIA RELEASE



11 July 2017



Reclink national program a winner for Australia’s disadvantaged

The Turnbull Government is supporting Reclink’s national program which breaks down the barriers  of isolation and inactivity among disadvantaged Australians to promote fitness, fun and social  skills.

Our investment of $2 million over two years will support Reclink Australia to reach out to some of  our most disadvantaged Australians and engage them in new sport and recreation programs.

Reclink Australia was created 25 years ago with the goal of enhancing the lives of people  experiencing disadvantage, including those with disability, drug and alcohol issues, homelessness  or mental illness.

The not-for-profit organisation has partnered with more than 300 community organisations  nationwide to develop sport and recreation programs that help people to come together and engage  with others, develop core social skills and improve their general health and wellbeing.

Some of Reclink Australia’s previous activities include a 14 team AFL series across Victoria, a  touch football series across South East Queensland involving 20 teams, and a learn to swim  program in Tasmania for Afghan refugees.

Reclink Australia has a proven track record of excellent social outcomes, with some participants  going on to take part in mainstream sports and arts programs, take up study or look for work.

The Turnbull Government’s funding contribution will be used for the Reclink National Program,  which provides team-based and individual sport and recreational programs to disadvantaged people  aged between 16 and 65 years, and at-risk youth.

The program includes wrap-around case management and access to other support services for  people who need it, with an extra helping hand for those who want to go on to study or search for a  job.

It will be delivered across 25 metropolitan and regional locations around Australia, providing  opportunities for social engagement for up to 3000 people.

It’s an innovative approach that can change people’s lives, and the Turnbull Government is proud to  support an initiative that will deliver better health and social inclusion.

(ENDS)

