

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY  MEMBER FOR ISAACS

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS RADIO  TUESDAY, 15 AUGUST 2017

SUBJECT/S: Citizenship

SANDY ALOISI, PRESENTER: Mark Dreyfus welcome to the program.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thank you for having me.

ALOISI: Can I begin by asking - where were you born?

DREYFUS: I was born in Perth.

ALOISI: And where were your parents born?

DREYFUS: My parents were born in Melbourne - my mother - and my father in  Germany. He arrived as a stateless person, as a refugee from Nazi Germany in  1939. And he’s a naturalised Australian.

ALOISI: So there’s no question mark hanging over the fact that you might be a dual  citizen?

DREYFUS: None.

ALOISI: What about the Prime Minister saying that five Labor MPs should have their  citizenship status challenged?

DREYFUS: This is just throwing dust into the eyes of those who can plainly see that  the coalition has a problem here. Labor is very, very satisfied Sandy in the rigour of  our processes. We have a questionnaire for candidates, we interview candidates,  and we take the necessary steps when we discover there might be an issue with  dual citizenship. And it was extraordinary to hear Christopher Pyne yesterday  inventing, and the coalition has been trying to do this for a while now, just inventing  problems where there are in fact no problems.



ALOISI: Is there documentation to prove that these five MPs are in fact not dual  citizens?

DREYFUS: Yes.

ALOISI: Well why do you not release it then?

DREYFUS: Because nothing has been said other than, “your father was born in such  and such a place, or your mother was born in such and such a place”. We have  taken all the necessary steps. It’s nonsense for the coalition to seek to divert  attention from the problem, the self-inflicted problem that has now been discovered  for the Deputy Prime Minister, who should absolutely stand aside from cabinet just  as Senator Canavan was made to stand aside. And he shouldn’t be voting in the  Parliament. The government has referred its own Deputy Prime Minister to the High  Court of Australia.

ALOISI: But Mr Dreyfus wouldn’t it shut down the nonsense, as you’ve described it,  just by releasing the documentation that would shut the door on it immediately?

DREYFUS: If the coalition’s got some point, it should make it. It hasn’t, so that’s the  end of the matter. That’s why our national secretary put out a statement yesterday,  to make it as clear as we possibly can - Labor is very confident in the rigour of the  processes that we have used for many, many years now to make sure that everyone  who stands for the Australian Labor Party, for the Federal Parliament, is qualified to  do so.

ALOISI: I suppose the question that arises in many minds might be that Barnaby  Joyce was confident as well before the revelations yesterday.

DREYFUS: Well, you’ve got some questions there about Barnaby Joyce. Did he  simply turn a blind eye? He knew that his father had been born in Dunedin, New  Zealand. Did he not care about his eligibility to stand for the Federal Parliament?  He’s certainly used the Prime Minister’s description of the Greens party Senators  being very, very careless. And that’s just not good enough.

ALOISI: He may have been simply unaware given that I think he just last month said  “no no, I can’t be a dual citizen because of descent”.

DREYFUS: Well he also said that he needed to apply and he hadn’t applied. Well  that at the very least shows gross negligence on his part in not inquiring into his own  citizenship status. It’s not as if this question hasn’t come up before. It came up in the  case of Sykes and Cleary, some 20 years ago. The High Court looked very closely at  this provision then. Because there was a question about the eligibility of not one but  two of the candidates for election in that seat, the seat of Wills in Melbourne. And the  law has been really clear on this ever since. You’ve got to take reasonable steps to  make sure that you are not a citizen of another country. This has been part of our  constitution since we became a nation in 1901. And why it is that someone as senior  as the Deputy Prime Minister has simply failed to check his own citizenship status is  a question only he can answer. But on the law as it stands at the moment, he didn’t

take the reasonable steps and was on the law - as the High Court has explained it  up until now - ineligible to be in the Australian Parliament.

ALOISI: Mark Dreyfus you say the Labor Party has rigorous procedures which  ensures there are no dual citizens in the Parliament. Are Labor MPs re-checking  their status to make sure that’s the case?

DREYFUS: I can’t speak for individual MPs, but I can speak for the very vigorous  process that Labor uses before people are even permitted to run for office. And it  involves asking them where they were born, where their parents were born, where  their grandparents were born. And then if anything is thrown up by those questions,  we check. We get lawyers to check and we go through the necessary processes to  make sure that every candidate is eligible and not disqualified by Section 44(i) of the  Constitution.

ALOISI: Mark Dreyfus thank you for speaking with us.

DREYFUS: Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOANNA HEATH 0427 915 633

