



The Hon Michael Keenan MP  Minister for Justice

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Counter Terrorism

MEDIA RELEASE

April 26 2017

Combating global terrorism with Lebanon

Today marks the beginning of a two day visit to Lebanon to further enhance the cooperation  between our nations on issues of national security, law enforcement and community safety.

During the visit, I will be meeting with ministerial, governmental and law enforcement  counterparts to discuss a range of shared interests, particularly continued cooperation to  combat global terrorism.

Recent world terror attacks have reinforced the importance of continuing to work closely  with our international partners in the face of shared threats and challenges.

It is through strong cooperation in the areas of anti-money laundering, counter terrorism  financing, transnational crime and international crime cooperation that we can continue to  tackle this challenge.

Australia and Lebanon are united as members of the Global Coalition Against ISIS, which  continues to have significant success in defeating the terrorist group - they are losing  territory, finances and fighters.

I will also visit the Dalhamyeh 027 Informal Settlement to see first-hand the plight of those  displaced by the ongoing conflict in Syria, which has resulted in one of the largest  humanitarian responses in the world.

Australia is playing its part; we have now issued visas to 12,000 Syrian and Iraqi refugees  and are providing $433 million in response to the Syria crisis, including $85 million to  Lebanon.

This funding is supporting humanitarian assistance, protection services and access to  education; and improving livelihoods for displaced Syrians and their host communities in  Lebanon.

Australia recognises the complexity of supporting large numbers of people displaced by  conflict in Iraq and Syria and applauds the humanitarian assistance Lebanon is providing.

Australia and Lebanon have a longstanding relationship on defence, law enforcement and  counter-terrorism.

I look forward to strengthening these ties with the government and people of Lebanon, and to  advancing our mutual goal of building a harmonious and safe global community.

Media contacts: Danielle McKay 0438 390 273 or Shannen Wilkinson 0476 820 816

