



SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW  RN DRIVE WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS

THURSDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2017

SUBJECT/S: US refugee resettlement deal



PATRICIA KARVELAS: Shayne Neumann welcome to the program.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good to be with you again Patricia.

KARVELAS: Malcom Turnbull says the Embassy in Canberra has confirmed that the  refugee deal with the US is in place, but Donald Trump has tweeted that he will study  this dumb deal.  That is a direct quote, which introduces an element of doubt.  What  does Labor make of that tweet by the President of the United States?

NEUMANN: Let me start by saying that Labor support this deal going ahead.  It is  time that Malcolm Turnbull stood up, and I think levelled with the Australian public  about whether he’s got a deal or not.  I think Australians deserve to know what’s  going on.

KARVELAS: Australians have read the tweet no doubt, that the President has  tweeted out.  What do you make of that tweet?  I mean, what more can Malcolm  Turnbull possibly do when we have a United States President who is tweeting how  he feels about the deal and we’re getting sometimes conflicting information from  officials.

NEUMANN: We’re getting conflicting information also from the Australian  Government Patricia.  I mean it was only a few days ago Malcolm Turnbull and Peter  Dutton were saying that Donald Trump and his Administration will honour the  refugee resettlement arrangement or deal that was done with President Obama’s  Administration.  Now we’re seeing the White House say something different.  The  version don’t match; either you’ve got a deal and the particulars and details about

that deal or you have no deal at all.  I think the Australian public deserve the Prime  Minister to be levelling with us about his conversation with Donald Trump. We  shouldn’t have to hear it from the President of the United States, or a tweet from him  or the Washington Post.  We should be hear it from the Australian Government and  the Prime Minister should be telling us what’s happening.

KARVELAS: That would be a breach of protocol. Presidents talk, Prime Ministers  talk, they don’t talk about every element of the conversation.  Do you agree it would  be a breach of protocol?  Where’s the precedent for a Prime Minister to come out  and to detail that kind of information out of a phone call.

NEUMANN: There’s plenty of Prime Ministers and President who talk about  conversations they have that are productive, frank, open and they give details of  what the outcome was.  The Prime Minister gave details of the outcome of the  conversation he had with President Trump that in fact they would honour this  agreement and within a day or two we’ve seen the President of the United States  say something very different.  So what’s actually happening?  Do we have a deal or  not?  We want these people off Manus and Nauru.  If indeed there is no deal, what  other third party arrangements is the Government of Australia pursuing.

KARVELAS: What could a Labor Government do in this situation differently?  We  know Donald Trump is volatile, he’s tweeted in a way that I haven’t seen a US  President tweet about our nation in my lifetime and twitter didn’t exist before my  lifetime, so its really unprecedented territory. His twitter account is no ones but his  own, so what would you do differently?  What would Malcolm Turnbull do differently  in this situation that’s different to what he’s done?

NEUMANN: Well be transparent and upfront about what is going on.  I mean you  can’t have one version coming out of the White House at about 10:00am this  morning saying President Trump is considering the deal, saying the deal is on and  then the President saying something different.  I mean, if we’ve got an arrangement,  let the Prime Minister of Australia be upfront and level with the Australian public  about what’s actually happening here.  I mean you ask what Labor would do  differently, I think we would be more transparent, accountable, upfront and honest   about what’s happening and I don’t think the Prime Minister of Australia has been,  and has he mislead the Australian public about what is doing on.

KARVELAS: Would Bill Shorten be able to do a better job?  Especially given the  previous comments he’s made about Donald Trump.

NEUMANN: I think Bill Shorten will be more upfront, honest and transparent about  these arrangements.

KARVELAS: Can I just ask for clarity though, you talk about transparency, upfront,  but how would that deliver the deal that you’re seeking?

NEUMANN: I think we need to be upfront and honest with the Australian public.  You  need to take the Australian people into the confidence.  What this Government has  failed to do, I think, in the three and a half years they have been in power is deliver  these people from Manus Island and Nauru to a third country.  They haven’t done it.

It took until the dying days of the Obama Administration for them to do an  arrangement in relation to that.  They did it with fanfare, you remember that Patricia.   We had flags, we had battleship pictures behind.  We had people in uniforms  announcing this was going ahead.  Since that time, they did all that, they’ve had this  conversation with the President of the United States, they have been dealing with the  Trump Administration in transition, and they have been dealing with the Trump  Administration in Government.  They have failed to be upfront and honest with us,  the Government of Australia in relation to dual nationals and exemptions in relation  to those seven countries.  They said they had a special arrangement, now we know  there is no special arrangement.  Now we see the fiasco and the incompetency of  the Turnbull Government on issue after issue.  So you ask what Labor would do, I  think we would be upfront and more honest with the Australian public about what’s  going on here…

KARVELAS: But that wouldn’t change the outcome, would it?

NEUMANN: We would be dealing with the Trump Administration of course, any  Government where it be Labor or Liberal would be dealing with whoever is the  President of the United States, but you’ve got to be fair dinkum with the public and  let them know what’s going on.  That’s our main criticism of what’s going on with the  Turnbull Government at the moment.

KARVELAS: To be frank here, Labor need this deal to happen as much as a  Coalition does.  Labor’s border protection policies contributed to what we’ve seen,  the buildup of asylum seekers.  Australia now has a bi-partisan approach.  You built  and support these off shore detention centres, so is this the time to be working in a  bipartisan fashion with the Government?

NEUMANN: We do support the Government in a bipartisan arrangement and we  want the deal to go ahead.  We absolutely supported it from the day the Prime  Minister and Minister for Immigration and Border Protection announced it.  Labor has  consistently supported the Government in its efforts in relation to this. We have be  critical at times about the lack of transparency and accountability and openness  about what’s going on.  But we have supported it consistently and we want this deal  and arrangement to continue.  But we have been critical of the Government in their  administration of immigration and border protection and it’s not just us; there are a  number of Auditor General Reports recently, the RAND Corporation an independent  report also criticized the administration of the department of immigration by the  Prime Minister and current Minister for Immigration.  So we have been prepared to  do it as a constructive opposition.  That’s our role to offer constructive criticism.  We  do support offshore processing, regional resettlement and turn backs when it’s safe  to do so.  You’re right Patricia, there is a degree of bipartisanship and you’re right  that Labor wants this deal to persist.

KARVELAS: But you can’t on one hand criticize the Prime Minister who is obviously  dealing with a President, which I would argue Labor would struggle to deal with as  well.  Unprecedented stuff here, tweeting comments that I’ve never seen made about  our nation before and about a deal made with our nation.  Given all of that, it looks  like Labor is playing some politics on this issue.

NEUMANN: I think Labor is being a constructive opposition in relation to this, that’s  our role.  We do offer bipartisan support in this issues of national security.  We have,  as we’ve outlined today our agreement with the Government in a whole range of  areas.  But we are critical, our role in Opposition is to call the Government to account  where we think the Prime Minister of the country and the Immigration Minister had  failed and where they are not being upfront; where they may have misled the public,  where they haven’t been transparent and honest with the public, it’s our job as the  Opposition to pull them up.

KARVELAS: Can I just pick you up on that, where do you say the Prime Minister  has mislead the public?

NEUMANN: He said he had a special arrangement with the President of the United  States and that he would honour that.

KARVELAS: The President has even in his tweets said he’s studying the deal, he  hasn’t said he’s abandoning the deal yet.

NEUMANN: Well that’s not what the Prime Minister of Australia has said.

KARVELAS: It’s be confirmed by the State Department and the Embassy, we’ve  heard Sean Spicer the White House Press Secretary officially confirm it in a press  conference.

NEUMANN: We’ve also seen Washington Post press reports, we’ve also seen the  tweet of the President of the United States so what we need to know and establish  with the Prime Minister of Australia and his Immigration Minister is where the  situation is up to exactly from Australia’s point of view, they have said one thing and  it looks like the White House has been saying another.  The President has been very  critical clearly of what is going on and what has been requested by the Australian  Government.  Let the Prime Minister of Australia be upfront and honest with the  Australian public and level in regards to what is happening.

KARVELAS: Shayne Neumann, thanks for your time.

NEUMANN: It’s good to be with you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529

