

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC 774 MELBOURNE - ABC MORNINGS, ALICIA LOXLEY FILLING IN FOR JON  FAINE  MONDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2017

SUBJECT/S: New Zealand refugee resettlement offer, Manus Island closure,  Turnbull’s failure to negotiate third country resettlement options, Turnbull  Government’s citizenship crisis.

ALICIA LOXLEY: Alicia Loxley sitting in the chair for Jon Faine. This morning now the  Manus Island standoff has entered day six today and you may have seen yesterday the  PM reiterated his stance against a deal with New Zealand to take 150 refugees. It was a  deal was first offered of course to Julia Gillard when she was Prime Minister and Labor  has opposed it until now. But Bill Shorten said at the weekend that he would support  looking at it. Joining me now on the line is Shayne Neumann, who is Federal Opposition  Immigration spokesperson, Shayne Neumann thanks for your time.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Good morning to you and good morning to all of your listeners.

LOXLEY: You would support the consideration of such a deal with New Zealand?

NEUMANN: Yes and we have been saying that for a considerable period of time. I’ve  done lots of interviews that said that Labor would consider this. We’ve been saying this  for quite some time and so has Bill Shorten.

LOXLEY: So what’s changed your mind?

NEUMANN: Well we’ve taken the view that  these people need to get off Manus and  Nauru and the Government in their fifth year has taken what were to be regional  processing centres and created them into places of indefinite detention. We thank the  New Zealand Government for their generous offer. Julia Gillard did, back in February  2013, come to an agreement with then New Zealand Prime Minister John Key that New  Zealand would take 150 of the people in offshore processing or indeed people that are  coming here by boat but that was scotched by Tony Abbott when he got into power.  We’ve been saying for a considerable period of time that the Turnbull Government  should not just put all their eggs in one basket with the US resettlement arrangement

but also should be considering New Zealand and sitting down with the New Zealand  Government to work out the terms and conditions.

LOXLEY: This is your party’s doing, however, it’s a result of you border protection  policy. Is it not just opportunistic to take a softer approach now?

NEUMANN: Well we set up these RPCs in the last days of the Rudd and Gillard  Governments. The Government has been in power for over four years; they’re now in  their fifth year. They should take responsibility for the education system, the health  system, infrastructure spending, the economy; they should also take responsibility for  what’s been happening in offshore processing and their woeful incompetence in failing  to secure third country arrangements. The Government’s got to take responsibility and  step up and this is an absence of leadership and a failure by both the Prime Minister  and his Minister for Immigration.

LOXLEY: It’s a deal for 150 people - what would your plan be for the remaining men on  Manus Island?

NEUMANN: The Americans have offered up to 1250. The New Zealand Government  has offered 150. We don’t know the precise numbers; they change from time to time.  Some people have gone back to their country of origin; other people have resettled in  PNG - we know that there’s a few dozen that have done that. We don’t know the  precise numbers but the Government should be looking at other third country  arrangements. They should have been negotiating that. If they can negotiate that with  the US they certainly, with the offer on the table, pick it up from New Zealand and  looking at other third country arrangements.

LOXLEY: The vetting is taking a long time with the US however. I think there has only  been 54 people settled so far out of that agreed 1250. That could take years it appears  on the way it’s currently going.

NEUMANN: We thank the American Government and Labor supports the US refugee  resettlement arrangement. The Government should be calling on the Americans to  expedite these arrangements to de-escalate the tension there. They should be  guaranteeing with the PNG Government the security of services, security of persons,  health services and also the necessities of life. We know from Senate Estimates that the  Australian Government’s going to spend $150 million to $250 million in the next year in  relation to what’s happening on Manus Island. They should be being transparent and  accountable to the Australian public and provide those guarantees not just to the PNG  Government but also to those people on Manus Island RPC.

LOXLEY: Are you worried about the safety of those men on Manus Island currently?

NEUMANN: We’ve got skin in the game there and we’ve got a moral obligation. We  should be working with the PNG authorities to de-escalate the tension there and to  guarantee essential services of life, health, security, welfare services. We’ve got an  obligation, a moral obligation, in relation to this issue and they should be working with  the PNG authorities.

LOXLEY: Let’s talk about the citizenship debacle and we saw reports at the weekend  that secret audits are being done already by each of the parties. How confident are you  in Labor’s vetting process under the scrutiny of a public audit?

NEUMANN: I’ve been a candidate for the Labor Party since 2004 and I know what we  go through to vet. It’s seems like a burdensome, onerous thing at the time but I’m very  glad we go through it. I am very confident that the Labor MPs and Senators have gone  through a really, rigorous process. What the Prime Minister needs to do is lead, I think,  in these circumstances in what I call a “citizenship crisis”. Government MPs clearly  knew what was happening with the President of the Senate. We can’t take the Prime  Minister at his word; he told us that the High Court would hold all these people not be  dual-nationals. I think the Prime Minister really needs to accept Labor’s proposal for a  universal disclosure in Parliament or he should refer MPs in doubt - including for  example Alex Hawke, Julia Banks, Josh Frydenberg, whoever - to the High Court for  judicial determination.

LOXLEY: He’s got a point though doesn’t he that really at the end of the day it is only  the High Court that can determine this, so therefore a way that an audit would be  conducted, it’s difficult to see how it would not be a political process?

NEUMANN: Well everything in Parliament is political process. We want a process  where all members can make the necessary disclosures to ensure to the Parliament  their eligibility. But he’s right at this level, it’s ultimately, in the country like ours with a  constitution, the High Court that makes these determinations but we’re not wedded to  the specifics of this. We are prepared to sit down with the Government to resolve this  issue. We want a bipartisan approach in relation to the implementation of this proposal,  but what I know, what I really know, as a local MP that the people are sick of this and  they are blaming Malcolm Turnbull, rightly, so for this crisis.

LOXLEY: The Greens have proposed a model for an audit. Have you had a look at that  and what do you think of that?

NEUMANN: We’re not going to take any advice from the Greens who have lost two of  their Senators by their own failure to undertake proper vetting process. I don’t think the  Greens have got any credibility on this process at all. We’ve got a proposal on the table,  we should be considering it, the Prime Minister should look at our idea of universal  disclosure to Parliament.

LOXLEY: Shayne Neumann thanks for your time.

NEUMANN: Good to talk to you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110

