



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  5AA BREAKFAST WITH DAVID PENBERTHY AND WILL GOODINGS

FRIDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2017

Subjects: Donald Trump phone call with Malcolm Turnbull; Visit to the US with Parliamentary  Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security; US refugee resettlement deal; US Alliance.



DAVID PENBERTHY: South Australian Labor Senator Penny Wong is now the Shadow Minister for  Foreign Affairs. She is in the US at the moment and has had what you would call a front row seat for  the most spectacular flare up in the relationship between Australia and the US since the Whitlam and  Nixon era.

Senator Wong is on the line now, Penny, good morning, thanks so much for your time.

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: Good morning, good  to be worth you.

PENBERTHY: What impact do you think this stink between Malcolm Turnbull and Donald Trump has  had on the relationship between the US and Australia?

WONG: I think there are two issues and it’s important we keep them separate. One issue is the  politics of the day and the personal relationship between two politicians. But the second is our  relationship with the United States, our alliance with the United States and that aspect is obviously  bigger than any individual and bigger than any occupant of either of the leadership positions of both  countries. It’s an Alliance that is key to our security, it’s been key to Australia’s foreign policy for  decades and that will continue.

We’ve obviously got a pretty difficult situation currently in terms of some of the media reporting and it  is disappointing if the reports are true, but ultimately I think we do have to remember that we have  very strong relationships with the United States that go back over many years and encompass many  institutions.   I’ve just been at the CIA, we’ve met with the FBI, we’ve met with people at the Pentagon and I can  say to you at all of those institutional levels our relationships are deep and trusted.

PENBERTHY: Do you think in hindsight Malcolm Turnbull might have made a mistake strategically in  placing so much store on an agreement he had struck with Barrack Obama right at the very tail end of  Barack Obama’s Presidency, particularly when the content of that arrangement was probably always  something you would see was going to offend someone with the political views of Donald Trump?



WONG: You’d certainly think that the change of Administration did require the Government to think  carefully about how to handle it. I want to make clear Labor obviously wants the resettlement  arrangement with the United States to succeed, it’s very important. I think there are questions about  the Prime Minister’s judgement about how he’s handled this, whether his actions have made this  agreement a more difficult agreement to keep in place.

It seems very odd that the Prime Minister made the comments he made on Monday suggesting that  the deal was secure in light of what has subsequently become, if it’s true, what has subsequently  been reported.

PENBERTHY: What does Labor think though of this idea of extreme vetting? We get a lot of calls to  this show saying if you can’t guarantee that absolutely every single one of the people who is going to  be transferred from Manus Island to the US is not going to pose some sort of security risk down the  track maybe Donald Trump’s hard line approach is actually a better one on community safety  grounds.

WONG: I don’t think there’s anybody from any side of politics who doesn’t suggest we should properly  and thoroughly assess the security risks associated with all of those individuals and in fact any  individual coming into our country. I don’t think that’s the issue. I think the issue is whether or not an  arrangement that was put in place will be honoured and whether or not Malcolm Turnbull has handled  this appropriately. If the reports are correct what he said on Monday would seem to be at odds  certainly with what the reports are today and that does go to questions of judgement.

WILL GOODINGS: So none of the events since Donald Trump’s Inauguration change your position  on the Australian US Alliance? The withdrawing from the Trans Pacific Partnership, the frayed or  terse conversation with Malcolm Turnbull, the reneging on the Barrack Obama deal - none of this  gives you pause to think more broadly about the nature of that relationship?

WONG:  I wrote a piece in the week after Mr Trump was elected and I made two points. The first was  that the Alliance is bigger than any particular individual, but the second was that given what Mr Trump  had said about a range of foreign policy positions we were going to have to ensure we stood up for  Australian values and Australian interests as an Alliance partner and I think we’ve seen the need to  do that. We’ve seen the need to say we are a friend and ally but on these issues we may not agree.   So, I don’t have a view that because we may not agree with something an individual says that that  has an impact upon the Alliance, I think the Alliance is bigger than all of the individuals who are in the  positions that people hold currently. But I think what it does mean is we have to think very carefully  about how we stand up for Australia’s interests in this relationship.   We’ve been a very good ally and partner of America for many years and that will continue and that  does mean we can say what we believe to be correct even if at times it may not the be same as the  position of a particular President or Administration.

PENBERTHY:  Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, South Australian Senator Penny Wong in  Washington DC, thank you very much for joining us on 5AA Breakfast.

WONG: Great to be with you both.

ENDS

FRIDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2017

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573



