

THE HON MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY  MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 4 JULY 2017

SUBJECT/S: Climate Wars, power prices, energy crisis, SA bank tax.

FRAN KELLY: In his new book, Climate Wars, the Labor spokesperson for Climate  Change and Energy, Mark Butler, argues Australia remains disconnected from the  dawning gravity of the social, economic, and environmental threats of climate change.  Mark Butler welcome back to breakfast.

MARK BUTLER MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY,  MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE: Good morning Fran.

KELLY: The highest electricity price in the world, in your home state of South Australia,  a direct result of state Labor policies according to Steven Marshall. These are policies  that you support aren’t they?

BUTLER: Well one commentator has said that they would be the highest power prices  in the world; I know the State Government challenges that so I’m not really sure that  that assumption is correct. There is no question that electricity prices around the country  are skyrocketing because of a paralysis in policy.

South Australia has always had much higher prices than the rest of the country and if  anything over the last decade, analysis shows that the gap between the South  Australian average price, and the national average, has actually shrunk. The biggest  increases over the past decade have shown to be in the three big eastern states.

But there is no question that households across the country, including in my state of  South Australia, and businesses, are doing it incredibly tough on power. It’s actually  threatening the viability of a range of businesses across the country.

KELLY: I’ll come back to power and the thesis in your book, but could I just say, in your  home state of South Australia, where the row has shifted to the Premier’s bank levy,  announced in the Budget last week. You supported the Federal bank tax; do you  support Jay Weatherill’s bank tax?

BUTLER: Well that I think is a matter now for the state governments to consider what  revenue measures they might take to reflect the Federal tax. The important thing to be  clear about this is, Jay Weatherill and before him frankly Mike Baird, the New South  Wales Liberal Premier; had been very up front about trying to take a constructive  approach to dealing with a drop off in revenue after the mining boom. Jay said very  clearly that his view was banks and the financial services industry was significantly  under taxed, a very highly profitable part of the economy was really shielded from the  GST. He talked about putting a GST on financial services that would deliver additional  revenue to the Commonwealth, but also a revenue stream for states and territories that  actually have to fund all of our schools, hospitals, roads and police.

Now when Malcolm Turnbull backed away from that debate, Jay was upfront about the  fact that states and territories would have to take their own measures, and that is what  he has done in this year’s Budget. I can’t imagine why the Liberal Party has backed the  big banks on this and we are still no wiser about what revenue measures Mr Marshall  would put in place to ensure that South Australian hospitals and schools were funded  properly. But it does show how difficult it is to put in serious revenue reform if one major  party is willing to take the sort of action Mr Marshall has taken, the sort of action Tony  Abbott took when we tried to put in place a super profits tax on the mining industry.

KELLY: Okay, let’s shift to your book in fact, Climate Wars, and the energy debate  which this country is meshed in at the moment. In your book you argue only the Labor  Party, the party of big national reform is your claim, has the plan or the will to deliver the  bold action that is required on climate policy. But without political consensus an effective  national response will fail, won’t it? That is also really part of your thesis, as you track  through it.

BUTLER: Absolutely, without political consensus you can’t get the big investment  decisions that are needed to shift to a low-carbon economy. I talk in my book about the  United Kingdom experience. There is very few democracies in the world that are going  through the turmoil that the UK is experiencing right now. Particularly, as a result of the  Brexit vote. But all through that turmoil the climate and energy policies that have been  put in place on a bipartisan basis now for a decade have stayed solid. They’ve got a  very significant ambition to reduce carbon pollution, they are maintaining a strong  industrial base, and they are achieving huge cuts in their carbon pollution and big  growth in low-carbon jobs. So it can be done. Someone has just got to take on that loud  minority that is so clear in the Liberal Party, particularly lead for 10 years by Tony  Abbott, and in some quarters of the media.

KELLY: Well you’re highly critical of the Greens for siding with Tony Abbott in 2009 in  dumping Kevin Rudd’s original Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the CPRS. Labor  has a chance now to deliver consensus and support a Clean Energy Target, if the  Government does indeed adopt a Clean Energy Target. Will Labor support it?

BUTLER: We have said we would. We have said that it is not our first preference, and  frankly it wasn’t the first preference of pretty much every business group in the country  either. But all of us, business groups, and the Federal Opposition, the Labor Party, has  said that in the interest of finally getting some consensus and delivering some relief on  energy prices and energy security for business and households, we’d put aside the  clear election policy we took last year to the people and talk about a Clean Energy  Target.

The question really is, whether the Prime Minister and the Energy Minister, Josh  Frydenberg, are going to get the authority of the Coalition Party Room, even to begin  those negotiations. Frankly, Tony Abbott’s behaviour over the last week, and particularly  their hysterical response to the Finkel recommendation, I think means that there is a bit  of a way to go in the Coalition Party Room.

KELLY: Should we shift how we operate, should we have something like a climate  cabinet, above and beyond politics? Have you thought about that?

BUTLER: The UK has got I think a very sensible system where they set five yearly  carbon budgets based on recommendations from a climate change committee that  operates a bit like the Climate Change Authority that we put in place when we were in  government, and Tony Abbott tried time and time again to abolish. I think it is important  to get some expert, objective advice about these things that are able to look beyond the  horizon and day to day political skirmish. That is what they have been able to do in  Britain, it was only really a couple of weeks after the Brexit vote and the turmoil that that  lead to, that the fifth carbon budget in the UK was quite quietly endorsed. It is a very  ambitious budget for reducing carbon pollution there, endorsed by both parties in the  Parliament, at a time of really quite unprecedented political turmoil. Those are the sorts  of things we need to look at.

KELLY: Your assessment of likely climate impacts this century is very bleak. It is based  on what the scientists are saying, I’m not saying you are over egging it. In this country at  the moment the debate is all around our power bills, it is not about rising sea levels, or  more bushfires, or more hot days, or climate refugees. Is that a problem as you see it, in  our understanding of climate change?

BUTLER: It is a problem. Obviously people are concerned about power prices and  security, that is effecting their daily life, it is really putting pressure on households and  as I said on the viability of businesses. But really, the problem with prices and security  flows from our paralysis in climate change policy. That is the irony of Tony Abbott’s  position over the last 10 years, a position adopted by Malcolm Turnbull. Jeopardising  good climate policy actually created this energy crisis because investors don’t know  what the long-term future rules are going to be. They all know that there is going to be a  low-carbon future transition plan put in place, it is going to involve a price on carbon,  effectively in the electricity sector. But while we continue to fight the climate wars, there  is a paralysis in investment. So that is the irony of the position that Tony Abbott and the  right-wing media has created for Australia.

KELLY: Mark Butler thank you very much for joining us.

BUTLER: Thanks Fran.

KELLY: Mark Butler is the Shadow Minister for Climate Change and Energy. His book  is called Climate Wars, it is published by Melbourne University Press and in it he really  tracks the climate change politics and policy in Australia from the 90s until now.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO - 0408 803 428



