



THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PYNE & MARLES  SKY NEWS LIVE  FRIDAY, 21 JULY 2017

SUBJECTS: Asylum seekers; Talisman Sabre; home affairs portfolio; Greens  candidate pre-selection; economy

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: Good afternoon and welcome to Pyne & Marles here on Sky  News Live. It’s Friday, 21 July, I’m Christopher Pyne and I’m here in Adelaide and my  colleague is Richard Marles and he is in Melbourne today. Good afternoon Richard.  You’ve had an exciting week at Talisman Sabre in Queensland, but you’ve flown back  into a storm as Kevin Rudd emerges from the political grave to put again on the agenda  Labor’s division over offshore processing, and unfortunately this morning Anthony  Albanese backed Kevin Rudd and said that you only had a 12 months offshore  processing policy and that after that everyone was coming to Australia, so you of course  have been the spokesman, you’re the man in the hot seat, how are you going to deal  with this breakout of division?

RICHARD MARLES: Well, I know you love to put words into your opponents’ mouths.  That’s actually not what Anthony Albanese said at all this morning. I think he made the  point that the original regional resettlement arrangement went for 12 months, and there  was a review after that, which is exactly right and the reason for that, Christopher, is  that it was expected by everyone that during that period of time people would be  resettled either in PNG or in third countries, or at least the vast bulk of those people, but  the fact of the matter is from the moment that you were elected you dropped the ball on  the whole question of resettlement.

Anthony didn’t for a moment suggest that people were coming back to Australia. What  happened back in July of 2013 was that Australia was taken off the table and that  remains the very clear position of the Labor Party today, so not so much of a storm.

But you’re right I had a great time at Talisman Sabre, you saw an impressive array or  our military hardware, what our military can do, the kind of organic engagement that we  have with the United States. 30,000 people participate in this operation, and so

everything was being tested from field hospitals to catering to airbase guard dogs. I’ve  got to say I enjoyed it, but the accommodation, in tents, lying on stretchers, certainly  made me feel my age.

PYNE: Well you’re getting too old for that, you see. That’s the problem.

MARLES: Well, that is probably right. I think at a younger age I might have liked the  adventure of sleeping in a tent with 10 other people, but not so much now. But we  should get on with our program.

PYNE: We should.

MARLES: So on Tuesday the Government announced that it intended to establish a  minister for home affairs in Peter Dutton. We will be discussing that. During the week,  the Greens Party has been experiencing a whole range of woes with two of their MPs  losing their spots in the Senate because of having dual citizenship. We’ll be talking  about that. And yesterday the jobs figures came out and they coincide with the  Melbourne University 2017 Economic and Social Outlook Conference at which the  Treasurer, the Shadow Treasurer and indeed right now the Leader of the Opposition  have been speaking, so we’re going to talk about the economy. Our guest today is  Peter Leahy, the Director of the National Security Institute at the University of Canberra,  former Chief of Army, and we’ll be talking to Peter about the national security  landscape.

First of all, Christopher, perhaps the big announcement of the week, which was on  Tuesday, that the Government intends to establish a home affairs minister. Take a look  at this.

MALCOLM TURNBULL [CLIP]: I’ve decided to establish a home affairs portfolio.

GEORGE BRANDIS [CLIP]: These are historic reforms and they have my strong  support.

PETER DUTTON [CLIP]: The home affairs portfolio is dedicated to keeping Australians  safe.

BILL SHORTEN [CLIP]: It’s sort of like the Government’s come up with a solution and  now they’ve got to find a problem to justify the solution.

PETER JENNINGS [CLIP]: As quickly as they can I think they should move to develop  what in the public service we call a green paper. In the absence of doing something like  that the Government as created a six months very slow-moving target for itself.

MARLES: Well, Christopher, you know that our reflex, our instinct on national security  matters is always to engage in a bipartisan approach and it’s no different here, but the  issue is we don’t get what the Government is trying to do here in terms of what is the

problem that you’re trying to solve. This was announced on Tuesday, we’re here on  Friday, we still haven’t heard what that problem is that you’re trying to solve through this  rearrangement. Pretty concerned by the fact that when the Government has been asked  on a number of occasions whether the security agencies themselves support this reform  there has been a deathly silence associated with that, which leads us to the only  conclusion that we can that this is actually much more about politics that it is about  policy, you only need to look at George fighting back the tears there as all these  responsibilities were taken off him-

PYNE: -Rubbish.

MARLES: -to know that there was a definite winner and a definite loser in this  announcement. Was this really more about giving Peter Dutton a reward for trying to  prop up Malcolm Turnbull’s Prime Ministership?

PYNE: Well, Richard, the sad part about that contribution is that your party has been  advocating just this outcome since Kim Beazley was the Leader of the Opposition 16  years ago, that policy lasted through Kim Beazley, Simon Crean, Kim Beazley again,  Mark Latham and Kevin Rudd took it to the 2007 election campaign. It was only after he  got into government that he decided not to do it, so it’s not exactly a new policy for the  Labor Party. The truth is that as you and I both know our agencies, our security  apparatus are world class.

MARLES: They are.

PYNE: They do an outstanding job protecting Australians, protecting our national  security but our adversaries, as you also know, are getting more sophisticated through  their terrorism networks using our own technologies back against us in a way that we  need to keep fighting, and the view of the Government is that to make our agencies and  apparatus even better, bringing them together under the umbrella of the home affairs  minister means that they will be better coordinated, work more closely together and help  protect Australians, and Australia’s national interest. So there’s no politics involved here  at all because national security is too important for politics, and as a consequence we  are doing what we think needs to be done.

MARLES: Right, but clear this up for us Christopher: did the national security agencies  advise this change or not?

PYNE: Well I’m not going to speak for them and as public servants, as you know as  public servants they won’t speak out either on those matters, they give us advice,  they’re not public figures-

MARLES: -You can.

PYNE: Let’s move to our next topic, which is the Greens and their seeming  unawareness of the Australian Constitution. Let’s take a look at this:



LARISSA WATERS [CLIP]: It’s with great sadness that I have discovered that I’m a  dual citizen. I just want to apologise to my party.

MALCOLM TURNBULL [CLIP]: And it shows incredible sloppiness on their part.

RICHARD DI NATALE [CLIP]: We are committed to a thorough, root and branch  review so that we strengthen our governance.

TURNBULL [CLIP]: It’s extraordinary negligence on their part.

BARNABY JOYCE [CLIP]: You’ve got to be really careful if you start throwing stones  when something was an honest oversight, because you bet your life the same will come  back and get you.

PYNE: Well Richard I think there’s more to this story than meets the eye to be honest  because this seems to be not only the Greens falling apart from the point of view of not  understanding the Australian Constitution, losing Larissa Waters, losing Scott Ludlam.  Now Nick McKim’s citizenship is under a cloud, whether he might be a UK citizen, he  can’t find the papers that proves that he isn’t. Richard Di Natale is facing similar queries  about whether he might still be an Italian citizen. This follows very quickly on the heels  of a real fight in the New South Wales Greens involving Lee Rhiannon and the national  Greens in Canberra after the last sitting week which got a lot of coverage and now this  morning in the Australian newspaper is more stories about Greens analysing the polls to  say that under Richard Di Natale’s leadership the Greens are going backwards and  might lose their Senators in Queensland, New South Wales and South Australia, so I  think this isn’t just a story that’s popped up because some journalist has been doing  good research, I think there are some dangerous tactics going on behind the scenes in  the Greens to damage Richard Di Natale.

MARLES [CLIP]: Yeah, that’s an interesting take on it. You can’t help but feel for  Larissa Waters and Scott Ludlam. Obviously it’s a devastating turn of events for them  personally. It is unbelievable how kind of unprofessional the Greens have been in terms  of going through their due-diligence in relation to their candidates. All of these issues  are easily remedied.

There’s been a whole lot of discussion about whether the constitution should be  changed that totally misses the point. If you were to take the 10 top things to change in  the constitution this is not one of them

PYNE: No.

MARLES: The reality is this is a provision easily complied with, but I’m interested in  your line of thinking as well. One of the things that’s happened with the departure of  these two senators it would seem to me is that Richard Di Natale’s just lost the numbers

internally within the Greens Party. Is this going to mean that we’re going to see Adam  Bandt and Sarah Hanson-Young now launching a coup for the top job?

If anything this highlights the difference between serious parties of government and  those who are on the fringe. I think this whole saga has been that, but we should move  on.

This week, in fact yesterday, we had the release of the latest job growth figures. Have a  look at this.

SCOTT MORRISON [CLIP]: There is a clear momentum starting to build again within  our economy, a sign that confidence is rising.

MALCOLM TURNBULL [CLIP]: Jobs and growth is not just slogan, it’s an outcome.

MORRISON [CLIP]: This is not some pipe dream or mirage on the horizon, it’s not a  line, it’s not a slogan.

BILL SHORTEN [CLIP]: The economy is not working as it should in the interests of  working Australians.

MARLES: Well I know that in the midst of a sea of despair, Christopher, there was  some clinging to this twig like a drowning government that you are, but the reality is that  despite this particular figure, which is obviously good news, the real issue within our  economy now is that inequality continues to grow. That’s what Bill Shorten is talking  about right now at Melbourne University in his contribution to that conference. We’ve got  the slowest rate of wages growth in our history, real wages are actually falling, that is  feeding into the household consumption number, which is also completely anaemic,  growth is anaemic. It’s only two quarters ago that you had negative growth and no  reason at all.

Your policy prescription to this is to give a tax cut to people who are millionaires, to give  rise to penalty rate cuts for those who actually need that money to get through, and to  have a tax increase for those who are on lowest incomes. It makes no sense at all.

PYNE: Richard, you can be all doom a gloom if you like, but that facts are our growth  rate is the higher than any country in the G7 and the truth is that the jobs figures  yesterday showed 166,700 new full time jobs created in the last six months, the highest  number of new full time jobs on record in our history in the first six months of a calendar  year. So the government’s absolute laser like focus on jobs, on investment, on growing  the economy, on getting the budget settings right is absolutely working and Bill Shorten  is in Melbourne today talking about casualization of the workforce a day after the  highest number of full time jobs have been created in the first six months of a calendar  year in history. So you can keep talking about non-facts, but the truth is the facts speak  for themselves. We are concerned about wages growth, and we are trying to do  something about wages growth, but when there’s a good figure you should accept the

figure and move on, not just practise old politics. Now we have to go to a break now,  and then we’ll come back and we’ll be talking to Peter Leahy, and you can’t have the  last word.

[AD BREAK]

PYNE: Well, good afternoon and welcome back to Pyne & Marles here on Sky News  Live. Richards and my guest today is to do with national security issues to talk through  some of the changes this week. He's the director of the National Security Institute at the  University of Canberra and former Chief of the Army, Professor Peter Leahy, thank you  Peter very much for joining us this afternoon.

LEAHY: Well great to join you gentlemen.

PYNE: Peter the first thing that I wanted to explore was the changing terrorist challenge,  threat that we've faced in the last 10 years. How do you think that has developed over  that decade which has led the government and others to think that we needed to  change the apparatus to address it.

LEAHY: I think it's developed quite quickly and it's become more severe and a greater  threat. But I wouldn't confined it just to terror and I think when talking about the last 10  years or so, I look at the platform of Kevin Rudd's December 2008 statement, the  national security statement to the Parliament and I see four aspects of that, one, he  broadened the nature of national security beyond just territorial integrity and terror.  We're now looking at transnational threats climate change, pandemics a whole range of  things like that and I think that's the best way to look at national security. He establish a  national security adviser talked about the need for a national security budget and also  talked about the fact that we were going to concentrate on cooperation collaboration  and coordination rather than have something like the United States and Homeland  security and I think that provides a really good platform to talk about the changing  nature of the threat and in my view why we need the sorts of changes that have been  forecast by the government this week the changes to national security in terms of our  home affairs department.

MARLES: So, Peter, we we've not had a significant event in Australia over that period  of time. I mean, there obviously have been a couple of incidents. Lindt siege obviously  saw two people lost their life. But in terms of a mass scale event we've not been the  subject of that in the way that both France and Britain have been? Is that luck? Are we  doing it and we doing it well? Are we not a target? What's your sense about that?

LEAHY: I think it's probably all of the above but given the work that I've done over my  career I'm not much a believer in luck. I think you have to prepare and you make your  own luck and so I would give due credit to our government agencies who are involved in  these matters and looking after our security I think I would also pay credit to the fact that  we're part of a broader international alliance but none of that means that we can relax.  We have to be very careful and very studious, very alert and that's why again I would

say that I think these changes are suitable because I see real opportunities in bringing  these agencies closer together into an environment where we know that the threat is  increasing. We're seeing what's happening in the Middle East and certainly one of the  issues at the moment is that those foreign fighters who have been there are looking to  come home and we're going to have to deal them with them at a judicial level we have  to deal with them in prison those who might be released eventually. There is a lot of  work to be done in this area and I think a better way of working together is something  we should be looking for.

PYNE: So Peter could you just unpack that a bit for us because it's kind of very much  goes to the nub of what's happened this week. We've had several commentators talking  about the Government's changes to creating a home affairs department talking about  the need for there to be scrutiny of each other by ASIO and the ASD and the AFP, et  cetera, the border forces, but you obviously have the view that the government has  moved in the right direction and built on the foundations of the previous government.  Just explain why you think it's now is the time for a home affairs department of this kind.

LEAHY: Well in part it goes back to the issues that came out of Kevin Rudd's national  security statement and I'd say in there that I'm certainly the first I speak the bigger threat  the greater threat the more transnational threat, I think that's a given. But if I look at  what happened to the national security adviser and those aspirations for a national  security budget I could only give that a fail. I don't see the presence and the capability of  a national security adviser and we're certainly not seeing national security budget. So I  think a Department of Home Affairs would be able to bring some coherence to that bring  some discipline to that and bring some fact that we need to be able to look across all of  the threats that are out there rather than down ministerial pipelines, down single budget  pipelines will be able to assess the priorities across those things that will keep us safe in  the future. Now as to the fourth aspect I mentioned which was coordination cooperation  and collaboration. You shouldn't be surprised from my career but I'm not much in favour  of those sorts of things particularly when we're under threat. And I think the threat is still  coming our way and we need a more directive. And could I say a greater leadership role  from a department like the Home Affairs Department and if I could give an example just  quickly we saw in a Royal Commission report after the bushfires down in Victoria that a  comment was that one of the failings was that the departments weren't able to work  together and most tellingly they had mistaken management for leadership that is that  they adopted this cooperation approach the responsibilities and boundaries weren't  clear and I think as we face a threat we've got to get those responsibilities clear those  boundaries clear. And we do need leadership.

MARLES: So, if I can just follow that - Peter, you talked about the leadership of the  department of this kind. I think you used the word discipline, that it would have imposed  some more discipline into the system. Do I take it from that that what you're saying is  that agencies such as ASIO, such as the Federal Police, need that policy leadership  from the department of this kind and need the discipline that might be imposed by the  department of this kind?

LEAHY: No I don't want to criticize the prison agencies and I think we've acknowledged  already that they're doing a really good job, but I think there are opportunities in the  future and they're the ones that are and we know this is going to take some time and  I've heard Peter Jennings call for a green paper on that and I would support those sorts  of things. These things have to be really thought through the agency heads and the  agency leads and indeed the ministers also need to be thinking about how they're going  to work together. But to me it's a simple statement that the threat is increasing. It's  become broader. It's certainly international and if we're going to work across all of those  levels at the international level with homeland security in the United States with Home  Affairs in the United Kingdom I think a similar type of department looking at similar  issues in similar arrangements is going to make us more secure and kind.

MARLES: Sorry Christopher, if I can just follow up: do you think that there is  appropriate coordination at this point in time between the civil agencies, which are the  subject of this reform, and defence?

LEAHY: Well I'd say there in terms of the national security budget and let's move on  from Mr Rudd's national security statement and Julia Gillard put one out as Prime  Minister in January of 2013 I think whether it was apartheid in that talked about the  budget. And I think there was an appreciation that perhaps defence would be available  as a source of additional funds for some of the agencies and we've seen quite dramatic  increases in the intelligence agencies over this period. Well defence hasn't been a  source for those sorts of funds. So I think we're seeing that the agencies are operating  with their ministerial support quite independently of each other and I think that there  should be due consideration at the National Security Committee level of where we're  spending our money most appropriately and I might mention that quite a few people  would say that support to Department of Foreign Affairs and the aid that they give out  there might solve some of these broader security problems before they actually occur.  So a broader discussion a strategic discussion where all of the agencies are  represented at the appropriate level is what I see as one of the real advantages of this.

MARLES: Well, Peter, we really appreciate your insight today. Thank you for joining us  and we hope that we can get you back on obviously a topic which is going to be with us  for some time in the future.

LEAHY: It has been a great pleasure to be with you.

MARLES: Thank you, and that brings us to the question of the week, which is inspired  by the week from hell that the Greens have been experiencing, and it is: how much do  the major parties investigate candidates for elections? So, Christopher how did it work  with the Liberal Party?

PYNE: Well, when I first got elected in 1993, and I got preselected in ’92, I must admit it  was a lot more haphazard Richard. We basically were asked to sign a document that  we had taken care of our citizenship that we didn't have any prior convictions or have an  office of profit under the Crown which means work for the Commonwealth Government

while seeking election to parliament and now it's a very different process. We have to  produce evidence of these various things. We have to sign statutory declarations and  the major party that the Liberal Party is goes through a serious process because  obviously we don't want to see happen to us what is happening to the Greens this week.  I assume Labor's not very different.

MARLES: No, that sounds very similar. We have to produce birth certificates and  explain how our citizenship is founded as it were, and if there was any hint of dual  citizenship what steps we've taken to make sure that that second citizenship has been  renounced, and of course there are a series of questions about holding an office for  profit under the Crown which goes to some of the other issues that have been taunting  the Greens over the last week, so there is certainly a very thorough process.

Just finally, before we go, I would normally wish you best of luck on the weekend with  your football team, but not tonight Christopher.

PYNE: Not today, no.

MARLES: I'm wearing my Geelong tie, our two teams face off on the top of the table  clash, maybe a grand final preview, but we'll see how they go.

Great to join you.

PYNE: It’s a very exciting night, and go the Crows, of course, who I'm sure will be  victorious at home.

MARLES: Go Cats!

Great to join you again this afternoon. Look forward to doing so again next week. Join  us then on Pyne & Marles on Sky News. We'll see you then.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TONY HODGES 0435 594 552

