

HON LINDA BURNEY MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICE   MEMBER FOR BARTON

E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC WEEKEND BREAKFAST -  MIRIAM COROWA   SUNDAY, 6 AUGUST 2017

SUBJECTS: REFERENDUM, MARRIAGE EQUALITY AND TRUMP-TURNBULL  PHONE CALL LEAKS

MIRIAM COROWA: Well for more on the Garma festival and the other political  issues of the week, we’re speaking with Linda Burney Shadow Minister for Human  Services, who was also in attendance at Garma. Good morning to you Linda Burney.

LINDA BURNEY: Good morning.

COROWA: Firstly, I’d like to ask you, the Prime Minister spoke yesterday, gave a  speech, acknowledging the referendum Council’s reports handed down looking into  constitutional recognition. I’d just like to find out from you initially - what are your  comments, your views on what the Prime Minister has had to say at this stage.

BURNEY:  Well Garma is a remarkable gathering. Thousands of people up in north-east Arnhem Land and I think it is really important to stand as done Miriam to  recognise the Gamatch people and thank them for allowing us all to be there, and of  course Galarrwuy Yunupingu for his invitation. It has been very emotional. The  opening ceremony was a real tribute to Mr G Yunupingu, of due course who left us  so tragically young.

There was a huge and is a huge focus on constitutional reform and both the Prime  Minister along with Nigel Scullion and Bill shorten along with myself, the members  from the Northern Territory plus Patrick Dodson and Malarndirri McCarthy and of  course our leader Bill shorten were in attendance.

Both leaders spoke yesterday at the big forum and spoke about their vision and in  particular I can talk about Labor’s vision for constitutional reform.

COROWA: Well in regard to that of course as you mentioned, the Opposition Leader  Bill Shorten did also speak and openly has supported the recommendations put  forward in that report. It even goes further to propose a timeframe for when we may  in fact have a question drafted and potentially a referendum as early as next year.

When you put that against the comments of the Prime Minister where he is talking  about further consideration required and the proper political processes need to be  observed, do we in fact see a bipartisan approach being taken here?

BURNEY: Well there has be a bipartisan approach and I understand the Prime  Minister's reluctance to commit to a timeframe and commit to a question but Labor’s  position was very different and very clear - unequivocal, actually - is that we believe  that there needs to be a joint standing committee of the Parliament established  immediately; to deal with the issues around constitutional reform; and most  importantly give life to the Uluru restatement. It would also explore what some of the  legal issues are; what some of the issues are around timing. And we have in our  mind a very clear timeframe as well as is of course what the question should be.

It is Miriam, the role of the Parliament under our Constitution to determine the  question; of course the timeframe. There has been much talk on this, over 10 years  of talk, and we believe the time is now action and we want that question and that  timeframe to be clear by the end of this year.

COROWA: So does the Prime Minister’s reluctance to speak in those terms signal  that we may in fact not see a quick time frame offered for this discussion for a vote to  actually happen.

BURNEY: Well, I’m not quite sure but I think the key to this is very much the  establishment of that Joint Parliamentary Committee. Therefore there is a body of  the Parliament to take forward the aspirations of First Nations people and take  forward the issues around constitutional reform.

I think they are very clear as does Labor in relation to what Aboriginal People and  Torres Strait Islander People are saying. The time has come for action to be taken  by the Parliament and it will be up to the Parliament and our processes here which  we have to go through of course, to determine those important issues around the  questions and the timing and that is really what needs to start happening as of  Tuesday when Parliament returns.

COROWA: Now, Linda Burney you were of course at Garma yesterday. It’s been  billed by our Indigenous Affairs Editor Stan Grant as one of the most pivotal  gatherings of its kind in years. What’s been the mood of the people there, particularly  of people of important roles and positions within the indigenous community after  hearing what both the Prime Minister and Bill Shorten had to say yesterday?

BURNEY: Well, I think that it’s important for people watching this morning to  understand that Garma is a remarkable gathering of thousands of people. Many of  those people are non-Aboriginal people. There is a great involvement, including the  ABC of course, from the corporate sector. There are people from right across the  country and many Indigenous leaders that are there, not everyone, we need to  recognise that. We need to also recognise of course that part of the role of the joint  committee that I referred to will be to talk to people across the country on this issue  of constitutional reform.

I think that the mood was one of intense interest in what was being said by political  leaders but also intense interest on the way forward in terms of a whole range of  issues in the Aboriginal affairs arena.

It is very much a cultural gathering and the cultural messages that cultural practice,  the dance, the bungle ground, is one of bringing people together. But it is, as I say,  one of many gatherings that we need to attend and listen to what people have got to  say and move on this issue of constitutional reform very much informed by what the  Uluru Statement said. And of course, listening to what Aboriginal People are saying  right across the country.

COROWA: Well, on that note of gatherings we should also be reminded that  Parliament will be returning in the coming week. And ahead of that, we understand  that the Liberal Party will be holding a special meeting around the issue of Marriage  Equality. We see a number of ideas being talked about at the moment. Understand  that Liberal MP Dean Smith is proposing a private members bill to allow a free vote  in Parliament. We’re also hearing of another option around the possibility of a  plebiscite by postal vote. What’s your view of either of those options and their  relative merits?

BURNEY: Well, my view is that the Liberals and the Coalition have tied themselves  to one almighty knot about an issue that the public and Labor have made their minds  up about a long time ago.

Of course, our position is very clear Miriam. And that is that we believe that Marriage  Equality should exist in this country. We believe that all relationships should be  respected and that they are equal. And Labor has committed, and Bill Shorten has  committed, of course, to Labor making this a reality within 100 days of government.

On the other hand, on the question you’ve asked, it is going to be fascinating party  room discussion. Party Room Discussion Mark Two, after the then Prime Minister  Abbott tried to deal with this. But it just is remarkable that this is an issue that the  Australian people have time and time again have said, that we believe in Marriage  Equality, please get on with it.

This Parliament is here and we are elected to make decisions and clearly the  division in the Coalition party over this issue is going to I think, not serve them well.

COROWA: Is it also the case that the inability of other parliamentarians to agree on  a plebiscite has also unnecessarily delayed this being brought into reality?

BURNEY: Well, what is a postal plebiscite, which of course, I noticed Mr Dutton is  supporting, what is it going to do? What is it going to mean? It is not binding. It is  voluntary whether you participate in it. So it seems to me to be a sop to people to try  and push this off to some other time. Now, at some point Malcolm Turnbull and his  party are going to have to face up to the fact. And Malcolm Turnbull of course is a  supporter of equal marriage, is going to have to face up to the fact that this decision  has been, and the Australian people’s view is that there should be equal marriage.

The machinations that are going to go on in that party room tomorrow afternoon is  going to deliver a deal, not for people in the LGBTIQ community, who should be  respected, who deserve equal marriage. It will be a fix for Malcolm Turnbull and the  Liberal Party.

COROWA: Alright, that is for the week to come. Let’s have a look also at another  key issue of the week that’s passed. And that of course is the leak of the phone  transcript of a conversation between US President Donald Trump and the Prime  Minister Malcolm Turnbull. In particular, the substance around the conversation of  the issue of an agreement around refugees currently held in off shore detention  centre on Nauru and Manus Island. What’s your take on what’s transpired in that  conversation? And has the Australian public, in fact, been misled?

BURNEY: Well, two things. Firstly, the incredible worrying position that clearly now  conversations between leaders of different countries is no longer sacrosanct. You  can no longer see that as something that should be private I think that’s incredibly  worrying if two leaders from other countries cannot talk to each other without the  prospect of that discussion being leaked, then that poses an enormous question not  just for Australia and the relationship with the United States, but in fact the  relationship across the board in terms of those private conversations.

But secondly, we were told or the Australian community was told one thing by the  government that has been repeatedly told by the government that the deal in terms  of some of those people from Manus and Nauru being settled in the United States  was a done deal. Julie Bishop said that there is no change in that arrangement  because of the change in the administration in the United States. And one would  have to ask the question: were the Australian public given the right information by  the government. I am not making a value judgement but I do think Miriam there is an  enormous question to be answered there.

COROWA: Indeed. Our Shadow Minister for Human Services Linda Burney thank  you very much speaking with us on Weekend Breakfast.

BURNEY: Thank you very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222

