

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RADIO 774 'THE POLLIE GRAPH'  WITH RAFAEL EPSTEIN  WEDNESDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2017

SUBJECTS:  Uluru; Government in crisis; Manus Island.

RAFAEL EPSTEIN, PRESENTER:  And the breaking news this afternoon of course the  President of the Senate, kind of like the Speaker of the House, the person who presides  over the upper house, Stephen Parry, he's a Liberal Senator from the State of  Tasmania, he's found out he does qualify for British citizenship, he will have to leave the  Senate as well. Joining us today is Tanya Plibersek, she's the acting Leader of the  Opposition while Bill Shorten is overseas. She covers education and she's also Shadow  Minister for Women. Tanya Plibersek, good afternoon.

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP, ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hi Raf, how are  you?

EPSTEIN: Thank you for joining us.  Tanya's in our Sydney studio.  Alan Tudge is, and  I'm sure he'll make a point out of it, as well as being a Liberal member in the suburbs of  Melbourne, he's the Minister for Human Services in Malcolm Turnbull's Government and  he's long campaigned on traffic issues which is why he's somewhere by the side of the  road and not sitting with me in the studio.  Alan Tudge, welcome.

ALAN TUDGE MP, MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES: G'day Raf, that's exactly  right, there was an accident on the Monash, I think, which meant that I couldn't be there  in person.

EPSTEIN: Well done answering the question without EastLink, that's good.

TUDGE: (laughs) I called it Monash, not EastLink.  I could talk about the EastLink if  you'd like me to.

EPSTEIN: I'm sure you could. Let's talk about the other bit of breaking news this  afternoon, I'll begin with you Minister Tudge. The traditional owners at Uluru have

decided to ban anybody from climbing the rock in two years' time. Lot of callers very  happy, lot of callers very unhappy Alan Tudge.  What do make of it?

TUDGE: I'm disappointed in their decision because I think a lot of people did enjoy  climbing the rock, but, at the end of the day it's owned by the traditional owners and it's  their decision and their call, and they've made that, so we have to abide by it.

EPSTEIN: So disappointed because people won't be able to climb it, is that what you  mean?

TUDGE: Yeah basically, I think it's obviously iconic, it's part of Australia. Many people  have enjoyed in the past climbing it, many international tourists have climbed it and  would like to do so in the future.  But it is owned by the traditional owner groups in  Central Australia, and it's their call at the end  of the day, and we respect their decision  and we abide by it, but that's what it is.

EPSTEIN: Tanya Plibersek, what do you think of the ban?

PLIBERSEK:  Well I'm absolutely happy to be guided by the traditional owners on an  issue like this.  I think it's very reasonable to give people who've booked a holiday a  year or two years ahead the opportunity to climb the rock if they wish, but I really would  hope people would respect the wishes of the traditional owners and not do that in the  meantime.  You know, if a place has really strong, sacred significance for the traditional  owners, you can understand why they've made this decision.  As a tourist you might  want to have a cup of coffee while you're touring St Peters Basilica, but they idea that  you have to allow someone to set up a coffee cart in the middle of it just doesn't  hold.  People need to respect the cultural significance of this very important icon.

EPSTEIN: Minister Tudge is undoubtedly right though, there are people who are both  angry and disappointed, Tanya Plibersek, what would you say to them?

PLIBERSEK: Just what I said. All religions and cultures have sites that are very  important to them and being able to protect them and protect their sacredness should  be allowed. These are the traditional owners, they've made a decision, they've given  people a lot of forewarning about that decision.  Seems pretty reasonable to me.

EPSTEIN: Alan Tudge, if I can ask you about the Uluru Statement from the Heart.  It's  poignant perhaps that ten year process, hundreds of meetings, real unanimity from  Indigenous Australians. They wanted constitutional recognition of an indigenous  advisory group. Your Government's decided not to put that issue to a  Referendum. What do you say to people how are disappointed by that decision?

TUDGE: Oh, this is a very complex one. You probably know Raf, I'm in favour of  some  sort of constitutional recognition of Aboriginal people.  The debate has always been  around the form of that recognition and there's a proposal put to us and to the  Opposition which was in essence to enshrine an Indigenous advisory body in the  Constitution and part of our concern was that it may not have success in succeeding  through the Australian public in getting constitutional change.  Very, very difficult to get  constitutional change, so from memory it's only eight out of 44 referenda have ever got  up. The last substantial one was actually the 1967 referendum on Indigenous voting  right effectively.  Very difficult and I wasn't convinced that this would be successful



EPSTEIN: Tanya Plibersek, it's a good reason isn't it to be a little gun shy of that  referendum, it's tough getting constitutional change?

PLIBERSEK: It certainly is tough to change the Constitution but we're both parties, or  both sides of politics are generally agreed, we've had a much better chance of seeing  referenda pass, so I thin itf there was a proposition to enshrine and indigenous voice  that had bipartisan support, if we had a Prime Minister and a Leader of the Opposition  who were prepared to go out and campaign together for it and to reassure Australians  about it then I think writing off the proposal because we fear that it might not be  successful, I don't think that's an answer.

EPSTEIN: Can I move on at twenty minutes to five to issues of citizenship.  Your  questions are welcome on 1300 222 774. The phone number's 1300 222 774. Alan  Tudge, you're in the lower house, Stephen Parry's in the upper house. He didn't tell  anybody he might have a British citizenship issue. He signed the form, I think, three  times to swear that he does not have a citizenship issue. It's now been confirmed that  he's British. Do you think he was either honourable or sensible to not bring that up until  the start of this week?

TUDGE: I know Stephen Parry very well. He's a very decent person and he's great job  as President of the Senate, he's a former police officer before coming to Parliament. My  understanding is it was brought to his attention becuase of the clarity of the High Court  decision, which took many people by surprise. 7-0 and a very, very black and white  statement.

EPSTEIN: I don't think it actually took that many people by surprise, other than the  Government and the Solicitor-General, Alan Tudge.

TUDGE: I still has taken many people by surprise and is contrary to the advice that we  were receiving from the Australian Government Solicitor. So off the back of that, he has  said listen, because of that decision I may be British also. His father was born in  England but was an Australian citizen, he himself was an Australian citizen born here as  well, so I don't think it crossed his mind until that High Court decision.

EPSTEIN: Can I interrupt again Alan Tudge, I mean, that's just...do you believe him  when he says that it didn't cross his mind? That's just nuts isn't it? That's all we've been  talking about for months is people who've got a parent who is born overseas?

TUDGE: I haven't spoken to him about it. I do know though that he is an honourable  person and a decent person. So now that it has come out that he is a dual national he  consequently has resigned.  Sadly that's the end of his career for the moment and  another person will be duly elected. This has taken a lot of people by surprise this issue  and we've got to deal with it, the High Court was very clear in relation to it, that we want  to be able to have the by-election for Barnaby Joyce, hopefully get him back in, and  then put this behind us and focus on the things that matter to the Australian people.

EPSTEIN: Tanya Plibersek, Stephen Parry didn't think of it until the High Court decision.

PLIBERSEK: Look I actually like Stephen Parry a lot as well. I think he's actually a very  nice man, but it doesn't seem credible does it that someone who is presiding over

people referring themselves to the High Court didn't once think to ask whether the  circumstances that led to their referrals might also apply to himself.  And of course the  other question is, is it really likely that he didn't talk to anyone about it at any stage, that  this has just come as a bolt out of the blue, that the Prime Minister didn't know, the  Attorney-General didn't know, that nobody else knew.

EPSTEIN: Sorry are you raising the - are you saying that he must have told someone in  Government?

PLIBERSEK: I'm not saying he must have, I'm just saying it seems unlikely that he  didn't discuss it with anyone.

EPSTEIN: Les in Yarraville, what do you want to say Les?

CALLER: Alan, yesterday we heard the Primie Minister say he's never had so much fun  in his life. Well let me assure you, people out here in the real world aren't having much  fun at all.  We've seen your Government deliver a second-rate NBN, a second rate  energy policy.  We've got the Deputy Prime Minister and now the Leader of the Senate  not knowing what nationality they are, so they're gone.  We've got the Employment  Minister who tried to stitch up Bill Shorten but that completely backfired all over her and  if she had any decency she would resign.

EPSTEIN: Is there a question there Les?

CALLER: Yeah, yeah, we've got Manus Island which looks like being chaotic and I  haven't even mentioned Tony Abbott. Alan, your Government looks like it's a shambles.  It's in chaos. I've never seen anything more dysfunctional than the last year of the  Whitlam Government, and when the Acting Prime Minister came out and -

EPSTEIN: Sorry, if you can get to a question Les?

CALLER: Yeah, well, what are you going to do about it? I mean, you are a complete  shambles at the moment!

EPSTEIN: Well I guess shambles is the accusation Alan Tudge?

TUDGE: Well he doesn't sound like a swing voter to me but I hear that accusations  that's been made and there's a lot of issues which he's raised there. We're dealing with  something which was unexpected in terms of citizenship issue. And the fact that it's  effected the Greens that fact that its effected the Nationals Party and now effected the  Liberal Party and we didn't want it to occur but the High Court’s been very clear, we're  moving forward on it we'll have the by-election and then we need to get back to 100 per  cent focusing on the things that that matter to the Australian public. And they are traffic  congestion, they are the cost of living pressures, it is national security and it is issues  like that which are of concern to everyday Australians and that's what we are going to  be focused on that's what we maintain our focus on.

EPSTEIN: That's Alan Tudge, forgive me Tanya Plibersek, Alan Tudge is the minister  for Human Services. We're about to hear from Tanya Plibersek. She's acting Leader of  the Opposition while Bill Shorten is away it’s a quarter to five go for it Tanya Plibersek

PLIBERSEK: Well I've just think Raf it’s not just that these people have been found to  be possibly citizens of other countries or eligible to be citizens of other countries that's  the problem, it's the division and dysfunction that this whole process has exposed within  the Government. So you've got the big fight over who's going to replace Fiona Nash,  you've got Larry Anthony the president of the Nationals saying that the Coalition  agreement holds, just for now-

EPSTEIN: The Liberal Party doesn't have a monopoly on internal tension does it?

PLIBERSEK: You've got Barnaby Joyce saying that the Liberals should be grateful to  the Nationals or they would have lost last time round. You've got Julie Bishop getting  ready for what looks like a run at the leadership, you've got the brawl over who should  be the acting Prime Minister. So there is all this difficulty and tension that it has exposed  and it’s also I think fundamentally a question of Malcolm Turnbull's judgement I mean he  said that people were eligible -

EPSTEIN: It’s Stephen Parry's judgement he's the one who didn't tell anyone.

PLIBERSEK: This latest problem certainly that’s the case but remember Malcolm  Turnbull first of all said when he was talking about the Greens that it was ‘incredible  sloppiness’ ‘extraordinary negligence’ and then he found out that some of his own were  under attack. He then allowed Fiona Nash and Barnaby Joyce to stay in Cabinet while  there were questions about their eligibility while Matthew Canavan had to stand aside.  Matthew Canavan's been found to be OK and Barnaby Joyce and Fiona Nash have  been found to be not OK and the judgement ‘ the High Court will so find', that sort of  stuff just doesn't sit well with people. People understand-

EPSTEIN: - Something the Prime Minister said in Question Time, I do want to ask about  audits but I think Craig in Narre Warren has a query about the same thing.

CALLER: [Asks about possible citizenship audit for sitting politicians.]

EPSTEIN: So you want an audit. Can I just ask who would you like to do the audit?

CALLER: [Suggests an independent body.]

EPSTEIN: Some sort of independent - maybe a retired judge or something like that.  Tanya Plibersek I'll go back to you, I don't think either of the major parties are keen.  Why not have an audit? Eric Abetz who is now effectively a backbencher, a Liberal  senator from Tasmania he wants an audit. Tanya Plibersek why not have one?

PLIBERSEK: Well because we are confident of our processes and we don't live in  country that has a reverse onus of proof.

EPSTEIN: Alan Tudge why not have an audit?

TUDGE: Well Tanya and I are on a unity ticket on this one-

PLIBERSEK: Don't tell your friends Alan it won't be good for my reputation.

TUDGE: With a lot of what you are saying beforehand Tanya I will let you go very  respectfully, but I agree with Tanya on this. In essence it would change the onus of  proof. Now people have declared themselves to be single nationals when they run for  Parliament and unless someone provides the evidence to the contrary or they  themselves come forward like Senator Parry did, then I think we leave it at that.

EPSTEIN: Feel free Alan Tudge to respond to any of the things that Tanya Plibersek  said but maybe if I put it in this way, you now that people don't trust politicians we've  now had five of them kicked out by the High Court, you've had a Government  representative, in my terms, not fess up that they might have an issue. Wouldn't Alan  Tudge, wouldn’t an audit help restore a bit of trust?

TUDGE: There is a general issue in terms of trust of politicians and there is no doubt  and the trust of large companies and other institutions outside more broadly, and we  need to be cognisant of that and be aware of it. I just don't think we should be  fundamentally changing the onus of proof [inaudible] if someone had evidence that  there is a member of Parliament that may be a dual citizen then of course they can  present that evidence. To say we've had a lot of individual members of Parliament come  forward off their own volition to say 'Hey I actually may be I hadn't even thought of it,  hadn't crossed my mind before but I'll get it checked out' and I just think that [inaudible]  rather than changing that onus of proof.

EPSTEIN: We'll get some more with Alan Tudge and Tanya Plibersek in a moment.

Traffic report

EPSTEIN: Tanya Plibersek is with us for Pollie Graph and so too is Alan Tudge. Tanya  is Acting Leader at the moment she is Shadow Education Minister, Deputy Labor  Leader. Alan Tudge is the Minister for Human Services. Minister if I can ask you about  Manus Island. Your Cabinet colleague Peter Dutton says there are places for the men  to go to on Manus, the centre they have been in has been closed new facilitates are  being built but Minister people there say it’s not safe to go where you and the PNG  Government want them to go, it’s not safe, how would you respond to that?

TUDGE: Well from what I understand there is the people from the Manus Island facility  who have been travelling to this other destination on a very regular basis sometimes to  do their shopping, sometimes they've already been staying in that new facility and  returning at a later stage to the traditional Manus Island facility where they've been more  permanently based for the last little while. So I think we've got to take that with a grain of  salt and what we have, the position-

EPSTEIN: You think they are not genuinely afraid?

TUDGE: Well at the end of the day this is a decision of the Papua New Guineans to  close down the Manus Island facility and consequently other arrangements have been  made. Now if people weren't a refugee, they've gone through the process they are not a  refugee they've obviously been asked to return back to their home country and we'll  help facilitate that. If they are a refugee then there are options available to either stay on  Manus Island and there is accommodation there available there's options in Nauru and  of course they can apply for the United States as well. But that's what we are dealing

with that's what the Papua New Guinea Government is dealing with them, and handling  quite appropriately.

EPSTEIN: Tanya Plibersek it does look like new facilities are being built on Manus  Island for these men do you accept that facilities will eventually be available for them?

PLIBERSEK: Well, there was an interview with Fran Kelly this morning, I'm not sure if  you heard it Raff, with Nat Jit Lam the deputy regional representative of the UNHCR,  that’s actually currently on Manus. And in that interview it suggested that the new  accommodation is not ready, it doesn't look as though its ready, it’s difficult for me to tell  from here what the case is, but it looked like from that inspection there's a short fall of a  couple of hundred - accommodation for a couple of hundred people, I can't confirm that  that's just the report from the UNHCR -

TUDGE: No that's not right this came up in the Senate Estimates as you may know  Tanya where by the officials did confirm that there was enough places available for  everybody there. And indeed they have confirmed as well that many of the people who  have been based in this facility which has since been closed have already been  travelling backwards and forwards to the East Lorengau refugee transit centre where  there is accommodation there and shopping there and other things-

EPSTEIN: Tanya Plibersek you've got public servants in Estimates saying it’s ready do  you believe them or do you believe the UNHCR on the radio.

PLIBERSEK: I think people will have make their own judgement about that there's also  of course the reports...

TUDGE: What are you saying though Tanya, I mean the public servants are under oath  when they're making their statements so surely...

PLIBERSEK: So was Michaelia Cash.

TUDGE: And she clarified the matter afterwards when she was made aware. So I'm not  sure what you're saying.

PLIBERSEK: She spent all day saying one thing that was completely untrue.

TUDGE: Don't divert here Tanya, you either believe the public servants or you don't.

PLIBERSEK: Well I am concerned when UNHCR representatives say that the facilities  aren't ready. Of course there's a report from the mayor that the local community haven't  been consulted. I am worried about what looks like a developing powder keg and I won't  pretend that I'm not worried. I'm worried both for the refugees and asylum seekers on  the island. I'm worried that the local community feel nervous about the large group of  men that are moving. It seems to me an incredibly poorly handled situation. We've got a  minister who has completely abrogated his responsibility to find third country  resettlement options for these people. I'm worried about reports that healthcare has not  been properly made available. Yes, I have serious concerns about what is going on  there at the moment.

EPSTEIN: Alan Tudge and Tanya Plibersek are with us Peter is with us as well, he is in  Coburg. What did you want to say Peter?

CALLER: [Says there is no alternative - says that this is an attack on innocent people].

EPSTEIN: Okay Peter, let me get a quick response from both people. Tanya I'll start  with you.

PLIBERSEK: Well I think I just explained the difference between the Government's  position and our position.

EPSTEIN: Peter clearly thinks you are part of the problem for locking them up in the first  place, it changed before you lost government under Prime Minister Kevin Rudd.

PLIBERSEK: Well it just gets- I think people like Peter like to deliberately suggest that  there is no difference when we have said, for example, that by 2025 we would double  Australia's refugee intake, we've said that we would end the secrecy allowing journalists  to have access to asylum facilities, we've said that there should be independent  oversight of facilities and an independent children's advocate, we've said that we would  restore references to the Refugee Convention in the Migration Act, we've said that we  would get rid of Temporary Protection Visas and give people found to be genuine  refugees a permanent Australian visa. Remember this wasn't our first choice, we  wanted an arrangement with Malaysia that would have been a proper regional  resettlement arrangement that would have allowed people to live and work in Malaysia,  their children to go to school, proper healthcare provided to them and the Liberals  stopped that. After they stopped that 600 people drowned at sea. That's the difference.

EPSTEIN: Alan Tudge you got both barrels from Peter there including calling your  government fascist for the way you've dealt with people on Manus Island and Nauru.

TUDGE: I just think it is absolutely offensive to say that these are concentration camps  over there and it's offensive generally and particularly offensive to those who have  actually suffered in concentration camps or have had family members in proper  concentration camps and they are nothing like it. These are open facilities where there's  education, there's healthcare, people are free to move about. Now the real problem  here emanates from many years ago when the Labor Party opened the borders again,  let the people smugglers trade occur and we have thousands and thousands of people  coming to our shore on leaky boats, hundreds and hundreds drowning at sea. We're still  dealing with the consequences. Thankfully we have now closed down Tanya 17 centres  across Australia. 17 have now closed down. Not a single child is in detention anymore  and the last children were taken out of detention two years ago, and now we've got no  longer any boats coming to these shores and that means that in the future we'll have  fewer and fewer people in detention and we can get more people from the genuine  refugee camps.

EPSTEIN: Alan Tudge and Tanya Plibersek I need to end it now, I'm sorry. I know there  is a lot more you could both say. I need to thank you both for your time. It's been an  enjoyable Pollie Graph but I need to get to Peter Newham at the bureau.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

