

THE HON MARK DREYFUS QC MP  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY   MEMBER FOR ISAACS

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2017

Subject/s: Trump immigration ban; Turnbull’s abject silence

ALI MOORE, PRESENTER: Mark Dreyfus welcome to the program.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Thanks for having me Ali.

MOORE: Do you have any more clarity on the impact of this on Australian dual  nationals? We’ve heard the story this morning about the Melbourne teenager.

DREYFUS: We know that there are more than 100,000 Australians who were born in  these seven countries, and probably tens of thousands more, like this boy from  Melbourne High School, who were born in Australia but for reasons to do with  international citizenship law have got dual citizenship. This is something that is  affecting thousands and thousands of Australians and it’s wrong. It’s something that  we need to have our government speaking up about, to tell our friend the United  States that they’ve gone down the wrong path.

MOORE: Well Julie Bishop has asked diplomats to lobby for exemptions for  Australia. What else should she be doing?

DREYFUS: That’s not good enough. It’s not good enough for her to simply say ‘I’ve  instructed our diplomats to do something’, she’s got to speak up. And Malcolm  Turnbull, our Prime Minister, the leader of our country, has to speak up. He needs to  show some moral leadership which is entirely lacking at the moment. You’re left  wondering what happened to the old Malcolm Turnbull? The old Malcolm Turnbull  would have spoken up here. But now, we have this Prime Minister who is basically  an empty space. Someone who is not prepared to say anything, not prepared to  stand up for Australian interests and not prepared to tell our friend and ally the  United States when they are going down the wrong path. This is really important.  Some moral leadership is needed here. France, the United Kingdom, Germany,  they’ve been prepared to say something. The former US Ambassador to Australia,

Jeffrey Bleich in very very firm and strident terms this morning, he made clear what  he thinks of this ban and we should be doing the same.

MOORE: Jeffrey Bleich was of course a Barack Obama appointment. Is there a risk  though that if Malcolm Turnbull was to speak up, that that deal for America to take  refugees from Manus Island and Nauru could be at risk?

DREYFUS: I don’t think so. I think that this is far more important to speak directly to  the United States about why they are going down the wrong path. The United  Kingdom, which is negotiating an absolutely vital trade deal for the United Kingdom’s  future as they seek to exit from the European Union - they are negotiating now with  the United States on that trade deal - that has not deterred the United Kingdom  Prime Minister Theresa May from speaking out. We’ve had abject silence from our  Prime Minister.

MOORE: To be fair though, Theresa May’s words have been less than shall we say  stridently critical, and her initial comments were not very critical at all. And she’s said  that the state visit will go ahead regardless of demonstrations and a number of  people who have signed a petition against it.

DREYFUS: But at least she said something Ali - we’ve had silence from our Prime  Minister. We’ve had our Prime Minister say that this is a matter for the domestic  policies of the United States. That is not good enough. We’ve had from Scott  Morrison, the Treasurer of this country, an extraordinary statement suggesting  somehow in a self-congratulatory tone, suggesting that the United States has in  some way copied Australian policy, which of course is quite wrong. It’s wrong for him  to say it, and it’s wrong in fact, because we have non-discriminatory policies in this  country. We need to have a United States with non-discriminatory immigration  policies. We know in this country, and this is part of core Australian values, that we  get strength from diversity, we get strength from respecting others, we certainly don’t  improve our national security by adopting this sort of blanket ban, this sort of  mindless exclusion of everybody from particular countries because, make no  mistake, that’s what this ban is.

MOORE: But Mark Dreyfus I guess, bottom line, is what Trump is doing is what he  promised to do prior to his election, he was elected, it is a democratic country, they  are a sovereign nation.

DREYFUS: It was wrong before the election, and it’s wrong now. I think most people  around the world have lived in hope that not every promise made by President  Trump before the election, was something he was going to implement. This is  certainly one of them. We are now seeing from the chaos that has erupted around  the world, in airports across the United States, just what the effect of this is. And it’s  not just those people who have been immediately affected, those caught in transit  when the ban was put in place - it’s all those tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds  of thousands of people who had plans to travel to the United States, who have family  in the United States, who have work in the United States. We heard from Brian  Schmidt, the Vice-Chancellor at the ANU, a Nobel Prize winner, saying yesterday  how deeply affected the staff and students at the Australian National University are  going to be by this ban. The fact that President Trump may have said something

about this before the election is no reason for us to stay silent about it. We need to  speak up, we need to condemn this kind of discriminatory policy being implemented  by the United States and we need moral leadership from our country, from our  government.

MOORE: Given the strength of your feeling on this, if you were in government, what  else could you do? Words are hollow, it’s a very close relationship with the US, what  could you do that would have a practical impact?

DREYFUS: We need to speak publicly. We need to explain clearly and simply to the  United States that this is wrong, that it’s not in accordance with the dearly-held  Australian values of freedom in Australia, we need to try to explain to the United  States the chaos that this is causing, we need to put our view to the United States  and it should be our view that this does not assist in making Americans more secure  any more than the implementation of this kind of policy might assist in making  Australians more secure.

MOORE: On the flip side, do you fear that this will actually make the world less  secure?

DREYFUS: I’m sure that it will make the world less secure. Just for a start, the chaos  that has been caused at airports necessarily means that border officials are  distracted from their true task of focusing on individuals which might pose a threat to  national security. A blanket ban based on nationality, a discriminatory policy distracts  from what the real problem is which is individuals who might pose a threat to the  security of the United States or the security of Australians. We need to stay focused  here.

MOORE: Just a last question, if I can just reiterate that - is there anything though  that Australia could do? Because while you say there needs to be moral leadership,  there certainly seems to be - as you say, your argument is that we should speak up  - but as such a strong ally, is there something, some action that Australia could take,  to show its displeasure?

DREYFUS: I don’t think it’s about action Ali. I think we are close to the United States.  They are our longstanding friend and ally, and when Australia speaks we should be  able to hope that it will matter in the United States. And that’s why Malcolm Turnbull  as our Prime Minister needs to speak up, needs to stop being weak and spineless  which is the way he is approaching this at the moment.

MOORE: Mark Dreyfus thank you for joining us.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOANNA HEATH 0427 915 633

