

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 5 DECEMBER 2017

SUBJECTS: Labor to Legislate for Ten Days Domestic Violence Leave;  Citizenship; Manus Island.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Brendan O'Connor is the Shadow Employment Minister and he  joins us now from Parliament House. I think we have him there. Thank you for joining  us.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS:  Good morning.

TRIOLI: Sorry about that muck-up. You're promising to go for ten days domestic  violence leave. The Fair Work Commission rejected that same claim by the ACTU for  just that. So why are you ignoring the umpire on this and pushing ahead?

O’CONNOR: The Parliament has every right to legislate on minimum entitlements  and in fact the National Employment Standards in the Fair Work Act have a whole  array of entitlements for workers in the Federal jurisdiction.

Labor thinks it's time we did more to respond to the national scourge of domestic  violence. This year alone, 45 women have died as a result of domestic violence and  we need to provide more support, and that includes providing support for women at  work, and, can I say, flagship companies have already gone out and either provided  ten or more days, including Qantas, Virgin Australia, NAB Bank, Telstra. We just  want to make it a universal workplace right for women who are in dire need, in many  circumstances.

TRIOLI: Of course, I understand the concerns of frontline groups and the reasons  why this period of domestic violence has been proposed. But in some way, isn't it an

admission that as a society, we're more prepared to allow a great deal for the result  of family violence, rather than strenuously confronting the cause?

O’CONNOR: I think it's both. To deal with domestic violence, you're absolutely right,  we need to get to the root cause and I think that's going to take, unfortunately, that  will take some time to stamp out this violence all together. But certainly, we need to  do that.

We also need to de-stigmatise the right for women to speak out and speak up  against violence that they've been subject to. One of the things about this  announcement is, I think it will help de-stigmatise this issue. And I have to say,  overwhelmingly, the majority of employers would want to be supporting their workers  who might be subject to such violence.

TRIOLI: Let's turn to matters in the House and there's a lot going on. Explain to us  all this morning about how resisting referring Labor Senator Katy Gallagher to the  High Court is not total hypocrisy from Labor given that she was a dual citizen when  she nominated to contest the last election?

O’CONNOR: Firstly, there's a process in place in the Senate and in the House to  disclose the details of all Members and Senators in order for there to be  consideration of referrals, of Government or non-Government members and  senators. And until that takes place, I don’t think we should be quick to rush to  judgement.

Our view has been that our Members and Senators have taken all reasonable steps.  That is the advice we've received, and therefore, they're eligible to be Members and  Senators. But there will be conversations with the Government and with the  crossbench, with the Opposition, in order to ensure that if there are to be referrals in  either of the chambers, then we try to do this in a bipartisan manner. The worst thing  that could possibly happen is the majority seek to refer the minority. That would set  an awful convention for the Parliament in future Parliaments allowing future  governments to refer opposition  members without that consensual approach. So  let's see what happens. The week's not over yet and we should examine all of the  disclosure details, not just of the Senators who had to disclose early, but the  members of the House as well.

TRIOLI: I'm just going to jump in there because it sounds to me like you're overly  complicating something that really no-one has clean hands on when it comes to this,  because there's been a lot of finger pointing on both sides and when you say you  don't want to rush to judgement, I think some on your side have been exactly quick  to do that. The High Court are there in order to try and clarify this issue. If you want  to show us that your house is clean, it beggars understanding why you would resist  the question letting Senator Katy Gallagher have that heard in the High Court and  have at that clarified, and really for any of your Members?

O’CONNOR: You won't find any quotes from me rushing to judgement. Look, if it's a  clear-cut case that you are ineligible, then you must be referred, of course. But I  think let's exhaust the process.

TRIOLI: She clearly wasn't eligible when she nominated. So that is clear-cut -

O’CONNOR: No, no, you can interrupt me if you like or you can interview me, it's up  to you.

TRIOLI: No, it's a conversation.

O’CONNOR: Let me just - OK, let me just respond to that. You're not the High Court.

TRIOLI: No, that's right, and neither are you.

O’CONNOR: No, and all I'm saying to you is that you just indicated that she's  ineligible. You're not the High Court Justice.

It is our view and it is the advice we've received that she's taken all reasonable  steps. Now, as I've said, we are still examining all of the details of the Senate  disclosures that were only out yesterday. In some cases, people have provided no  documents at all. In the case of Senator Gallagher, she actually has indicated she's  taken reasonable steps. And of course, there's 24 hours to proceed, to look at the  House of Representatives members. I believe there should be an effort by the  Parliament to work together to refer people if there are questions about ineligibility,  but it shouldn't be just the focus on one. We should be looking at everybody.

TRIOLI: Indeed, I think Australians would want every member of Parliament to be  looked at. Brendan O’Connor, New Zealand has offered to resettle 150 refugees on  Manus and Nauru. You were the Home Affairs Minister during probably the worst  period of asylum seeker arrivals. Would you be comfortable accepting that offer?

O’CONNOR: I do believe that the Government should entertain this. That's why we  supported a motion in the House, which as you know prevailed for a moment  yesterday -

TRIOLI: A brief moment, yes.

O’CONNOR: A brief moment, until the Government got their act together after losing  control of the Parliament. I do believe in the circumstances we're in, where these  detainees have been languishing indefinitely for years now, that it is wrong for the  Government not to accept the generous offer by New Zealand to provide and afford  accommodation and resettlement for 150 detainees for this year, and indeed, for  future years.

TRIOLI: OK, but popping your hat back on, given that you were Home Affairs  Minister, that sort of thing has always been presented to us by the then Labor

Government as keeping alive the people smuggler business model. So can you talk  out of both sides of your mouth about that one?

O’CONNOR: I've been pretty clear about this and I was Immigration Minister also. I  really did spend some time in this area of public policy.

TRIOLI: You did.

O’CONNOR: The same argument could be made about sending people to America.  It's a first world country. If people think that there's a pull factor in New Zealand  because it's a first world country, so too it would be true that having the deal between  the United States and Australia could arguably be a comparable situation. But you  cannot have hundreds of people languishing for now five years. That was never the  original intention of setting up offshore processing. Processing is supposed to take  place, and I think it is now overdue and the Government, I think, is considering, quite  frankly, is considering this privately. I know the Minister for Immigration is indicating  a hard line. I think there are those in the Government who understand that  something has to be done and I don't want to score points on this, but I just want the  Government to seriously consider the offer. I think it's one made in good faith and I  think given the circumstances and the real challenges now confronting those  detainees, that the best thing for the Government to do is to embrace that offer.

TRIOLI: Brendan O'Connor, good to talk to you this morning and enjoy the long  sitting of Parliament, won't you?

O’CONNOR: Thanks. Absolutely

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010



