



SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC 24 NEWS MORNINGS  WEDNESDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2017

Subjects: US refugee resettlement deal; Visit to the US with Parliamentary Joint  Committee on Intelligence and Security; US immigration ban; South China Sea;  Trump Administration



JOE O’BRIEN: The Shadow Foreign Affairs Minister Penny Wong has been visiting the  United States as part of a Parliamentary delegation. She joins us now from Washington  DC. Welcome.

We have had conflicting messages this morning from the White House and the  Australian Government about the status of this refugee deal. The Australian  Government is adamant meetings are proceeding as planned. What does this reflect  about the communication between the Australian Government, the Trump  Administration and the state of this?

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: First,  good to be with you. On this arrangement you'd have to ask: Does the Prime Minister  actually know what the agreement is and whether it will be implemented? It appears  there are very mixed messages as your correspondent has just outlined.

When Malcolm Turnbull stands up in just over an hour in Australian time, he really does  need to clarify with the Australian people precisely which of the versions that have been  reported by the ABC is correct, and what the detail of the agreement actually means. I  do think the Prime Minister is obliged to do that in these circumstances.

O’BRIEN:  If this agreement does go ahead, won't it be a significant achievement in the  current environment?

WONG: Look, we want the agreement to work. We have been saying for some time that  the Government does need to find resettlement options for the people on Manus. We  want the agreement to work. I think the concern is we've seen yet another  announcement from Malcolm Turnbull, which the next day has unravelled or appeared

to have doubt cast on it. That's a problem the Prime Minister needs to remedy when he  stands up in front of the Press Club.

O’BRIEN: Looking more broadly at the situation in the US now, it's a pretty  extraordinary time to be there. What's the sense you are getting about the mood in the  early days of the Trump Presidency?

WONG: I'm here as part of a Parliamentary delegation for the Committee on Intelligence  and Security. We have obviously been talking matters associated with intelligence  matters, security matters with our counterparts, Senate and House committees that deal  with intelligence, homeland security and we'll also be dealing with other agencies. There  has been very strong focus on the partnership, the Alliance and the partnership which  exists between the United States and Australia when it comes to these matters.

Having said that, obviously this is a big time of change. This Administration is in the  process of appointing people and in the process of making a range of decisions. And  certainly, the sense here is of a great deal of change, as I'm sure that people in  Australia have been observing with some of the announcements that have been made.

O’BRIEN: Just on that point, just this morning Donald Tusk from the EU has listed the  US alongside other threats like an assertive China and an aggressive Russia. What do  you make of the reaction from the rest of the world to what's happening in the US and  should Australia be raising concerns too?

WONG: Well, before I left Australia, I said, and I think Bill Shorten has also said, that we  should be prepared, the Prime Minister should be prepared, to stand up for Australian  values and Australian interests. The executive order that has caused a lot of  controversy, both here in the United States and globally, is an area where Malcolm  Turnbull should be asserting both Australian values and Australian interests.

Australian values are that we believe in a non-discriminatory immigration policy and that  has served us well. When it comes to our interests, I share the concern of Republican  John McCain and Republican Lindsey Graham who make the point that this executive  order and its implementation, however it was intended, has the risk of alienating the  very many Muslims around the world who are our strongest allies against Daesh, who  reject its ideology of hatred. That would be a very negative move in terms of Australia's  interests.

O’BRIEN: We have seen the protests over the immigration ban but does the rest of the  world have to accept that this is what half of the Americans who went to the polls voted  for? Doesn't this reflect what they want?

WONG: Look, it does. The Administration does have a range of policies that it went to  the polls with. We respect their democratic process but that doesn't mean we don’t  assert what we believe are in Australia’s interests and consistent with Australian values.  That is the job of the elected Government.

It is disappointing Malcolm Turnbull hasn't followed the example of other conservative  leaders like Angela Merkel and Theresa May, both of whom have made comments in  relation to this policy.

O’BRIEN: Malcolm Turnbull's point on that is that he has discussed things privately with  President Trump and that is the correct way for friends to approach this, and the  diplomatic way to do this - to come up with the most effective solution in the long-term,  like getting this deal which you support to resettle people in offshore detention?

WONG: Joe, are you seriously suggesting that the US Government would say to  Australia "We'll only do this deal if you don't criticise us"? I can't imagine that's the basis  of our relationship with the United States. It certainly doesn't appear to be the basis of  the alliance and relationship that the British have with the United States from the  comments that Theresa May has made. It doesn't appear to be the position that Angela  Merkel believes is the situation. I don't accept that that is a sensible rationale for not  making clear what Australia's views are about the impact of this policy.

O’BRIEN: But has Australia got a leg to stand on lecturing to the US on this when the  UNHCR has repeatedly raised deep concern about Australia's policy describing it as  immensely harmful and aspects of it as highly concerning?

WONG: Well, look, we can have a debate about what an appropriate response is to  unauthorised arrivals. We can have a discussion about whether or not boat turn-backs  are the appropriate policy. Labor has gone through that debate. We have made clear  our position. I understand there are some in the community who don't agree with that  but that is the position of the Labor Party.

But we are not talking about that here. We are talking about particular countries being  singled out and the perception of that. I think that is the reason why we have seen the  concern in Australia and in the United States but also globally.

O’BRIEN:  On the foreign policy front, how concerned are you about a potentially  dangerous escalation of tensions in the South China Sea? What should Australia be  saying to the US and China about that?

WONG: Well, we have an interest in continued constructive US engagement in the  region. That has underpinned security in our region, peace in our region and has been  the platform on which economic prosperity and economic growth has been able to  operate. So that is very important.

What we would urge is strong, sound and good relations between the US and China. It's  in our interests for there to be a positive relationship between the United States and  China. We don't want to see issues escalate and we'd urge that differences be resolved  by sensible diplomacy. That is the approach Australia has taken.

O’BRIEN: It sounds like Donald Trump may try to push the envelope on this with an  increased US Navy presence in the South China Sea. What do you believe are the  limits of reasonable diplomacy?

WONG: I'm not going to comment on hypotheticals. A lot of things have been said and  commented upon in the days leading up to and since the inauguration.

I'd say we want a region that is peaceful and secure. There are tensions in the region  when it comes to the South China Sea. We want them resolved, as far as possible,  amicably. We want them resolved in a way that reflects the international law of the sea.

We think that that rules-based order has served the whole region well and obviously  American engagement in the region has underpinned that.  But I'm not going to react to  every comment that's made by members of the Administration.

I think we should look at the approach that the Administration takes and the Australian  Government, I'm sure, will continue to and should continue to engage closely with the  Administration about how it sees progress being made towards resolution of some of  those disputes in the South China Sea.

O’BRIEN: Senator Wong, you mentioned at the outset you were there in the US looking  at cyber security and intelligence as well. There have been reports of this strained  relationship between Donald Trump and the intelligence community. Are you getting any  sense of that strained relationship in the extensive talks no doubt that you have had with  people in that field in the US?

WONG: I'm not going to add commentary to what has already been reported publicly  about those. Some of those reports may be accurate, some may not and some are  commentary. I'm not going to add to that. What I would say is, obviously, from our  perspective, we value very deeply our intelligence relationship with the United States.

O’BRIEN: OK, Senator Penny Wong, thanks for talking to us today from Washington.

WONG: Good to be with you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

