

16 October 2017





DOCTORS RING ALARM OVER MANUS ISLAND HEALTH CRISIS



The Independent Member for Denison, Andrew Wilkie, will join Dr Barri Phatarfod and Dr  Paddy McLisky from Doctors for Refugees to discuss the deteriorating health situation on  Manus Island.

WHEN: 1:30pm TODAY 16 October  WHERE: Senate Courtyard, Parliament House CANBERRA

“The situation on Manus Island is dire,” Mr Wilkie said.

“On top of what we already know about the dreadful conditions in the detention centre on  Manus Island, the way in which the Australian Government is managing the impending  closure of the centre on 31 October is making a bad situation worse.

“Of particular concern is the impending withdrawal of medical care and torture and trauma  support. Already we’re seeing the improper dispensing of medications.

“Foxtrot Compound has already been shut down and there is no electricity, running water or  drinking water for the men who are there. And the East Lorengau transit accommodation that  the Australian Government is pressuring the detainees to relocate to is unsafe and lacks basic  medical facilities.

“On top of this many people on Manus Island fear for their safety because of recent violent  incidents and escalating tensions within the community.

“The Australian Government has a duty of care to these people and at the moment it’s failing  miserably. The only humane solution is to immediately bring everyone on Manus and Nauru  to Australia so their claims can be processed and they can be given protection if their claims  are genuine. At the very least, if the Government is going to imprison people offshore they  should ensure that they receive appropriate health care.

“The Government would have us believe that all the problems on Manus Island will be  solved by the closure of the camp and the deportation of some detainees to the United States.  This is patent nonsense and the Government is being downright dishonest again.”



For more information: Tim Hurd 0447 427 292

