Senator the Hon. Matt Canavan  Minister for Resources and Northern Australia

TRANSCRIPT— Doorstop Canberra

E&OE

Topics: Labor's double standards on citizenship, Bob Carr's comments on Adani, Indigenous economic  development

MATT CANAVAN: Well I am going to agree in part with my fellow potential Italian Senator Richard Di  Natale , there have been some sides of politics in this place that have acted with integrity through  this difficult citizenship process. And there have been other sides that have failed the basic character  integrity test. It's easy to do the right thing when the consequences are good for you. It's harder to

do the right thing it when the consequences are bad. And for the Nationals Party it has been hard,  there have been bad consequences for us, hard consequences for us from fessing up and being  honest with the Australian people about the situation myself, Barnaby Joyce, and Fiona Nash all  found ourselves in a few months ago.  As a result of that process we've lost our Deputy Leader, Fiona Nash, we lost a Senator. We lost a

Deputy Prime Minister for a period of time, it's great to have him back. But we knew that what we  did in the last few month was the right thing to do. The law is the law, and when these situations  arose, like the Greens, the Nationals Party fessed up, put ourselves in front of the court, faced the  music, and dealt with the consequences wherever they would fall.

There's another side of politics here, in Bill Shorten, who is just acting in a shifty way. Bill Shorten is  acting more shifty than a Sidchrome tool set. He is all over the shop on this, he has not been up front  with the Australian people. He has repeatedly told the Australian people he's got no problems on his  side. We now learn that there are probably five Labor MPs or Senators who have issues. Karma has a

way of catching up with you Bill, it has a way of catching up with you when you try to deceive the  Australian people. And Bill has been found out now as just a shifty Labor leader who won't be  upfront with the Australian people about his own side so how do we expect to trust him at all.

JOURNALIST: Can you give us an update on how negotiations are going with the Opposition in terms  of discussing referrals?

MATT CANAVAN: Well really the ball is in their court. All of the referrals that have occurred so far  ultimately occurred through self-referral. And certainly on our side both the Liberals and Nationals  parties we have self-referred individuals where the circumstances gave rise to a case. In the case of  Malcolm Roberts, the Labor Party - this is how hypocritical they are - the Labor Party were going to  refer former Senator Roberts without his support. They threatened to do that, eventually Senator  Roberts relented and did refer himself. But the Labor Party were happy to do that to a One Nation  Senator but won't apply the same standard and test to their own. It's a double standard being



No publication date - received by Parl Library 6/12/2017

imposed by the Labor Party. It's up to them, the Labor Party have to come clean now about whether  they will refer the Senators and Members with questions over them. If they will not, the  Government will reserve the right, if necessary, to make those referrals in cases where clearly the  High Court should be providing an opinion.

JOURNALIST: What about the Coalition, when will they be making self-referrals?

MATT CANAVAN: We've done that, we've done that. Now we can respectfully disagree about each  individual case, and I won't make any pronouncement this morning about individual cases because  while I've looked at the documents I don't pretend to be a constitutional expert, notwithstanding  the process I've been through in the last few months, so let's get the proper advice. But we have  already done that. We've done that in circumstances like Bennelong where potentially we could

lose our majority in the House of Representatives. So I don't think anybody could claim that we're  not willing to refer people when and if there's a necessary requirement to do so. Each individual  circumstance will be different but it's really in the first instance up to the Labor Party to come clean  with the Australian people and face the music.

JOURNALIST: Just on those media reports about the Australian Border Force telling refugees on  Nauru that they must separate from wives and children in order to apply for resettlement in the US.  I guess, that contravenes international law, is that wrong do you think?

MATT CANAVAN: That's the first I've heard of those reports this morning. I am not going to  comment on media reports that I don't have further information on.

JOURNALIST: Just in principle what do you think about that?

MATT CANAVAN: Well again, I don't completely have advice on the international law, it's obviously  a matter for the Minister for Immigration. I would need more information before I comment on this.

JOURNALIST: And just on Bob Carr on China and Adani, has said that China doesn't want any  involvement there

MATT CANAVAN: I think Bob Carr needs to be asked a very clear question about what he has asked  the Chinese to do about Yancoal's investment in coal mines in NSW. Yancoal has bought Rio Tinto's  coal mines in the Hunter Valley for more than two billion US dollars. It's a massive investment, one  of the biggest investments in coal in Australia's history. It's a big tick of approval for the strength of  Australia's coal industry and the Government supports the investment, we have not problems with

it. But if Bob Carr thinks that Chinese investment in Queensland coal mines is bad but Chinese  investment in NSW coal mines is good I'd like him to explain to the people of Queensland why he  imposes that double standard. The reality now is we have a Labor Green dream team in Annastacia  Palaszczuk and Bob Carr - two Labor premiers who are standing against jobs in North Queensland,  standing against the Adani mine and doing everything they can to stop jobs and opportunity in North

Queensland. I think the people of North Queensland will work that out and they will work out that a  vote for the Labor Party is really a vote for the Greens. And if you want jobs, you want opportunity,  you've got to vote for parties that are going to back you and not do shifty deals behind the scenes  with Greens and other nation's Governments.

JOURNALIST: Do you have any hope for Chinese investment in Adani?

MATT CANAVAN: I support all foreign investment which will help improve the wealth and welfare of  the Australian people. We do welcome foreign investment. Bob Carr has certainly welcomed foreign

investment but he just doesn't like some in North Queensland apparently. But we welcome it. Now  it's got to be on the terms that are beneficial to our national interest. There has been no specific  proposal brought forward from Adani to my knowledge about Chinese investment at this stage.  We've got a robust foreign investment framework. If such a proposal came forward it would be  assessed under that.

JOURNALIST: Senator Pat Dodson was out here this morning talking about disappointment in  Indigenous Affairs reform essentially coming to nothing this year. How should that get back on the  agenda next year?

MATT CANAVAN: Well I'll just make one point that is actually related and overlaps one of your  previous questions. Today also in the paper an Indigenous elder of the Wangan and Jagalingou  peoples is criticising Bob Carr for stopping what the Indigenous people want to do which is to get the  Carmichael Mine up and running. They voted 293 to one in favour of the mine, 293 to one. But Bob  Carr has appointed himself apparently a better mortal than the Indigenous elders who want the

mine to proceed. So the first thing we've got to do to get Indigenous reform going is let Indigenous  people have their say. Let them have their rights on Native Title, we gave it to them 25 years ago but  we still have a bunch of white people like Bob Carr running around trying to tell black fellas what to  do on their land and I think it's disgraceful. I think it's absolutely disgraceful.

Now what I am trying to do as the Northern Australia Minister is give a voice to those Indigenous  people who do want development and opportunity in Northern Australia, like many other  Australians. Last week I met with my Indigenous reference group with a bunch of agricultural rural  research development corporations to talk about how we can invest in agriculture particularly with a  mindset of supporting Indigenous development. They were very productive discussions, we've got to  do that real practical work. I understand and I do talk to Senator Pat Dodson a lot too, I understand  his frustration about Native Title reform, it's a very complex area and the Attorney General is  progressing that as well.

JOURNALIST: Is there any contradiction in terms of listening to Indigenous voices in terms of  investment but not in terms of constitutional reform?

MATT CANAVAN: The Indigenous people I have spoken to, there are mixed views about those  changes and of course it would be counterproductive to Indigenous development if we were to  proceed and progress a reform which did not get the support of the Australian people, and I've seen  no evidence that the Australian people would support the Uluru Statement. I think we need to craft  that again in a way that's going to allow constitutional reform to happen and be supported by the

Australian people.

(ENDS)

Kylie Barron  Senior Media Adviser  Office of Senator the Hon Matthew Canavan  Minister for Resources and Northern Australia  Parliament House, CANBERRA ACT 2600  T:0262777180 1 M:0438493114

