

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNDAY AGENDA SKY NEWS  SUNDAY, 28 MAY 2017

SUBJECT/S: Gonski funding; NDIS; Budget; Indigenous recognition; Request  for additional troops for Afghanistan; Refugees and terrorism threat; Role for  ADF in terrorist events; South China Sea; One Belt One Road Initiative; Donald  Trump; US Alliance

PETER VAN ONSELEN: As mentioned off the top of the program our first guest  today is senior Labor frontbencher, Shadow Defence spokesperson, Richard Marles.  He joins us live, thanks very much for your company.

RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Good to speak to you  this morning Peter, and to you as well Paul.

VAN ONSELEN: Let's start if we can where Paul finished off on his editorial, this  idea that Labor is shunning what might be considered to be Labor party policies for  largely political reasons. It’s Paul's editorial. Is he right or is he wrong?

MARLES: Well it's not going to surprise you that I don't agree with that editorial, um,  but no doubt it was well put there Paul, but I think this isn't a question of opposing  traditional Labor policies. I mean we have been the party of schools and school  funding and indeed needs-based funding, and if you want to look at that to begin  with, our criticism here is that there's a whole lot of inequities which come from the  way in which the Government is proposing its funding. I mean the Catholic Education  Office says that one in five of its most vulnerable schools are likely to be cut as a  result of the way in which the Government has put forward its funding proposal and  $22 billion dollars over a 10 year period is a huge amount of money to take out of  schools and I put it in those terms because that is the amount that was committed by  the Coalition going into the 2013 election. Now that's the point that we're making  there. In terms of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, I mean we have always  been supportive of this; it was instituted under the Gillard Government and indeed  really we are supporting the Medicare levy we're just saying that it ought to be done  in a progressive way so that those on the lowest incomes aren’t required to pay it,  but we are supporting it on higher incomes. But the NDIA as it existed back in 2013  was properly funded and this ultimately comes down to a question of how we're  funding the budget. We think it can be done in a fairer way.  A budget result which  came out of this budget which sees people who are on high incomes, millionaires

getting a tax cut by virtue of the removal of the deficit levy, whilst the imposition of an  additional Medicare levy would see those on less than average weekly earnings  getting a tax increase - that's just not fair. And that's the principle that we're seeking  to stick with, and we can we can do that.

PAUL KELLY: On that point about the funding of the NDIS, Richard Marles, given  that Labor has only qualified support for the 0.5 percent increase in the Medicare  levy, at what time will Labor indicate how it intends to fund the shortfall in the  provision of funding for the NDIS?

MARLES: Well we've made it clear that….that, firstly the NDIS was properly funded  at the time that we left office. We're supporting an increase in the Medicare levy at  the higher end. But the point that we're making about funding across the budget  generally is that if you want to look for additional money, the $65 billion dollar give  away to large businesses, which we now have learned in the course of the budget  sittings - which is the reduction in the company tax for large companies - I mean  you can go there.  You can look at the way in which we do negative gearing as we  have been putting forward now for a couple of years. That's a significant budget  save. So we will continue to work on how we can make the budget work in a way  which is fair. It does actually require some deep and rigorous thought. We've been  doing that and that's all we’re sticking up for in the way in which we are arguing the  proposals at the moment.

KELLY: I’d just make the point as you know in relation to the corporate tax cut, of  the last election campaign, of course Labors savings from that were dedicated to  Labor programs. they weren't dedicated to the NDIS as such. Can I ask the question,  will Labor feel obliged to outline at some stage in the near future how it intends to  fund the NDIS or will Labor operate on the principle of “trust me”?

MARLES: I think Paul, if you look at the way in which we've been going about  policies we've been putting forward in respect of the budget, in respect of savings  measures, but also revenue measures, we have been an Opposition which has been  as forward and as transparent as really any opposition has been and we have been,  I think, brave in terms of our preparedness to talk about ways in which the budget  can be properly funded.  Superannuation; we were the first to come out of the blocks  to talk about savings measures there; negative gearing I mentioned as well; how we  tax multinationals and we will continue to do that right through until the next election.  I mean being responsible in terms of the management of the budget we see as being  a cornerstone of our ability to be elected. We have seen that from day one and that  will continue to be the basis upon which we go forward to the next election, so it's the  total antithesis of saying, you know, you can trust us on this - I mean you can, but  you can because we will be transparent in terms of how we're going to do it.

VAN ONSELEN: Before we get to your portfolio more generally, the other half of  Paul's editorial was this whole issue of indigenous recognition and the need for - if I  can put it this way - almost warring parties in terms of what that should look like, to  be able to come together in the Prime Minister's view for there to be a successful  referendum to include indigenous recognition. What’s Labor's view on this; I mean  what's your personal view? Do you see a treaty as something that is divisive or do

you see a treaty as something that can actually bring the Australian community  together?

MARLES: Well firstly, I agree with Paul that I think the work of the meeting in Uluru  over the last few days has been deeply significant and we would certainly thank and  congratulate all those who have been involved in that process. We await the  Referendum Council's report, which will come to Parliament in the next month or so,  and we’ll obviously examine that carefully. I think recognition in the Constitution is  really important and we support that. But we've never seen that as the be all on end  all. We've always had an open mind to other measures that might need to be taken  in order to pursue and ultimately complete this process.  I suppose I would also  make the point that the Prime Minister's observation about referendums is evidently  true. I mean referendums don't get up unless they are something which is supported  across the board and what we do does need to be an act which unites the country.  Now I don't say that in terms of making a judgment about whether a treaty or  anything else would be one thing or the other, but we need to get to a point where  there is broad consensus about the way forward.

KELLY: Can I just shift to your shadow portfolio now, The Australian has reported on  page one yesterday that the American administration is likely to seek a further troop  commitment from Australia in terms of the Middle East commitments.  In general  terms what's Labor's response to that?

MARLES: Well the starting point here is that Afghanistan matters. This is the place  where going back in the late 90s it was a haven for terrorist activities and terrorist  training and as people well know a number of the Bali bombers received training in  Afghanistan leading up to the Bali bombing in 2002.  So we've got a direct interest in  that country and in ensuring that it is denied to terrorist activities in the future. I was  in Afghanistan the week before last, and it is the case that al Qaeda is having a  greater presence in that country, ISIS also is present there. The country is  experiencing an insurgency. The circumstances on the ground are becoming more  difficult. We can't afford to see Afghanistan lost and it is important that we focus on  that. So we'll look at any request once we're properly briefed by the Government; we  hope to have that briefing this week. We've obviously sought that. We'll look at that  request very carefully. We're going to act in a really constructive way here with the  Government.  As I indicated in my Press Club speech during the week,  bipartisanship is where we ought to be aiming in terms of questions of this kind. But  Afghanistan is absolutely too important to see lost to terrorist organisations and we  have to bear that in mind.

KELLY: Do you think that in terms of looking at a greater troop commitment to  Afghanistan, the right way to look at this is in terms of Australian forces in a training  role, in a training capacity, rather than a direct combat capacity as such?

MARLES: I do.  For a couple of reasons. Firstly, I think the lesson from the Iraq  invasion in 2003 is that we really need to be building the capacity of these countries  themselves to deal with the challenges that they face, because when we go, it is  ultimately left to the forces in those countries to deal with the situation and you can't  have a situation where there is simply allied troops doing the fighting and then  hoping to have some kind of never ending occupation. That's not going to work.  And

so the model that we're now seeing both in Afghanistan and in Iraq is very much in  terms of Australians providing a training role. We're doing a lot of training in  Afghanistan specifically in terms of officer training. It's really well received.  We are  making a difference there and I think that's partly why there is a request specifically  in relation to Australia because of the really positive impact we're having. But the  other point here Paul, is that it then becomes a more sustainable commitment from  an Australian perspective. I mean this is still a very dangerous environment, there  are all sorts of possibilities which could ensue and a lot of care is taken to make sure  our Defence personnel are safe. But it's not nearly as dangerous as what we were  undertaking in Afghanistan in the past and therefore I think that an ongoing  commitment of this kind is much more sustainable in the public eye and that's really  important too.

KELLY: I think one of the interesting points you made in your speech this week and  you have just made it again this morning is your commitment, and Labor's  commitment, to an ongoing military role in that part of the world, and in Afghanistan,  and this, this conflicts with the view of a number of academics if you like, who’ve  been arguing in more recent times that Australia in a military sense should focus  more on its immediate region and it should look to leave the Middle East as soon as  it possibly can. Clearly that is a position that you and Labor at the moment reject.

MARLES: Well, I agree that we need to have a focus on our immediate region as  well and I started that speech by articulating what has been the defence posture  really over successive white papers and that is an armed forces which has as an aim  the defence of our continent, maintaining regional security in our immediate region,  but playing our part globally as well, and it's in that third category that you could  describe what we're now doing in the Middle East.  I think that is important, that third  category. The reality is that globalisation as we've experienced it over the last few  decades applies as much to the national security framework as it does to the  economy. You can of course buy goods on the Internet and they’re transported from  all over the world; but we've also seen terrorism now easily exported from  Afghanistan, from Mosul to our home shores and therefore we do need to be thinking  more broadly.  And I think it also goes to a question of who we are as a nation,  Paul.  When countries seek help and we're not going to be able to answer every call  for help, but I think we should be a country, which is among those that is willing to  play its part in global affairs and that's what's occurred with both Afghanistan and  with Iraq. Both the governments of those countries want us to be there. Want us to  play a role. We should be a country willing to do that if it's in our national interest and  in respect of both of those places, it most certainly is.

VAN ONSELEN: We're talking to Labor's defence spokesperson, Richard Marles.  We going to take a quick break here on the program, when we come back we'll  continue to unpick some of the issues raised in his National Press Club address.

[Break]

VAN ONSELEN: Welcome back. You're watching Sunday Agenda.  A reminder,  shortly we'll be talking to Angus Taylor, the frontbencher within the Government with  responsibilities for cities. But at the moment we're talking to Richard Marles the  Shadow Defence spokesperson. Can I get your thoughts on the head of ASIO’s

response in Senate Estimates to this issue of whether or not there is a threat from  terrorists via refugee intakes? He basically quashed that entirely. Does Labor just  accept that as a fact?

MARLES: Well, I think that it's important that we do the due diligence to make sure  that security checks are done in relation to those who come here through our  humanitarian program. That of course is done and it's done very carefully and very  extensively, and in relation to a lot who've come out of Jordan, for example, there is  already a lot of data that's collected by the UNHCR, biometric information and the  like. I think…I mean you can never be absolutely certain with anything and we need  to bear that in mind. But I think with appropriate vetting and security checks we can  make sure that there is no particularly greater risk associated with refugees coming  to this country than any of the other risks that we face and obviously -

VAN ONSELEN:  So what did you think of the head of ASIO’s response to the  questions though, in Estimates, he was pretty forthright and pretty blunt.

MARLES: Well, as I say I think that with the appropriate security checks we can  make sure that our country’s safe and I've long been an advocate for the need for  the humanitarian program to be increased, for us to have an intake and specifically  to have an intake in relation to those displaced by the Syrian and Iraq conflicts, and  so I very much support the refugee program and I think with appropriate security  checks, we can make sure that Australia remains safe.

KELLY: Now after the events in Manchester we've seen British troops on the streets  of cities in Britain and the Government has indicated that it wants to look at this issue  of how you can best use troops, Australian troops, in this country in the case of a  terrorist event.  What Labor's attitude towards this? First of all, as a matter of  principle, does Labor think that this is a desirable direction to go in and secondly do  we need to make any changes to the law, to the Defence Act and so on, in order to  make this feasible?

MARLES: Well, as a matter of principle Paul, we are very open minded to having a  conversation about all of that. That's perhaps the most important thing I can say in  respect of this.  Global terrorism has changed the way our defence forces act. I've  mean we've been speaking about Afghanistan and Iraq; in very significant ways we  are there because of the impact of global terrorism. But I think it makes sense that  we are bringing to bear all the capabilities and the right capabilities that we have to  any given situation and those situations are continually changing and continually  challenging and we need to be open minded about how we best manage this, so you  know if there does need to be a look at the way in which we coordinate our  constabulary forces on the one hand and our military forces on the other to put the  best capability in play in the right moment, we're up for that discussion.  And equally  if there needs to be an examination of the law in respect of that we're willing to have  that conversation as well. I come back to what I said in the Press Club. These are  issues where we ought to be striving for bipartisanship. There isn't a partisan  ideological divide on this. We are all acting from the basis of wanting to make  Australia as safe as possible and I think we do need to be continually thinking about  this and flexible in our approach and we are.

VAN ONSELEN:  Would a Department Homeland Security help with that, do you  think?

MARLES: Well, there's been a lot of discussion around the world about this sort of  model and indeed what you see in the US is different, for example, to the model that  you see in Britain. Again, we're up for a conversation about how we can engage in  better coordination of our resources, how we can look at doing this better. I think it's  important to make, at the outset, the comment that nothing is broken at the moment  in Australia. We often say that our counter-terrorism agencies are the best in the  world and that can easily wash over you as the kind of thing that people will say. But  it's actually true. We do do this stuff well but that doesn't mean that we shouldn't be  looking at how we can improve and if there is a reason for doing that we're open to  that. What I would say though is it can't be allowed to descend to the politics of the  moment, to people's personal ambitions, to internal squabbles and it's that kind of  politics, which to be honest, we've seen coming out of the Government in relation to  that specific proposal over the last couple of years. We want to have a good look at  the policy here. We'll leave that kind of politics up to the Government.

KELLY: If we can just switch to the South China Sea. When I interviewed you at the  end of last year, you were supportive of the idea of a freedom of navigation exercise,  sending a vessel through the zone near those islands occupied by the Chinese at  the moment, is that still your view that Labor should engage in that sort of exercise?

MARLES: Well as a matter of principle my view has not changed. What I was  articulating to you last year, was a matter of principle. We have a distinct interest in  the South China Sea and that is, it is about freedom of navigation. Sixty percent of  our trade, by many estimates, goes through the South China Sea and that is a  distinct interest of Australia's and we need to remember that when we're discussing  this.  This is not a kind of far off, removed issue for us. This is very present in terms  of what we do in the world. It's also important to know what our interests are not. We  have, we don't have an interest in the sovereignty disputes between various  countries in the South China Sea and China themselves.  But the UN Convention on  the Law of the Sea matters deeply to Australia. Now, the construction of the artificial  islands in the South China Sea have been found by the Court of Arbitration  internationally to be in breach of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, that  convention matters to us. Any actions, including freedom of navigation operations,  any actions which support the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, are in our  national interest.

KELLY: I understand the argument that you’re just putting forward. What's your  response to your critics who would say that Australia should not be involved in that  sort of exercise? That it's too provocative, that there’s no point in us alienating China  by engaging in that. What's your, what's your response to that critique?

MARLES: Well China matters and again I outlined that in the Press Club during the  week as well. And it's important that we continue, and build out our political and I  think our defence relationship with China. How these things are done can be more or  less provocative and the judgment about how they're done can really only be made  from office. But to ignore the national interest that we have in the South China Sea is  just wrong as well. I mean we…60 percent of our trade goes through that part of the

world. We clearly have an interest and I think the way we proceed on these issues  when we're trying to look at how we engage with China, when we look at America's  role in the region, we just have to have a very clear-eyed view about what our  national interests are and act in accordance with them. In this case it's about the  trade, the shipping that goes through that part of the world, that is underpinned by  the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, actions which support the UN Convention  on the Law of the Sea is what’s in our national interest. Clearly we have an interest  in making sure that we build our relationship with China, and I'm very much  supportive of that as well.

KELLY: Just staying on China for the moment. President Xi has talked about China's  Belt and Road Initiative as being the project of the century and China would clearly  like to see some of its investment, some of its proposed investment to this country,  such as investments in the development of the Northern Territory badged under the  Belt and Road Initiative. I'm just wondering what your thoughts are or what Labor's  thoughts are on that sort of Chinese proposal, if Labor has finalised a position on  that?

MARLES: It's looking at this on a case-by-case basis Paul, I think that's the way to  answer the question. Certainly it's not about rejecting China's initiative out of hand.  That makes no sense at all. There are going to be important infrastructure projects  and a desire from China to invest in them, which may well be in our national interest  that we should ultimately support. Clearly though, we do need to be bearing in mind  our national security when we engage in these and we need to be looking at things  through that lens. We were critical for example of China’s...of the Government  allowing the Port of Darwin to be purchased by Chinese interests which were  connected with the Chinese Government, based on our national security grounds  and interests. So that has to be a lens through which we look at this. But I've long  been a supporter of economic interaction with China and indeed Chinese investment  into Australia. I supported that when I was Trade Minister, went to Beijing to try and  play a part in concluding the China FTA. I'm really glad we have the China FTA.  So  we can walk down this path, it needs to be done with caution and we need to be  examining these things on a case-by-case basis. But I'm sure there are many  projects that we will want to be a part of.

VAN ONSELEN: Bill Shorten was highly critical of Donald Trump before he became  U.S. President, he wasn't exactly Robinson Crusoe in taking that view before he got  the top job, but in the time that he's been there have you been surprised on the  upside with how he's performed or is he pretty much delivered what you yourself and  the Labor Party expected?

MARLES: Well I suppose I've tried to maintain a position of being cautious and  sober in the way in which I react to Donald Trump and because he is a person who  is doing politics very differently to how we've ever seen it be done before. One of the  things that is disconcerting about the way Donald Trump operates is that he is  unpredictable and he can, he wears that really as a badge of honour, he probably  wouldn't take that as a criticism.  And in an international sense that's a hard reality to  come to terms with, but we're all going to have to come to terms with it. There is an  upside though, if that's your question, I mean I think that if you look at North Korea,  for example, having a harder edge in respect of North Korea and seeking to engage

China in dealing with North Korea is the right way to go and Donald Trump's been  responsible for that.

VAN ONSELEN: You thought that the Obama Administration got that wrong? That  this is a good shift by the Trump Administration?

MARLES: It may well be that you would have seen similar actions under a Clinton  Administration and I heard Jeffrey Bleich interviewed on this who made that point,  that if there had been a President Clinton she may well have been going down this  path as well. But I do think a harder edge in relation to North Korea is the right play. I  do think trying to engage China more in respect of North Korea, given its particular  relationship with North Korea is also the right play and incidentally China's initial  reactions to this have been have been basically positive in terms of wanting to play a  bigger role. But the idea of a North Korea weaponising an intercontinental ballistic  missile with a nuclear warhead is an appalling prospect and it has to be dealt with.  To take another example, I think the missile strikes in Syria in response to the use of  chemical weapons, that was the right play as well. I mean when you draw a line  you've got to give some meaning to it. And it is right that we ought to as an  international community be trying to see the end to the use of chemical weapons.  There’s been a treaty in place since the 1920s. That was an appropriate step as well.  So I do think there have been steps taken by President Trump, which have been  positive, but we're going to have to look at every step he takes very carefully. One of  the points I made during the week is that the kind of supportive reflex and instinct,  which I’ve always had towards the United States, is probably not enough to get us  through at this moment and maybe there's a really good discipline that comes out of  that, to make sure that we are examining absolutely everything on its merits and  working out what is Australia's interests and having a clear eyed response to  incidents based on that.

VAN ONSELEN: Well what about for example, the information sharing ,the  concerns, there was concerns raised about Donald Trump sharing information about  ISIS that had been provided by an ally, the British Prime Minister she raised  concerns about the leaking of information to a New York newspaper in relation to  what happened in Manchester, is this something that Australia should be concerned  about as well?

MARLES: Well, I suppose I don't want to get into the specifics of what's going on in  respect of Britain and the US in relation to that, but in general I make this point, the  Five Eyes community is very important for Australia's national interest. But when  you're talking about intelligence information there's no more sort of precious  information than that which governments have and use and protect, and it needs to  be protected, and there needs to be a sense of confidence that nations have in each  other about the way information they share is ultimately going to be used, and so I  do think that is a bedrock of our relationships and it's important that we can have  confidence in that.

KELLY: Given what you said during the week in your speech to the Press Club, I  conclude from that that you feel that Malcolm Turnbull as Prime Minister should be  more publicly sceptical and critical from time to time of Donald Trump, is that  correct?



MARLES: I think that's a fair statement Paul. I mean there hasn't really been any  criticism that's come out from Malcolm Turnbull and I think there are going to be  occasions now where we need to be ready to criticize, and one of those that I  highlighted during the week was the executive order in relation to immigration. Now  there is a degree to which that's a domestic policy of the US and I'd be reticent to  comment on that. But immigration represents the door to a country, and so there's a  foreign policy dimension to it as well and having an immigration policy which is  avowedly discriminatory on the basis of religion, is an appalling thing for a civilised  country to engage in, and it demands criticism from the international community.  If  we ever did it, we would expect to be criticised by the international community and  we should be a part of that in that event. We didn't, we, Labor, criticized at that  moment, the Government did not. So I mean, that's an example where there does  need to be a willingness to say it as we see it, and that's where I come back to this  point, that the kind of reflex and instinct which got us through in the past and I've  been guilty of that as well, I don't think is going to be enough to get us through in the  next few years. Now that, that should not be read as being any criticism of the  Alliance, my speech during the week, I intended to be a passionate defence of the  Alliance, no matter who is the President and no matter who is the Prime Minister.  I  think it's deeply relevant to Australia today and it remains the cornerstone of our  defence framework and our foreign policy outlook. But within that, and it's totally ok  to do it within that, we need to be able to criticize where it's appropriate to do so, and  I suspect it’s going to be on occasion.

KELLY: But do you also accept that for a government, for a government not an  opposition, for a government and for a Prime Minister to start criticizing Donald  Trump, given his notorious glass jaw, there could well be adverse consequences?  Does Labor, does Labor accept that if Turnbull does what you want him to do then  there are likely to be adverse consequences?

MARLES: Well I think you can do this in a number of ways. You can, you can do  things in a more or less provocative way, a more or less subtle way. But ultimately  we have to be true to who we are and not reactive based on the particular  peculiarities of an individual who is the President the United States in any given  moment in time and that ought to apply in terms of whoever is the Prime Minister at  any moment in time -

KELLY: Can I just get this right. It seems to me that what you're saying, is let's  criticize Donald Trump but let's not provoke him, is that really feasible?

MARLES: Well firstly Paul it's not about criticizing Donald Trump for the sake of  criticizing Donald Trump.

KELLY: I know, I know.

MARLES:  I’ve made a lot of points in this interview about saying where I think  Donald Trump has got it right. And we need to be able to say that as well and that's  across the political spectrum, but very much on the Labor side we need to be able to  acknowledge where Donald Trump has got things right and he has got some things  right. It's not about Donald Trump, it's about us. It's about making sure that we are

saying who we are and what we believe in. Now an immigration policy, which is  avowedly discriminatory on the basis of religion, flies in the face of who we are as  Australia and how we see the world and it's very important that we articulate  that.  It's very important in terms of our own, you know, our own population, as a  country where a quarter of our population were born beyond our borders. That's not  about Donald Trump, that's about us and how we see the world and we shouldn't  change the way we see the world because of who is the President at any given  moment in time. But the point I also make is that how we see the world is that our  relationship with America is absolutely vital and we need to be emphasizing that, and  I did during the week and I do now.  The Alliance, irrespective of who is the  President, irrespective of the fact that Donald Trump is the President right now, is  absolutely critical to Australia and I remain a fierce advocate of it.

KELLY: Okay, but the consequence of what you're saying is that where Donald  Trump is running domestic policies that the Labor Party doesn't agree with, whether  they concern racial issues or presumably issues relating to women or sexuality or  gender, then Labor feels that the President of the United States ought to be  criticized.

MARLES: Oh now, I've actually been clear on that in this interview Paul, making the  point that I think it's not so much our place to be talking about domestic policies, I  mean it's never a “never” in respect of that, there are some occasions where  domestic policies are so appalling in other countries that we will comment about  them, but I don't think anything's happened in America under this President which  would require us to comment upon the domestic situation going on in the United  States, I made that very clear.  My point about the executive order in respect of  immigration is there is a foreign policy dimension to immigration; immigration for any  country is the door to which people come into that country and in that sense it is part  of the way in which that country relates to the rest of the world. It's in that respect  that I think the immigration order needed to be criticized by us, because it goes to  how countries work with each other. So I don't agree with the proposition that we  should be in there giving our view in respect of every domestic policy going on in the  US.  I haven't seen anything that's happened under President Trump which would be  so extreme in a domestic setting that it would require us to comment. But when we're  talking about the way in which America engages in the globe, we do need to be  ready to see it, to call it as it is. I mean I mentioned another example which was  actually when Donald Trump was the President-elect and he was talking, or tweeting  I should say, in respect of Taiwan. I mean we have long held a view of a One China  policy with Beijing as its capital with a whole lot of diplomatic forms which exist in  respect of Taiwan. It's not in our interests for that to be unsettled. It's important that  we make that clear and it's important for the Chinese that they hear us make that  clear. Now in doing that there is an element of criticism in respect of that tweet. Well  so be it, that, it's not about Donald Trump, it's about us and it's about making clear  that we are very clear about the way in which we engage with the world and how we  see these things playing out, and a non-discriminatory immigration policy is central to  that.

VAN ONSELEN: Richard Marles, Shadow Defence spokesperson, we appreciate  you joining us on Sunday Agenda, thanks for your company.

MARLES: Thank you.

MEDIA CONTACT: Simon Furey, 0415 032 732

