TRANSCRIPT

Sky News - Speers

Senator the Hon Mathias Cormann  Minister for Finance  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for Western Australia

Transcription:   PROOF COPY E & OE

Date:   18/12/2017

Topic(s):   Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook

DAVID SPEERS: For more on this Budget update I am joined now by the Finance Minister Mathias  Cormann. Good afternoon to you. The bottom line is looking better than it has for some years, but for  households, is income growth where you would like it to be?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Well employment growth is much stronger than what had previously been  anticipated. We would like income growth to strengthen into the future and the Budget forecast has  strengthening of wages growth over the forward estimates from 2.25 per cent this financial year to  3.5 per cent, which will be about 1 per cent above where our CPI is expected to be by 2020-21.  Wages growth is certainly the one part of the Budget, part of the economic indicators, that we would  like to see strengthened, which is one of the reasons why we need to get our business tax cuts  legislated in full as soon as possible.

DAVID SPEERS: So that is the answer to the wages growth, is the company tax cuts?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Nine out of ten Australians work for a private sector business and their  future job security, their future career prospects and their future wages growth depends on the future  success and the future profitability of the businesses that employ them. The way to boost wages  sustainably is by boosting productivity on the back of increased investment and businesses in  Australia compete for investments around the world and our corporate tax rate is too high by  international standards today.

DAVID SPEERS: But with income growth clearly not where you would like it to be, you have still got  an increase in the Medicare levy coming in mid 2019 as well. Penalty rates for many are going to be  going down and down over the coming years. Can you understand some households are not exactly  popping the champagne corks?

MATHIAS CORMANN: You have to look back at the situation we inherited in 2013. The economy  was weakening, unemployment was rising, the Budget position was rapidly deteriorating. If you look  at a speech that Chris Bowen gave in December 2013 at the National Press Club, putting down  some of the markers and benchmarks that we would need to reach. One of the key things out of  three that he mentioned was that we should try and keep the unemployment rate below 6.25 per  cent. Well it is at 5.4 per cent. We are still waiting for his press release congratulating us on our  …interrupted

DAVID SPEERS: You might be waiting a long time for that.

MATHIAS CORMANN: We have just completed out 26th year of continuous growth. We are entering  our 27th year of continuous growth, but we have gone through a difficult transition. Coming out of a  period of growth that was driven by investment and construction going into a period now of broader  drivers of growth and we have been able to manage that adjustment without a major blowout in  unemployment. The slightly lower than previously experienced wages growth is part of that. If wages  had grown by more, the unemployment rate would have been higher.

DAVID SPEERS: Back to this point though, do you acknowledge there are households out there this  Christmas who will be thinking, income tax for all intents and purposes through the Medicare levy is  going to go up. We are not seeing much in terms of wages growth. If someone is in a job that brings  in some penalty rates, they are going to be going down. There would be some worries there.

MATHIAS CORMANN: The question is what is the counter factual. We want every Australian to  have the best possible opportunity to get ahead. Part of being able to achieve that is to ensure that  the businesses that employ them have the best possible opportunity to get ahead. Bill Shorten is  running on an agenda of increasing the overall tax burden in the economy. That will make business  less successful. Less successful businesses will hire fewer people and be able to pay them lower  wages. Wages under the Coalition over the medium term will be higher than they would be under a  Labor Government, just by virtue of the fact that Bill Shorten’s economic agenda is designed to  make it harder for business to be successful, which makes it harder to hire people and pay them  higher wages.

DAVID SPEERS: Why is putting more money in the pocket of the company through company tax  cuts a better stimulus for wages than not proceeding with the increase in the Medicare levy, which is  coming straight of the pocket of the wage earner?

MATHIAS CORMANN: In the end, the services that Australians expect the Government to provide  have to be funded and they have to be funded out of the economy. If you look at the tax burden in  the economy under our Government, we have self-imposed a limit of 23.9 per cent as a tax as a  share of GDP cap. Labor has already said that they would blow that tax as a share of GDP cap out  of the water … interrupted

DAVID SPEERS: I am just asking about why putting up the levy on workers is a good idea while  cutting the tax on the company?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The point I am making is the Coalition is always committed to keeping taxes  as low as possible. But in the end we have to pay for the services that Australians expect us to  provide. The Prime Minister has already indicated we will be pursuing income tax cuts, in particular  focusing very much on middle-income earners, in future Budgets and Budget updates.

DAVID SPEERS: So the levy will go up, but they will get a tax cut?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Overall taxes will be lower under the Coalition than under Labor by virtue of  what has already been announced. We have already clearly indicated that not only will we be  reducing business taxes, we will be reducing income taxes moving forward.

DAVID SPEERS: It would be simpler just to say we are not going to go ahead with the levy increase.

MATHIAS CORMANN: You have to make sure that the funding commitments that are made and the  funding commitment to the NDIS was a commitment that was bipartisan, Labor did not fully fund that  particular ... interrupted

DAVID SPEERS: They do not back the levy increase.

MATHIAS CORMANN: It is very clear that Labor did not fund the National Disability Insurance  Scheme in full. We are committed to ensuring that it is on a sustainable funding trajectory for the  future. That is something that we will have to continue to pursue. But we are committed to keeping  taxes as low as possible.

DAVID SPEERS: When will we see an income tax cut?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The Government is currently working through what we will be able to afford.  There will be announcements in due course.

DAVID SPEERS: Will it be around the time that the Medicare Levy goes up?

MATHIAS CORMANN: There will be announcements that go as far as we can sensibly afford in the  context of the fiscal situation at the time, at the right time. But let me say, again, we have already  imposed a tax as a share of GDP cap on ourselves of 23.9 per cent and in the Budget forward  estimates period over the medium term we have already built in, future tax cuts are already built into  our revenue assumptions because our revenue forecasts are based on an assumption that tax as a  share of GDP will not go past 23.9 per cent.

DAVID SPEERS: A few other things in today’s Budget update. Universities, you have tried a few  different ways to rein in spending on universities, now you are going for measures that do not require  legislation. You want to save $2.1 billion by freezing funding at this year’s levels for the next couple  of years. Do you accept that is, essentially, reinstating a cap on student places?

MATHIAS CORMANN: No, that is not what we are doing. We are freezing the overall  Commonwealth funding.

DAVID SPEERS: Commonwealth funding is based on per-student funding.

MATHIAS CORMANN: There is still per-student funding that is separate to this. But what we are  saying is Commonwealth Grants Scheme funding is frozen at 2017 levels. You have to remember  here, overall funding to universities has grown much more strongly than the cost of providing the  service, and right across government, right across the community, efficiencies have had to be  absorbed in order to help get the Budget back into surplus. We believe that the Budget repair effort  ought to be sensibly shared. Universities, as you just indicated, have benefited from a demand-driven program for some time now. Utilisation, the number of students at universities, has gone up  dramatically, overall funding has gone up dramatically, it has gone up much more than the cost of  providing the service ... interrupted

DAVID SPEERS: If you freeze the funding, how does that not cap student numbers? How else do  they pay for extra student numbers?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We are not getting rid of the demand drive program. What we are saying to  universities is that there is opportunity to achieve efficiencies. We believe that $1.9 billion in  efficiencies which is the effect of the freeze over two years, over the forward estimates is eminently  achievable and efficiencies for universities to absorb.

DAVID SPEERS: They point at other universities in the region who are spending more on higher  education, this is the way you make a more productive economy.

MATHIAS CORMANN: We have a budget challenge. All other parts of the community and of  Government have had to contribute. So far the higher education sector has not contributed or not  materially contributed. The higher education sector on the back of the demand driven approach now  and significant increases in enrolment numbers and overall increases in funding on a per-student

basis, their funding has increased much more than their costs and it is not unreasonable for  universities to contribute their proportionate share to the overall effort.

DAVID SPEERS: The other area, you’re wanting to save $1.3 billion, is making new migrants wait  three years rather than two for Newstart and wait three years for family payments, paid parental  leave. This is going to make life harder for them, isn’t it?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Overwhelmingly our migration program these days is very much focussed on  attracting skilled migrants who are coming here to work and who are crucial to the economy, not to  access welfare payments from day one. Across a whole range of welfare payments there is already  a two-year waiting period as you say, for Newstart Allowance or for Youth Allowance, and a series of  other payments. We are proposing to increase that from two to three. A range of welfare payments  do not actually have a waiting period at all. We believe in order to make that consistent, there should  be the equivalent waiting period across the board. I hasten to add a range of categories of migrants  or potential migrants are exempted, for example humanitarian refugees are exempted, families  under financial pressure are exempted and there are a range of other exemptions.

DAVID SPEERS: Do you need legislation for this one?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Yes.

DAVID SPEERS: And any sign you’ll get the support?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We will engage as we always do after every Budget and every Budget  update with non-Government senators. Everybody knows the numbers. We have 29 senators in a  Senate of 76. We need ten non-Government senators to get anything through.

DAVID SPEERS: One of the smaller line items in the Budget update is the legal cost of the  citizenship fiasco. It’s $11.6 million. Small in the overall context, but how do you feel taxpayers will  feel that they’re forking out nearly $12 million because people couldn’t sort out their citizenship.

MATHIAS CORMANN: In all of the circumstances we made a judgement that it is an appropriate  item of expenditure. There were some legal issues, some Constitutional issues that needed to be  clarified. We are going through a period where these issues are going to be settled once and for all.  We think that is very much in the public interest.

DAVID SPEERS: Just away from the Budget update. George Brandis looks like he’s off to London.  Are you hoping to become the Government’s new Senate Leader?

MATHIAS CORMANN: David, you have known me for long enough to know that I do not comment  on speculation. That is just speculation. These are matters that are well beyond my pay grade.

DAVID SPEERS: You’ve known me for long enough to know that I can try, I can try. Alright, Finance  Minister Mathias Cormann, thank you very much for joining us this afternoon.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Always good to talk to you.

[ENDS]



