

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS  MONDAY, 30 JANUARY 2017

Subjects: US immigration ban; US refugee resettlement deal; Visit to the US with  Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security.

NAOMI WOODLEY: Penny Wong, the Foreign Affairs Minister Julie Bishop says the  Government is working to make sure Australians still have the same access to the  United States as they have previously, and the Prime Minister says they have not been  asked for consular assistance from anyone. What more can the Government do?

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE: I am  concerned about a number of things. The first thing I am concerned with is obviously the  policy that President Trump’s Administration has implemented. I am also deeply  concerned about the implementation of this, particularly as it affects Australian nationals  who may well be dual nationals.

I have written to the Foreign Minister today, asking her what representations have been  made. I note that Canada’s Justin Trudeau has indicated that certain assurances have  been given in respect of Canadian dual nationals and we’d be looking for the  Government to take a proactive approach on this to get similar assurances for  Australian dual nationals.

WOODLEY: The Prime Minister says if and when the Government needs to raise such  an issue with the US Administration it would do so privately and frankly. What is wrong  with that approach?

WONG: I saw the Prime Minister’s press conference today and what we saw was a man  who was desperate to not say anything. Let’s be clear, Australians across our great  country have spoken out with concern about what is occurring in the United States.  Labor disagrees with this policy. We have a very strong view that you don’t ban people  based on their origin or race or religion. We’ve had a non-discriminatory immigration

policy in this country for 40 years and our values on that are clear. It’s disappointing that  Prime Minister Turnbull feels so scared about standing up for what he believes in.

WOODLEY: But as the leader of a country, as opposed to a citizen who can exercise  their right to protest, why isn’t it reasonable for Malcolm Turnbull to say I’m not going to  comment on the domestic policy of another country?

WONG: We’ve seen conservative politicians around the world - from New Zealand, Bill  English, we’ve seen Theresa May, Conservative Prime Minister of the United Kingdom,  we’ve seen Angela Merkel from Germany - all be prepared to say what they think about  this policy. And, of course, we’ve made this point, there are matters which go only to  domestic policy but this is a matter I think which does have global implications, as has  been clear from the discussion worldwide since the executive order was issued.

WOODLEY: The Treasurer Scott Morrison and indeed the Prime Minister in his press  conference have both said that this is Donald Trump implementing his election policies  as the Coalition did with its border protection policies following the 2013 election.  Doesn’t an elected government have the right to do what it said it was going to do?

WONG: An elected government does have the right to do what it said it was going to  do, and an elected Australian Government has the right to stand up for Australian  interests and Australian values. I think Australia has had a bipartisan position of a non-discriminatory immigration policy and the Prime Minister should find the courage to  stand up for that principle.

WOODLEY: You are on your way to the United States as part of a bipartisan  intelligence and security delegation. What is the purpose of this trip?

WONG: This is, as you said, a delegation from the Parliamentary Joint Committee on  Intelligence and Security. It’s a committee I’ve been on for a number of years. It’s  obviously had to deal with some very difficult pieces of legislation which are all about  focussing on how we make Australian safe. I’m looking forward to this visit with other  members of the committee to engage with members of the US Intelligence community,  elected and non-elected members, and to get their insight into how we best ensure that  our citizens are safe.

WOODLEY: Are you expecting a discernible change in the attitudes of the people that  you are going to meet or their view of the US relationship with Australia?

WONG: All I can say is that the Alliance with the United States remains a central pillar  of Australia’s foreign policy and that’s a bipartisan position, has been for decades, and it  will continue in the decades ahead.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573

