

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST   TUESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2017

SUBJECTS: US immigration ban; US refugee resettlement deal; 18C; The  Liberals’ $30 billion cuts hurting Australian schools.

FRAN KELLY, PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, welcome back to Breakfast.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Fran.

KELLY: Labor wants Malcolm Turnbull to condemn the ban. Many world leaders,  Angela Merkel, Theresa May, Justin Trudeau have done that, it hasn't really had any  impact. So what difference would it make if Malcolm Turnbull weighed in? Why is it  important, in your view?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think it's an important statement of Australian values that we  support a non-discriminatory immigration policy. We've had a non-discriminatory  immigration policy in Australia for 40 years or so and it has served us well. It is  important that good friends and strong allies of the United States, like the United  Kingdom, like France, like Germany, like Canada, have all expressed their concerns  about a very, I guess, heavy handed and slightly clumsy approach to what Donald  Trump says he wants to do which is protect United States citizens from external  threats.

KELLY: Is that how you describe it: “heavy handed” and "clumsy"?

PLIBERSEK: I think it's been quite a chaotic way to do what every national leader  wants to do, which is protect their own citizens, protect their own country. There is no  evidence that this approach will do what the United States leadership have said it will  do, and I think it's a very important thing for Australia to say, and our leadership to  say, "this is not an approach that we think is appropriate or that will work".

KELLY: Australia does have some form on this front too - in 2010 the then Labor  Government introduced a suspension of the processing of new asylum applications  from Sri Lanka and Afghanistan, which meant people couldn't apply for some months  for that refugee status. Arguably a discriminatory approach to immigration.

PLIBERSEK: Well if there are temporary reasons such as an escalation of conflict in  a country, or a decline in conflict in a country that might affect whether people are  likely to be accepted as refugees or not, that's one issue. Here you have a situation  in the United States where a number of countries have been selected, there's no  clear reason that these countries and not some other countries have been selected.  And there's a lot of confusion around people who are dual citizens of countries - in  fact permanent residents of the United States who have been temporarily overseas.  There are -

KELLY: There's no doubt there's confusion - but are you more concerned about the  sort of chaotic, to use your word, implementation of this, rather than the temporary  ban itself?

PLIBERSEK: I think it's very important from the Australian perspective to say we  don't support a ban that is based on ethnicity or religion, that when countries want to  protect their citizens of course they have the right to do stringent background checks  on people who are to become permanent residents, or citizens, or people who might  be travelling. But this kind of approach that says if you come from a particular  country, or really if you are of a particular religion, you are automatically perceived as  a threat. I don't think that's something that Australians can accept and I think it's very  interesting that so many Republicans have also criticised this as, in their own words,  un-American.

KELLY: It seems pretty obvious that our Prime Minister doesn't want to do anything  to imperil the refugee resettlement deal for people on Manus Island and Nauru. And  that seems to be a view shared by Paris Aristotle, he was a member of Julia Gillard's  expert panel on asylum seekers, we just heard him on AM. Do you accept that might  be the price we have to pay to get refugees off Manus Island and Nauru?

PLIBERSEK: Well I think France, Germany, the United Kingdom and Canada are all  good friends of the United States and if they're able to make principled statements  about the type of ban and the way it's been implemented, then I don't see why  Australia can't. But I -

KELLY: Except we're on the verge of this deal - we want America to do something  for us that would in the face of it seem to be in conflict with this ban

PLIBERSEK: I think it's absolutely critical that we get people off Manus Island and  Nauru. They've been there too long already, it's been one of the great failures of this  government - that they haven't secured third country resettlement with these people  well before now. So, there is no question that I am absolutely committed to ensuring  that this deal goes ahead. That shouldn’t mean that we are unable as a good friend  of the United States to express a principled position on some of these other issues.

KELLY: Back to the US ban, Penny Wong, Shadow Foreign Minister, wrote to Julie  Bishop, the Foreign Minister, yesterday asking her to clarify the situation regarding  Australia dual nationals who could be caught in the dragnet. Julie Bishop is seeking  the same preferential treatment as citizens from the UK and Canada, for example  which would mean dual nationals would still be allowed to enter the US if they've  travelled directly from this country. Has Labor received any clarification from Julie  Bishop yet that you're aware of?

PLIBERSEK: Not as far as I know.

KELLY: In October last year, you warned that a Trump presidency would be  dangerous. At the time you said, "we are deeply concerned by his cosying up to  Russia". The truth is, Donald Trump is doing what he promised to do in his  campaign, and that's what Americans, many of them, voted for, isn't it?

PLIBERSEK: Well yes, a lot of people voted for them, voted for those policies, and a  lot more people voted against those policies - we know the difference between the  popular vote in the United States and what the electoral college system delivered.  Nevertheless, the United States is a strong ally of Australia, it will continue to be a  strong ally of Australia. We need to have a constructive relationship. But sometimes  that constructive relationship does rely on us as good friend saying: "we're not sure  this is the right way to handle things".

KELLY: A parliamentary committee is holding hearings in the proposal to amend the  Racial Discrimination Act 18C. Polling today shows that almost one in two of us  support removing the words "insult" and "offend". The committee chairman, the  Liberal MP Ian Goodenough says Australians are resentful of the culture of political  correctness preventing people from expressing an opinion. Do you accept this is not  a fringe issue - that this is the sort of thing that is exercising people?

PLIBERSEK: I think the real issue for most Australians today is will I have a job in  five years’ time and in ten years’ time? Will their kids have a job? What kind of job  will it be? Will it be enough to support themselves? Will it be a decent quality of life?  What's the health system going to be like if these cuts continue? Will their kids get a  good education at school, at TAFE, at university? These are mainstream issues.  Being able to insult and offend people on the basis of race is not a mainstream  issue. What are we really lacking in Australia in terms of free speech? This same Act  as well as 18C, it has section 18D that gives very strong protections for free speech,  that's made with good intention. We've got a lot of focus on 18C of the Act - people  should think a little bit about the protections that 18D affords to free speech and relax  a little bit. We don't have a problem here that people are desperate to engage in  racist hate speech and they're not able to because we don't have free speech in  Australia? The real problems are about everyday issues like jobs, like health, like  education, and that's what this government should be focussed on.

KELLY: Talking of jobs, Bill Shorten will be at the National Press Club today  restating Labor's so-called Australia First policy with the emphasis on more skills,  more training, a recommitment to reserving one in every ten jobs on government  projects for Australian apprentices. Presumably that will involve reviving TAFE, how  much is that going to cost?

PLIBERSEK: Well we've seen $2.5 billion cut from vocational education in recent  years. We've got 128,000 fewer apprentices today than when the Liberals came to  government. We've got a national partnership agreement where the Commonwealth  funds TAFE that will run out next year. Yes there are significant investments to be  made because vocational education has been treated like the poor cousin of schools  and the university sector for some time now. But we've got an issue, Fran, where  each year we're inviting people to come to fill temporary job shortages in Australia.  We should be training young Australians - and retraining older Australians who've  lost jobs in sectors like the auto sector - to take up those positions long term, and  we're not doing it because of these massive cuts.

KELLY: Can I just ask you finally and briefly, in your own portfolio yesterday we  heard from the Education Minister, Simon Birmingham, about the introduction of a  phonics test for grade 1 students; a mechanism to boost education standards from  there up, basically by boosting literacy. It's not just about boosting overall funding, a  point he makes. Do you think it's a good idea to teach reading via phonics rather  than look-and-say, which we have to say isn't getting great results?

PLIBERSEK: Most states, in fact every state, includes phonics in its teaching of  reading these days. It is commonly used and I think -

KELLY: But not by all. A lot of kids still learn look-and-say.

PLIBERSEK: But the most important thing is you've got an Education Minister who  says we want to test kids to see if they're falling behind but we don't want to fund the  extra support they need to catch up. They're cutting $30 billion from our school  system. Can I tell you, Fran, I'm a mother of a six year old and I got at the end of last  year the most detailed report where every element of my child's reading was laid out  with strategies to support improvements at home. Kindergarten teachers, year 1  teachers, are intensely monitoring children in their reading development and  numeracy development at that age. What they need it the time to improve their own  teaching skills, the peer support to improve their own teaching skills, the time to  mentor new young teachers, and most importantly, one-on-one individual time with  children who are falling behind. I'd like to see the Education Minister commit to fully  funding the extra school funding that Labor has committed to, so that kids can get  the individual help they need to catch up.

KELLY: Tanya Plibersek, thank you very much for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thanks Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

