

Media Release  | For immediate release: Wednesday 19 September 2018

“If genocide isn’t cause for decisive action, what is?” -  Australian Government urged to act on Myanmar atrocities at  UN

The Australian Government should immediately end its engagement with Myanmar’s military and  impose sanctions on abusive military generals, the Human Rights Law Centre (HRLC) and the  Australian Council for International Development (ACFID) said in a joint statement at the UN  Human Rights Council overnight.

The statement comes as a major, 400-page report by an expert Independent Fact-Finding  Mission on Myanmar was presented to the Council. The Fact Finding Mission, which includes  Australia’s former human rights commissioner Chris Sidoti, documented systematic rape, torture  and murder by Myanmar security forces against the Rohingya population, and recommends that  Myanmar’s top military generals be investigated for genocide, crimes against humanity and war  crimes.

The HRLC and ACFID statement, which was delivered by HRLC Director of Legal Advocacy  Daniel Webb, said:

“Our Government must immediately sever its ties with Myanmar’s military and impose targeted  sanctions on abusive military generals. Because if genocide is not cause for decisive and  principled action, then what on earth is?”

In response to the expert report the Australian Government told the Council it “condemns in the  strongest terms the atrocities committed in Rakhine, Shan and Kachin states” and indicated it will  support a European Union led resolution to establish a dedicated body to consolidate evidence  with a view to facilitating criminal proceedings.

While the HRLC and ACFID welcomed the Australian Government’s support for a new  accountability mechanism they called on the Government to follow all of the Fact Finding  Mission’s recommendations, not just some.

“The Fact Finding Mission recommends ending operational support for the Myanmar military,  which it describes as having ‘contempt for human life’. But while the US, the UK, and the EU  have all taken steps to sever ties with the Myanmar military, the Australian Government last year  spent close to $400,000 on defence cooperation in the country,” Mr Webb told the Council.

“The Fact Finding Mission also calls for targeted sanctions against those responsible. But again,  while the US, Canada, and the EU have all imposed financial sanctions and travel restrictions on  Myanmar military commanders, the Australian Government has refused to do so.”

“And while the Fact Finding Mission says that the victims of these atrocities deserve a future free  of danger and insecurity, the Australian Government continues to imprison them indefinitely in  remote, offshore, refugee detention camps.”

Marc Purcell, ACFID CEO, said that Australia had a clear responsibility to act.

“As a member of the UN Human Rights Council, Australia has a responsibility to send a strong  signal that it has a zero-tolerance approach for gross human rights violations in our region,  including the abhorrent use of sexual violence as a weapon of war.”

“The time has come for Defence Minister Christopher Pyne to end Australia’s defence  cooperation with Myanmar’s military,” said Mr Purcell.

Watch: The HRLC and ACFID's statement here.

Read: The HRLC and ACFID’s statement here.

The Fact finding Mission’s report and media release are here.

The Australian Government’s response can be viewed online here.

For more information, please contact:

Jen Clancy (ACFID): 0423 459 283

Michelle Bennett (Human Rights Law Centre): 0419 100 519

