



THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PERTH  TUESDAY, 10 APRIL 2018

Subject/s: Extension of Stephenson Avenue; Labor’s Fair Share for WA fund; LNP  Cabinet leaks; Immigration; GST; Live exports; ATO.

MELITA MARKEY, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR STIRLING: I'm Melita Markey and I'm  the Federal Labor Candidate for Stirling, and I'm very pleased to welcome this morning  our Leader, Mr Bill Shorten, our Premier Mark McGowan, our Minister for Planning and  Transport Ms Rita Saffioti, our Shadow Minister for Infrastructure, Mr Anthony  Albanese  our Member for Balcatta, Mr David Michael and our Mayor Mr Mark Irwin, to  make a fantastic announcement for the City of Stirling. So thank you for joining us.

BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Melita, it's great to be here  with Premier Mark McGowan, his Minister Rita Saffioti, my Shadow Infrastructure  Spokesperson Anthony Albanese and of course local Member for Balcatta and the  Mayor and Deputy Mayor of the City of Stirling.

I'm pleased to announce, that a Federal Labor Government will invest $64 million in the  extension of Stephenson Avenue and the creation of a new freeway interchange.  Anyone who knows the area of Stirling knows that this will unlock business potential. It's  already a key CBD hub outside of Perth, it's central itself. This is an opportunity to  improve public transport linkages, to grasp the benefits of the Westfield development,  and to make sure that we can ensure there are more jobs created in the local area, and  also we can assist people with the challenges of infrastructure congestion.

What drives Labor to do this is of course the excellent advocacy of Premier McGowan  and the Government of Western Australia. It is long past the hour that Canberra  invested a fair share of national resources in Western Australia. Western Australia was  very hard hit following the end of the mining boom, but the problem is that the revenue  coming from Canberra when Western Australia was doing it tough wasn't a fair share for  Western Australia. Only Labor has a plan to invest national resources in Western  Australia - a Fair Share Fund for Western Australia.

Today's exciting and 10-year-overdue commitment follows on our commitment to build  better public transport with the extension from Midland to Bellevue, with the Morley-Ellenbrook railway line, and of course our exciting announcements in conjunction with  the West Australian Government for the hospital at Joondalup.

I'd now like to pass over to Premier McGowan and then hear from Anthony Albanese  and of course the State Minister and the Mayor as well about this exciting  announcement which is just a fair share for Western Australia.

MARK MCGOWAN, PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA: Thanks, Bill. Can I thank  Bill Shorten and the Federal Labor team for their commitment here to important  infrastructure in the northern suburbs. As we know, in this area right here there's terrible  gridlock on a daily basis and what this initiative will do is free up the traffic flow, unlock  the capacity for development of land around here and create jobs for West Australians.

Anyone trying to exit the freeway to get to IKEA on any given weekend will know it's  very difficult, and what this road initiative will do is free up this entire area - all the traffic,  make sure that there's easier access into the Stirling business hub which employs  30,000 to 40,000 people, and also provide the opportunity for Westfield to expand, and  for further opportunity for land development on many hectares of land through this area.

So today's announcement is about Federal Labor working with the State Government to  create business opportunities, investment opportunities, jobs and also free up traffic  here in the northern suburbs, and I'm sure people in the northern suburbs who deal with  this traffic gridlock on a daily basis will welcome this announcement.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE: Thanks very  much. I'm very pleased to be a part of this announcement. The City of Stirling came to  see me in Sydney and then I committed to come here and see first-hand the proposals  that they have in mind, not just for this, but the further stages that are planned, including  light rail down to Scarborough Beach in the future, which this makes possible.

From the Government in Canberra, you hear a lot of rhetoric about cities. This is what a  city deal looks like. Bottom-up, planning done properly by local government, working  with state and federal government and working with the private sector. Westfield will  make a contribution as part of this opening up of business opportunities. This is an  exciting project and it's one that is overdue. It's one that Federal Labor is prepared to  support as part of our commitment to making our cities more productive, more liveable  and more sustainable.



It follows on from the Ellenbrook rail announcement, from the Midland announcement  that we made yesterday, from the intersection of Leach Highway and Welshpool that we  have said that we will also fix the greatest area of congestion of any intersection in  Perth. Left alone urban congestion, according to Infrastructure Australia, will cost the  WA economy eight times the current cost over the next couple of decades, up to $15  billion. That is why we need to act on projects like this and it's great to see the three  levels of government again working with the private sector to deliver a fantastic  outcome.

RITA SAFFIOTI, MINISTER FOR PLANNING AND TRANSPORT: Thank you very  much. Again, this is one of our key election commitments that we made at the last  election, working with local Member David Michael and of course with the city. This is a  proposal that the city has put on the table for a number of years and we made the  commitment of $60 million from our State Budget last year to this project.

As has been highlighted, this is one area where state, federal and local can work  together to improve those transport connections, again highlighting a new freeway  connection which will reduce congestion in the area, a better bus transfer system,  again, which will reduce the issues relating to public transport, better connections to the  station and also new PSP.

This is an overall vision that the City of Stirling have put forward and undertaken  enormous planning in. The Stirling city centre then accompanied with a better  connection to Scarborough beach is really the sort of plan the State Government wants  to be involved in. The City of Stirling has undertaken a lot of planning. We're very happy  to partner with them. As we said, it's all about creating a new city centre, it's about  creating new developments and reducing congestion in the suburbs. That's our plan,  that's part of our METRONET vision. It's really about getting better liveability and  really making more use of the key destinations we have, and of course, the train station  here is a magnificent train station. We need better connections and we also need more  residential around that station. Thank you.

MARK IRWIN, MAYOR OF STIRLING: Thank you. We're thrilled to be here. This is a  fantastic day for the City of Stirling. This project is our number one priority at the City of  Stirling and for over 10 years we've been trying to seek Federal funding to secure the  additional funding to allow us to start the new Stirling city centre. This is a visionary  project and we believe it's Australia's largest urban regeneration project that will go  ahead, creating jobs and housing and creating an opportunity for private investment.

Stage one of the project is the Stephenson Avenue extension and what that will  do unlock potential for land and investment and it will provide for 33,000 new jobs and  potentially provide for 25,000 new residents in the Stirling city centre. Of course, that  will lead to the future which is stage two of this project and provide for light rail leading  from Perth city central CBD, right through to our iconic new tourist destination of  Scarborough beach. Once that is complete, potentially there will be 80,000 new jobs

created, and provide for 63,000 new residents in the Stirling city centre. Again, we've  been planning for this for over 12 years and we can assure you we are shovel ready for  this project to go ahead. We're very excited about this project and we’re very excited to  work with State and Federal government to now deliver this. Thank you.

SHORTEN: Are there any questions on this project to begin with, and then perhaps if  th  ere's other matters?

JOURNALIST: When would you hand over the money?

SHORTEN: We want to get elected first so if we want to get the money, if we want to  get the project flowing, vote Labor at the next federal election. Any other questions on  the project?

JOURNALIST: So in the first budget?

SHORTEN: Our aim would be to expend this in the first two years, yes.

JOURNALIST: Where do you and Labor - from Canberra, where do you and Labor  stand on population policy?

SHORTEN: I  think you're referring to a story which is a Cabinet leak where there  appears to be a disagreement yet again in the Turnbull Government, this time on the  question of migration numbers. It would appear that some people in the Cabinet are  choosing to undermine and attack their colleagues by leaking the deliberations. Before I  get to population let me just make it clear - this may seem a bit technical but Cabinet  government requires solidarity, in that the discussions in Cabinet can be held and all  options can be canvassed without them being used against each other. This is yet again  another sign of the dysfunctional circus which is called the Turnbull Government.

In terms of population policy itself, the government has said that they're not decreasing  the immigration intake. There's plenty of factors which go into population policy. I think  the broader community issue beyond the internal civil war and hate-fest which is the  government, is the issue of people's frustration at poor infrastructure, lack of access to  housing and the issues in urban growth which are not adequately supported by  Canberra. It is pretty interesting that on a day which we're announcing the Stephenson  Avenue extension and the new freeway interchange, and as the mayor said a visionary  project, urban renewal, this is what Australians want. In terms of population, we'll  maintain an immigration policy which has a refugee component, a family reunion  component, and of course, a skilled migration component.

JOURNALIST: So do you believe that the immigration intake should be cut until  population policy is fully resolved?

SHORTEN: I'm not going to react to government hypotheticals and kite-flying. What we  do when we are in government, is we always balance the issues of population growth  with the rest of our economic plan. We do need immigration in this country, it is part of

our economic growth story. But what we also need in this country is proper policy to  deal with poor infrastructure. As Anthony outlined, this is a real city deal policy. This is  about opening up underutilised areas close to the city. This is about ensuring that jobs  flow and that people can move around our cities much more easily than they currently  do. This is the way you help cities prosper and grow.

JOURNALIST: Is this part of the top-up GST plan, the money for this?

SHORTEN: Yes, it is.

JOURNALIST: Is that because you're at odds with the State Government in relation to  what the plan should be on GST?

SHORTEN: Mark can easily speak on the matters. We're the only game in town when it  comes to helping Western Australia get a better deal. I’ve said very clearly, as has  Federal Labor, that we think what has happened to Western Australia and their share of  GST hasn't been fair, they've been missing out. What we're doing is creatively and  constructively addressing the concern that Western Australia's portion of the GST is too  low. But the reason why we can create a Fair Share for Western Australia fund, why we  can do the sort of projects which Anthony and I were outlining, is because we're not  giving $65 billion away in useless tax giveaways to the top end of town.

Mr Turnbull could make these sorts of announcements plus more, if he wasn't handing  away taxpayer money to large multinationals, to the four big banks, to foreign  shareholders. What we are doing is we are ending the hunger games where we see  different parts of Australia at each other’s throat. But let me be very clear; at least a 70  cents de facto floor is where Labor is headed, and I think anything less than that is short  changing Western Australia.

JOURNALIST: That $1.6 billion is just for one year, isn't it?

SHORTEN: It's stretched over two years.

JOURNALIST: So what happens after that if the GST situation doesn't improve?

SHORTEN: We believe based on the forecasts even under the current system, that the  distribution will improve. Of course, we have got to wait to see what the Productivity  Commission says, and we'll continue to engage in constructive discussions with Premier  McGowan and Western Australia, and we'll listen very carefully to their propositions  after the Productivity Commission concludes its final review. Let's face it, the shortfall in  GST is right now, and there's only one man in Australia who can fix the shortfall right  now. His name is Malcolm Turnbull and where is he, where is Malcolm Turnbull? He  came across here to the Liberal Party conference 18 months ago or 12 months ago,  and he made all of the promises - the all signing, all dancing Malcolm Turnbull show. He  was going to fix Western Australia, well he's done nothing. Even under the GST  allocation, it's moved from 34 cents to 47 cents - still not enough. If Mr Turnbull wants to

make constructive moves now to address the problems in Western Australia now, he'll  have my cooperation.

JOURNALIST: You're quiet clearly at odds with Mr McGowan on this issue, aren't you?

SHORTEN: Not at all. Mark McGowan said -

JOURNALIST: Well you are -

SHORTEN: Sorry, if I can answer your question. You said we're at odds, I said not at  all. The reason why I say not at all Shane, is what we're putting here is the proposition  that Western Australia needs a fair share. That's what we're pushing for. Now, Mark's  got a very clear set of views on the best way to do it. What we are trying to do is meet  the debate in the middle. But we didn't get stuck in a traffic jam, Albo and I, behind a  fleet of Liberal limousines coming here to sort this stuff out, did we? I mean really, the  current Member for Stirling has been here for what, the best part of a decade and has  done nothing on this issue. The fact that it takes Labor and Melita Markey to be here  shows that only Labor gets the issues of Western Australia when it comes to the view  from Canberra.

JOURNALIST: Kevin Rudd has been at it again. He has written a letter to the Financial  Review this morning saying that Labor's 2010 election campaign was the worst run in  Labor history. What is your message to Kevin Rudd?

SHORTEN: I don't say this harshly, but I don't tend to read the letters page of the Fin  Review so I will go and have a look at the letter.

JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, do you support a summer ban on live exports?

SHORTEN: Say the question again.

JOURNALIST: Do you support a summer ban on live exports?

SHORTEN: What Labor's said is we'll work with the Government because I think  everyone was shocked and appalled at that footage. There's no way the sheep  should've been transported in that condition. I think a lot of people just thought this is  not on, it's wrong. Now, the Government says they want to correct this issue. Our  spokesperson, Joel Fitzgibbon has said we'll work with the Government, but we've got  certain conditions. One, that this whole issue of animal welfare has been going  backwards in the last five years, so they need to step up and be serious about it. Two,  we need to have an independent Inspector-General who can be available to deal with  all these issues straightaway. Three, it's long overdue to look at how we can value add  the meat industry in Australia, rather than to simply live export. I know that other  politicians have looked at a summer ban.  We'll work with the government to make sure  this doesn't happen again. Animal welfare is not a second order issue and I think this  government for five years has given the green light to this sort of negligent conduct and

we will just see if the Government has got the wakeup call which Australians expect  them to have heard.

JOURNALIST: Can I just get you on another issue, given the two tax-office whistle-blowers say staff are pressured to hit these revenue raising targets with this aggressive  debt collection. Do you think that changes need to be made at the ATO?

SHORTEN: Yes, I do actually. I have got no doubt that the cutbacks at the ATO have  undermined its ability to do its job properly. People who work at the ATO are good  people but they are being asked to do more and more with less and less. I actually think  what the whistle blowers have revealed is scandalous and we will be pursuing this in  parliament with some degree of ferocity.

J



OURNALIST: So that's more the issue though. In terms of like, the ATO obviously  have some very strong powers. Do you think it has, sort of enough internal and external  scrutiny on it?

SHORTEN: I think this is an issue which we're going investigate when we return to  parliament. I think it is scandalous. I think the whistle blowers have drawn the nation's  attention to something that a lot of businesses and people have been concerned about  but now it looks like the people's genuine concerns have got some basis in fact.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra



