

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 23 JANUARY 2018

SUBJECTS: ALP Members’ Rights; Company Tax Cuts, People Smuggling.

KIERAN GILBERT: Comments made by your front bench colleague Mark Butler to the  Victorian Fabian Society reported this morning, Adam Gartrell in the Fairfax papers has  this report and some of the quotes. He spoke of back-room buffoonery of the party’s  factional war lords, basically preventing reforms needed to the membership structure of  the party. And he says “I’m sorry to say that ours remains a party that gives ordinary  members fewer rights than any other labour or social democratic party I can think of,” is  what Mr Butler said. Do you agree with his assessment?

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Look, I think Mark is right to say we need to broaden our  base. We can always look at ways to ensure we have the broadest participation of  Labor supporters and Labor voters inside the party. I mean the best social democratic  parties in the world historically have been ones where there has been large  membership.

So I accept that as outgoing president Mark should identify what we could do better.  And to that extent, if we could find ways to increase our membership we should be  looking to do that. I’m not sure that I would agree that we’re the worst placed social  democratic party, but I haven’t read Mark’s speech, to be honest, and therefore I can’t  comment in detail.

But look, I understand what he is saying. His call is to Labor to make sure we broaden  our base.

GILBERT: And to empower the rank and file over the quote “factional warlords”. What  are your thoughts on that? Should the rank and file have more clout?

O’CONNOR: Any way you can make sure people participate more genuinely in a  political party is a good thing, in my view. Quite often though office bearers of the party  are products of the factions. And I think that it would be good, for example - look, Mark  is a very capable and well regarded colleague, but I think it’s probably better for the  President to not be a front bencher of Federal Labor. For example if we’d won the last  election, having a Cabinet Minister as president is difficult. Therefore I think there’s a  bunch of things we can do to open up the doors of the party to true participation and  that would include even making sure that we share the office holders so that executive  government members don’t necessarily hold those positions.

So I think it’s a worthy debate which we will have, Kieran, at this National Conference  this year in Adelaide - unlike the Greens, who have closed conferences, and of course  the Liberal Party who have a very much top down approach to everything.

GILBERT: At least they are open, unlike the Greens, the Liberal Party. In relation to  your criticism of having front benchers in that role, has the presidency of Mark Butler  precluded these sorts of reforms from being undertaken, is that what you are  suggesting? What’s the hurdle here?

O’CONNOR: No, I’ve always held the view that we are very fortunate to be executive or  shadow executive members of the Federal Labor Party. And I think that to really send a  signal that we want the office holders of the party to come from other areas of our great  movement then one way to do that was to say then let’s make sure that those office  positions are held by those who can probably speak more freely and are in a position to  do so.

It is not a criticism at all of Mark. I think he has alluded to a very important point, and as  I say he is a highly regarded and very capable colleague. But I do think there can be the  perception that if you are a Cabinet Minister, if we had won the last election, and  President that can be difficult.

So I think what Mark has raised is absolutely relevant and we should look at how do we  broaden our base and ensure we increase our membership so that we are a vibrant  party. But also I think we should look at how office holder positions are filled because as  Mark has said too often they are products just of factional decision making.

But the one thing about the presidency, of course, is that it is elected by the base. So to  that extent Mark has had a mandate. But I just think we could probably look at another  way of ensuring the candidates that come forward for the presidency and other office  holder positions are from different areas of the movement.

GILBERT: Ok, let’s look at a couple of other issues now. Yesterday your colleague Jim  Chalmers said that the tax cuts in the Trump administration is just one of many factors  at play  globally that has led to improve growth conditions. But the IMF has revised  upwards its growth forecast for the next year from 3.7 to 3.9 per cent and said half of it  is due to the Trump tax cuts. They have explicitly pointed to those tax cuts as being  responsible. Is it time for Labor to get on board with this agenda?

O’CONNOR: No, I don’t agree with that. I firstly accept that the IMF’s forecast has  increased in the first year. That’s what I’d call a sugar hit. There might be some  immediate increase in growth.

It’s not just about growth, Kieran, it’s about growth and it’s also about who are the  beneficiaries of that growth. In the United States it’s entirely up to them what they do,  but it would appear to me given this decision that the top 1 per cent are going to  become even wealthier again because they are cutting taxes for the high end and they  are going to be cutting social services. That’s not a recipe, I believe - that’s not what  should be happening in this country.

I think we’ve seen inequality growing and for that reason we’ve been opposed to  Turnbull’s $65 billion tax giveaway. At a time when, of course, we are seeing wage  growth at its lowest in 20 years, we’re seeing-

GILBERT: But your colleague said it would be wrong to say that the Trump tax cuts,  which were only recently legislated are responsible for the uptick in growth around the  world. That is what he said to me yesterday on this program, and yet you’ve got the IMF  saying that half of this revised growth forecast for the next year is due to those tax cuts.

O’CONNOR: And I say to you that the IMF’s forecasts over the years beyond the first  year in fact are lower than the forecast that were in place even before the Trump plan to  cut corporate taxes. So I think you have to look at not just the short term sugar hit, but  the medium and longer term in terms of growth.

You also have to look at who are the beneficiaries of growth. It’s not just about whether  your economy grows, it’s about whether you are less or more equal. Because the IMF  has also said, Kieran, that societies that are more equal, where there is not obscene  levels of wealth and people that are completely impoverished, ensures that you have  longer more sustainable periods of growth. So I think we should be looking at all the  information from bodies like the IMF and not just look at the headline figure of what may  happen insofar as the first year as a result of the proposed tax cuts in the United States.

GILBERT: Finally, Jacinda Ardern’s offer of taking 150 asylum seekers from our off  shore detention centres, The Australian’s front page report, Simon Benson reports, that  New Zealand's offer to resettle those 150, according to intelligence officials, has seen

an escalation in people smuggling attempts. You, as a former Home Affairs Minister,  your reaction to this? Does it remind Australian officials of just how sensitive this area is  in terms of offers like that made by the New Zealand Government?

O’CONNOR: The offer has been on the table for years and the fact that we argued  about it. I think sometimes the Minister for Home Affairs elevates this issue in a political  way which does create bigger news that may indeed excite some potential people  smugglers, but the fact that we are trying to reach settlement arrangements with the  United States could be argued to be a pull factor.

We are a first world nation, that's a pull factor. Any settlement arrangements could be  argued to be a pull factor, but I think we should be taking those offers by other countries  that will settle people who have been in offshore centres for years, indefinitely, that is  just not acceptable.

Of course the other difficult thing is Kieran, we get so little information from the  government in this area of public policy, it is very hard to know exactly what is going on  because they're a very secret government when it comes to these matters.

GILBERT: Mr O'Connor, we're out of time, we'll talk to you soon, appreciate it.

O'CONNOR: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010



