

WAYNE SWAN MP

MEMBER FOR LILLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PODCAST INTERVIEW

Politics with Michelle Grattan

WEDNESDAY, 1 AUGUST 2018



SUBJECTS: Labor’s emphatic by-election results; company tax cuts; Labor Party

leadership; trust in politics; Labor Party National Conference; Emma Husar



MICHELLE GRATTAN: Wayne Swan, who was Treasurer in the Labor Government, is

retiring from Parliament at the end of this term. But he’s not leaving politics. He’s the

incoming National President of the ALP, having beaten frontbencher Mark Butler, who was

seeking another term. The post is a particularly significant one, with an election coming up.

And Wayne Swan has made clear that he’s not going to be publicly silent in his new role.



Wayne Swan, it’s now history that Labor had a good Super Saturday. But I want to focus

on one of these by-elections — that in Longman — where the ALP had a good swing and

the Liberal National Party vote tanked. Labor made merry with a campaign on the

government’s policy of giving the banks a tax cut while squeezing money from hospitals.

And the government’s now considering whether to ditch the company tax cuts for big

business. But if it does abandon them, then surely your success in the by-election will

have deprived you of a very useful issue for the general election.



WAYNE SWAN, MEMBER FOR LILLEY: Well I don’t agree with that. They may well

attempt to drop the tax cut for the large foreign multinationals and the big banks. But if

they do that, they will have declared that they have no agenda for jobs and growth.

They’ve put all of their eggs in the jobs and growth basket, which are supposedly driven by

a tax cut to corporate Australia. Now we know that’s not going to happen. It’s a failed

economic theory. It’s not plausible or credible. People in Longman and right around the

country very much understand that if the government is going to give big, unfunded tax

cuts worth something like $80 billion, then the price for that is paid, over time, in money

which is not invested in vital health and education services. So this notion of the

government offering tax cuts was exposed in Longman as being just a recipe for further

cuts to health and education.



GRATTAN: But if they get rid of those company tax cuts, then they have less of a

problem, surely?



SWAN: Well, except that the government, when it was elected, was elected on a platform

of no cuts to health, no cuts to education and no cuts to pension. I think people are very

much onto the trickle down economic agenda of the government, and that’s what was

rejected in Longman. The notion that you can drive jobs and growth and greater equity

through tax cuts to large multinational corporations and the wealthy, and wage

suppression for everybody else, was exposed in Longman. I mean, the median income in

Longman and Braddon is $43,000. Now for $43,000, you wouldn’t even qualify for the

government’s measly $10 tax cut. So it’s a combination of their policies that’s on the nose,

and that was exposed in Longman. Because it wasn’t just a good result, it was a very good

result. A strong underlying primary swing to Labor that ripped votes off the Liberals. And of

course, their vote was also deflated by the defection to One Nation. It was a very

significant result in the history of Australian politics.



GRATTAN: And you do not feel that Labor would be disadvantaged by the government

being able to say, “well, we couldn’t deal with the company tax cuts in the Senate, so

therefore we’ll have more money in the out years for services like health”?



SWAN: I don’t think that’s believable. The Prime Minister put his leadership on the line in

these by-elections, and most particularly stood in Longman and asked people to choose

between the Prime Minister and Mr Shorten, and they chose Mr Shorten. And one of the

reasons they chose Labor was because they’re fed up with their trickledown agenda. It’s

not just what’s going on in tax. You know, if you work in the private sector in Australia,

your real wage has grown just 1 per cent. One per cent in five years.  People are really

feeling the pressure. Australians are like the frog being boiled slowly in a pot of water.

Well, they’ve now woken up and they’re onto the Liberals, they’re onto their trickledown

agenda, and they’re ready to give them a belting in the general election.



GRATTAN: Now, you’re a Queenslander. How do you see Labor’s prospects in that state

more generally for the election itself. Is Queensland different from down south? Because

after all, in Braddon, Labor was pretty line-ball.



SWAN: I don’t think Labor was line-ball in Braddon. You simply had the vote knocked

around a bit by an independent. It came back to Labor. There was a strong swing to

Labor. But what’s forgotten here is there was a strong swing to Labor in Braddon and

Longman in the last election. And on top of this, that swing in Tasmania has been held,

and in Longman, we did extraordinarily well. So I think there are very good results there ,

but I think that this does send a signal to the LNP in Queensland that there’s a structural

problem with their vote. The primary vote for Labor in Longman had a four in front of it.

The primary vote for the Liberals in Longman had a two in front of it. People like Peter

Dutton, and in neighbouring electorates such as Petrie, and electorates like Forde, they

know what this means. This means big trouble, structurally, for the LNP in Queensland.



GRATTAN: Would you predict that Peter Dutton will lose his seat?



SWAN: I wouldn’t predict it, but I’ll tell you what — he’s going to be run pretty hard.

Because the thing about the Longman result was that it was a bigger result than what we

received in 2007. And you might recall that Peter Dutton in 2007 went right down to the

wire. So much so that he attempted to move seats. Well, after seeing this result, he would

be getting flashbacks about 2007.



GRATTAN: We talk a lot about the Coalition’s problems with One Nation. But some of its

vote comes from Labor too. How do you think it’s best dealt with?



SWAN: Well I think it’s best dealt with the way it was dealt with by Labor in this election.

And I don’t think Labor did bleed votes to One Nation. And that is one of the very

interesting results that we see in Longman. It was the Liberals that bled their votes to One

Nation. Labor held its base, but in addition to that, won votes directly from the Liberals.

And I think one of the reasons that’s happening is this very close alliance between the

Liberals and One Nation.



GRATTAN: Now Bill Shorten says that people regularly underestimate him, and I think

that’s true. Nevertheless, he’d be happier if his personal ratings were higher. Why do you

think he doesn’t cut through more? Why aren’t those ratings up there?



SWAN: Because he’s an Opposition Leader. Most Opposition Leaders have low ratings.

There aren’t too many Opposition Leaders that have bested sitting Prime Ministers.

There’s one or two. And also, there’s been a very, very big effort on the part of the

Coalition and its allies to attempt to trash Bill Shorten. I mean, they’ve gone to the lengths

of calling Royal Commissions into the Leader of the Opposition. You know, once upon a

time these were the sort of things that only happened in banana republics! But these

people in the Coalition are out there trashing Bill all of the time. This guy has been

tenacious, he’s been incredibly active, he’s been on the ground, his record out there on

the ground is not appreciated by most of the people out there covering politics because

they fail to cover so much of the work that he does on the ground, particularly in places

like Longman, but more broadly, particularly in Queensland.



GRATTAN: As we know, there was some positioning by Anthony Albanese before the

election, in case things went bad. Were you disappointed to see that?



SWAN: Well I was certainly disappointed in the press coverage of Labor leadership

issues, when I know there was no basis for that.



GRATTAN: You know there was positioning, though.



SWAN: You say there was positioning, I think—



GRATTAN: You’re pretty astute; I think you’d know.



SWAN: I’m astute enough to know that we see stories like that from time to time, and I

was close enough to know that there was no basis for it.



GRATTAN: Now, you’re a former State Secretary in Queensland, you’ve seen campaign

techniques evolve through several iterations through your time in politics. The current

craze seems to be robocalls. But the feedback from the by-elections seems to be that they

annoy voters. Do you think that Labor will cut back on their use in the general elections.



SWAN: I don’t think you can argue that Labor was extensively using robocalls, actually. I

mean, I don’t know the use of robocalls in Longman by the various parties or even, for that

matter, by the Labor Party. But I’d just make this point — I don’t believe that robocalls are

the be-all and end-all of campaigning. They are utilised by a lot of groups, particularly

groups outside of the political system, to achieve their objectives. But I don’t see them as a

be-all and end-all of campaigning, and I do acknowledge that robocalling from time to time

does have the capacity to annoy people.



GRATTAN: Lack of trust in politicians and political institutions is obviously one of the big

issues in modern politics — some would say the biggest. To what extent do you think you,

the politicians, are responsible for this problem, and what should you collectively be doing

about it?



SWAN: Well, I think there’s an attempt to trash the political system, and sometimes

politicians, through their poor behaviour, add to that. But I think the thing that is adding to

much greater trust and disillusionment with politicians and democracy is the growing

inequity in our society. And that inequity has been vigorously pursued by this government,

particularly when it comes to government service delivery. There’s a deliberate attempt by

government to run down government service delivery, to starve vital organisations like

Centrelink of resources, to make people wait up to six months to get an age pension, as a

wage of discrediting the very institution of government. I mean, the Liberal Party in this

country has been taken over by Tea Party fanatics who are dedicated to actually trashing

government as an institution. And that’s part and parcel of what’s going on. We’ve got a

right-wing government seeking to run down the very institutions of government, also

seeking to make society more unequal, and what that does produce is disillusionment with

the whole system at the grassroots level.



GRATTAN: But surely you’re not calling Malcolm Turnbull a Tea Party fanatic?



SWAN: Well, he’s dancing to the tune of the Tea Party fanatics at every turn. It doesn’t—



GRATTAN: Who are they, exactly?



SWAN: Well, people like Peter Dutton. People like the Institute for Public Affairs, that run

the policy agenda for the government they push out into the media all of the time. Look at

their policies. I mean, who could think of a more extreme trickle down policy than a

quarter-of-a-trillion-dollar tax cut for multinational companies and high-income earners. I

mean, it’s breathtaking. It’s bigger than Donald Trump.



GRATTAN: Just going back to this question of trust, though. While obviously the distrust is

at a high point now, it didn’t just start with this government.



SWAN: No, of course it didn’t.



GRATTAN: It’s been going on for a long time.



SWAN: It has. It certainly has, and political parties have contributed to it. They’ve

contributed to it through disunity, from time to time, on both sides of politics. And the one

lesson that Labor can take out of the last half-a-dozen years is that unity is a sure way

through to earning, again, the respect of the electorate.



GRATTAN: Well, on this question of unity, because of Super Saturday, Labor put off its

National Conference. It’ll now be in December, making it of course closer to the general

election. How will you manage this conference when you’ll be taking over as the new

president formally, and what about issues like asylum seekers, border security and so on?

How do you stop that becoming an exercise in disunity?



SWAN: Well I think we have to be mature about it. And we will be. There’s no doubt that

there are views which are deeply held and policies that will be passionately debated. But I

think you’ve seen over the past five years from the Labor Party a degree of unity of

purpose that has been very strong. And I think that will shine through what will be very

passionate debates at the National Conference.



GRATTAN: So you don’t think the way through will be to negotiate something

beforehand? You think that those debates should be held on the floor of the conference?



SWAN: Look, I think all of those things will happen. There’ll be debates on the floor of the

conference, there will be negotiation, there will be clashes of view, but at the end of the

day, I think there’ll be a mature approach and a united party.



GRATTAN: Your predecessor, Mark Butler, was criticised when he was National

President for not doing enough on party reform. What is your position on that?



SWAN: Well, I made it very clear that party reform in the first instance was not my priority.

I made it very clear as I moved around the country — which I did extensively — that my

priority is winning the battle of ideas. And in winning the battle of ideas we also have to

have a strong organisational purpose so we can defeat our political opponents on the

ground. And that is the program that I put to the Labor Party membership which

emphatically endorsed me as President. So, yes, there are some organisational questions

that need to be resolved. There’s been big organisational changes in recent times; we

need to bed those down. But overwhelmingly, we have to be a party that has a set of ideas

that inspire Australians, and in particular, those that are passionate, to join our party and

win the fight.



GRATTAN: So you don’t think excessive factionalism is a problem? Or the fact that the

rank and file don’t often get a say in preselections because decisions are made up the

chain?



SWAN: There are more votes going on for positions in the Labor Party than I’ve ever seen

at any time in my 44 years in the Labor Party. So there’s been a lot of organisational

change, it’s not perfect, but our priority at the moment has to be the policy program and

the ideas that inspire people. I don’t want to see the Labor Party seen as the party, in

public, that is always talking about itself and its own structures. I want it seen by the public

as a party which is passionate about the ideas that’ll drive future prosperity and

opportunity in Australia.



GRATTAN: One internal distraction at the moment has been the controversy around one

of your backbenchers, Emma Husar, who’s now constantly in the media with a range of

allegations against her about her behaviour to staff and on other matters. There’s been a

long-running investigation by the New South Wales party into this; shouldn’t the national

party get involved and say, “let’s wrap this up, come to some conclusions, make a decision

about the future of this member who’s in a highly marginal seat”?



SWAN: No, I think the New South Wales process should take its course, and she should

be given natural justice through that. That’s what I think. And I don’t think it’s a matter to

be debated from go to woe in the public. There needs to be a process gone through of

reporting back any conclusions. That should be allowed to take its course, and when it

does, the Labor Party will reach a conclusion. But natural justice is important here.



GRATTAN: That’s true, but surely it’s a matter of public interest too, because of taxpayers’

funds being involved?



SWAN: Well of course it is, of course it’s a matter of public interest. But first of all, you

have to establish what the facts are. When that is established, we can go from there.



GRATTAN: What do you say to those who say there should be a public inquiry, rather

than just a party inquiry?



SWAN: What I say is it’s premature.



GRATTAN: But it could end in that?



SWAN: All I’m saying is, we’ve got a party process we’ll go through, it will reach its



conclusion, then we will take decisions about it, then we will talk about it. I’m not going to

pre-empt it. I think some of the speculation that’s around at the moment is appalling. We

should go through the process, she’s entitled to natural justice, we’ll get it done, and then

we’ll talk about it.



GRATTAN: Wayne Swan, thank you for talking with us today. We hope to talk to you

again around National Conference time. Meanwhile, that’s the end of our podcast for

today. Thank you to my producer, Eliza Berlage. We’ll be back again with another

interview soon. Goodbye for now.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DE VOSS 0403 775 158



Authorised by Noah Carroll, ALP, Canberra.





.









