

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB - THE ALAN JONES BREAKFAST SHOW  FRIDAY 25 MAY 2018

SUBJECTS: By-election date; By-elections; Border protection.

ALAN JONES, PRESENTER: Look I said earlier, I don't think you've got to be on  one side of politics or the other to find this quite odd, which I have to confess I  do. These by-elections have been called for July 28. Now that's 79 days that  these people will be without MPs and they could have been called by, the earliest  date you could have had them is on June 30. Now advice has been provided to  the Speaker who announces the date, Tony Smith, I understand in consultation  with the Australian Electoral Commission and the Government, for July 28. Just  so happens to be the weekend of the Labor Party conference. The Labor Party  are pretty angry, Tanya Plibersek is the Federal Deputy Leader, she's on the line.  Tanya, good morning.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning  Alan.

JONES: I know you've got a bit of a cold so don't worry about that. Sorry to drag  you out on all of this but what do you make of all of this?

PLIBERSEK: Well I just think it's extraordinary to leave these electorates  unrepresented for such a long period of time. I mean, yes, of course we are  irritated, it’s inconvenient for us - it will be very, very expensive if we have to  move our conference, but that's not the main thing that we're worried about. Why  would you put these electorates, first of all why would leave them unrepresented  for so long, and secondly does anybody really living in these electorates want to

face a 79 day campaign with people knocking on their doors and ringing them  campaigning for all of that time. It's a very difficult to understand decision given  that other electorates like North Sydney when there was a by-election, the writs  were issued within three days, Bennelong within two days, New England the  same day, Batman six days, and they were pretty speedy campaigns after that.  This contrast sees people basically unrepresented for close to three months.

JONES: Penny Wong, your Leader in the upper house, has accused the  Electoral Commissioner Tom Rogers of making a partisan call, saying the timing  will prevent ALP members from campaigning on the ground. Now are you saying  first on the one instance you're going to have to cancel the ALP conference, I  mean you've already surely booked hotels and convention centres and air flights  and all the rest of it - will that have to be cancelled?

PLIBERSEK: Look we haven't made a final decision yet. Our National Executive  will discuss it today, but Alan I don't see how Labor Party members, who will  want to be campaigning for our terrific candidates, will feel about being stuck in a  convention centre in Adelaide instead of out on the streets doorknocking and  campaigning. I think it would be very very difficult to convince people not to be  focused on the election campaigns. They will want to be campaigning. My guess  is our most likely course of action is we'll have to cancel it and that will, as you  can imagine, cost us a fortune.

JONES: Just on these by-elections, Bill Shorten, is there an embarrassment here  for the Labor Party? Bill Shorten declared nine months ago, there was quote 'no  cloud over any of our people' and yet Susan Lamb, Justine Keay and Josh  Wilson had been found to have been dual citizens. How can that be?

PLIBERSEK: Well, all of our people took reasonable measures. The old  decisions of the High Court, 25 years ago, said that if you've taken all reasonable  measures to renounce other citizenship, then you'd be fine. The High Court  decision in the Gallagher case recently said that wasn't enough. The fact that  these people had renounced their citizenship but the paperwork hadn't been  processed by the UK Home Office, for example, meant that they were barred  from standing, so as soon as we knew that we resigned, our people resigned.  But don't forget Alan, we also offered to refer all of our people to the High Court  at the end of last year and the Government voted against that because they  didn't want their people in similar circumstances to be similarly referred.

JONES: Are there people in the Coalition that you believe still have question  marks over their right to be in the Parliament?

PLIBERSEK: Look a number of people have been mentioned as potentially  having question marks over their parents’ or their grandparents' citizenship and  the effect on their own citizenship, but I don't think it's productive for us at the  moment to be getting into that. I think our focus will be on making sure that we

win the seats that are in contest at the moment. We've got terrific candidates and  my focus is on making sure that they are re-elected.

JONES: Longman, you've only got a margin of 0.8 of a percent. One Nation  preferences will be crucial, won't they?

PLIBERSEK: Absolutely, and in fact we wouldn't have won Longman last time  without those One Nation preferences, it's a very tough seat, but people have  had more time to get to know our member, our candidate up there Susan, and  she really is a terrific person you know. People have seen her in operation now,  Susan Lamb, they see that she is very compassionate, but very tough, and a real  fighter for her local area. They've had the opportunity of seeing her at work and I  think she's got every chance of retaining that seat.

JONES: You're the Deputy Leader. You must be concerned though about the  fact that no matter where you turn everything is being said about border  protection. Now your draft ALP Platform, which was to have been debated that  weekend, calls for asylum seekers to be shifted out of mandatory detention after  90 days. Can you understand that asylum seekers would be saying “well, we'll  cop 90 days in Manus Island and Nauru - where do go then?"  Where do they go  then if the Platform says they'll be shifted out of mandatory detention - to where?

PLIBERSEK: Our processing objective was always 90 days when we were last  in Government. We mostly achieved that. But of course if you don't know  someone's identity then you can't achieve that 90 day objective. When it comes  to Manus Island and Nauru, we think that the arrangement with the United States  is a good one, and we certainly hope that that will continue to take people from  Nauru, in particular, to the United States. We think that New Zealand has offered  a similar arrangement - we don't know why the Government hasn't taken that up.



JONES: But Donald Trump said that was a rotten deal.

PLIBERSEK: But he's honouring it.

JONES: Yeah but would he honour a new deal?

PLIBERSEK: Well we don't know, we'd have to negotiate. And Alan don't forget,  when we were in Government, we had a similar arrangement with Malaysia,  where we would have sent people to Malaysia, and the Liberals and the Greens  got together to block that one. Now I don't know, it doesn't happen very often, but  when it does you always smell a rat, when the Liberals and the Greens get  together.

JONES: But border protection, it's obviously a big issue whether we like it or  whether we don't. Now can you guarantee that your party would not dismantle  what Abbott and Turnbull and Dutton have put in place?



PLIBERSEK: Well Alan, we don't have any plan to close those offshore  detention centres. We have said that we would turn back boats where it's safe to  do so. But we've also said that we want a more compassionate approach to the  people who we fly here on Qantas planes and look after because we've got a  responsibility to the world as well, to do our fair share. Now-

JONES: But Ged Kearney has said that the detention centres at Manus Island, in  her maiden speech, and Nauru should be closed.

PLIBERSEK: We'd like to see no need for them. We'd like to stop the boats  coming, and in that case we wouldn't have to process people on Manus Island  and Nauru. That would be ideal - if we could stop the boats then we wouldn't  need Manus and Nauru.

JONES: But there are people there, there are people there. Now if you're going  to say you'll shift them after 90 days, where would they go? You mentioned  America. Do they come to Australia, that's the point? Peter Dutton says Labor  policies will see the return of asylum boats and drownings - sorry?

PLIBERSEK: No we've said very clearly that they won't, Alan. We don't want to  send any signal that would give people smugglers any hope at all because they  are wicked people who are running the biggest criminal enterprise in the world  right now, which is moving people, desperate people, illegally. We won't be any  part of that. We will not restart their business. Their business is evil.

JONES: Good. That's an excellent assurance. Just one final thing before you go.  I mean this is a very expensive business this five by-elections. Why not have a  general election? Why not have a general election, sort of - are you people ready  to go to a general election?

PLIBERSEK: Absolutely we are. And I'll tell you, really, the reason for this very  long delay, Alan - you don't have to be Einstein to work it out - is that the Prime  Minister doesn't think he's got a good chance in these by-elections and what he  would like to do, mark my words, this is my prediction, for free, Alan, for your  listeners, the Prime Minister wants to dump his toxic big business tax cut. You'll  see that in the next few weeks. There'll be a few pea and thimble tricks - and  they're delaying the by-elections as long as possible so they can dump the tax  cuts and try and sweeten the deal so that the Prime Minister can save his own  skin. That's what's happening here.

JONES: Alright good to talk to you. You go and get a few lozenges into you. I'm  grateful for your time at this rather ridiculous hour of the morning. Thank you for  talking to us.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you so much.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

Authorised by Noah Carroll, ALP, Canberra



