Senator the Hon Bridget McKenzie  Deputy Leader of The Nationals  Minister for Rural Health  Minister for Sport  Minister for Regional Communications

TRANSCRIPT

Sky News  Kieran Gilbert

Parliament House Canberra  12 July 2018  8:45am

Topic: ACCC Energy Report, Tony Abbott/USA and Invictus Games.

E&OE

KIERAN GILBERT  Good morning and welcome to the program.  On the energy debate over recent months, there has been, at various times a focus on the  Paris Deal, though the Prime Minister's been advocating as well for Snowy Hydro and  even on batteries, now the Prime Minister wants the focus on price.

He and the government want to pivot back to the issue of prices; in the studio with me to  discuss the report and other matters relating to energy is The Nationals Deputy Leader  Bridget McKenzie.

Your party leader Michael McCormack released a statement yesterday welcoming the  report and saying that it vindicated The Nationals position. Why is that?

BRIDGET MCKENZIE:  Well we've been speaking on and on and on, not just as a leadership group but as an  entire party, in our local communities across the country, not just about the importance of  reliable power and base load power generation to the grid, but also about affordability.

Out in the regions we have the highest intensity businesses, food processing and the like,  and we also have the lowest median income levels so our households are significantly  more proportionately impacted than those in the cities.

When we see the price hikes that we have seen in my home state of Victoria tripling as a  result of the state Labor Government's decision to tax Hazelwood out of business and they  shut down over 5 months, so I think the ACCC's 56 recommendations are carefully  calibrated.

GILBERT:  Scathing report too isn't it?

MCKENZIE:

Absolutely, no one escapes their critique, right? So the states rightfully so for the role  they've played subsidising solar feed-in tariffs, for gold plating their networks etc. and all of  those costs distorting the market and being passed on, you know, to consumers.

The Commonwealth and our Renewable Energy Targets and how that's distorted the  market and ensured that much needed investment in baseload power generation just  hasn't been forth coming and indeed retailers have copped a shellacking and rightfully so.

I think it's a great report and will give us a good thought on how we as a nation can deal  with power affordability. It's been a great competitive advantage for Australia and the  growth of our manufacturing sector and a lot of our businesses has been a result of our  access to cheap energy. We need to get back to that space.

GILBERT:  As I mentioned at the start of the program about the Prime Minister, his focus, as I said he  has advocated for the snowy hydro expansion, that's fine and various other issues and the  Paris Agreement has been raised by Tony Abbott and others.

But the Government, from what I can tell wants the focus 100% now on this issue of  prices. Whether it be filling or correcting market failure, or other efforts that needs to be the  focus doesn't it?

MCKENZIE:  Well we've seen a lack of investment in new power generation that is actually going to be  reliable when the demand is on. We need to be able to ensure we can get affordable  energy to where it is needed and we've got a system right now where that doesn't happen.

So I'm really confident that in the consideration of the ACCC report that if we can  implement these measures we will see a reduction in price for households and for  business, which I think is incredibly important.

You know two thirds of the national energy market is about delivering energy to  businesses and that is a lot of Australians being employed, particularly in high intensity  industry around the regions, so we are not just talking about cheaper household prices,  were talking about making sure that businesses can remain competitive and continue to  employ.

GILBERT:  And what are the elements of the recommendation that the Commonwealth Federal  government is to underwrite dispatch able power, that doesn't necessarily mean clean coal  though does it?

MCKENZIE:  No, and that's, I mean this is where we have to walk away from the evangelical attachment  to one particular source of power over another. This is calling for a technology neutral  approach and it's actually saying how do we de-risk investment and how does the  government underwrite the contract from years 5-16 years, and that will allow the investor  to then go to a bank and then get that much needed finance.

GILBERT:  Whether that be in gas, possibly clean coal, Rod Sims said yesterday that it had to be a  technology neutral approach that will get power prices down.

MCKENZIE:  That's right, because then the market will actually decide how best to do that, the other  great claim made throughout the report is the lack of competition within the market.

We have seen consolidation of power assets within states that really has meant it's not  competitive, we need new entrants, we need new generation and that's going to make a  real difference with price.

GILBERT:  But do you believe some of your colleagues need to get beyond that coal fixation, because  while obviously it has played a pivotal role, will it continue to play an important role in the  system?

MCKENZIE:  Well yes 60% of our generation in 2030 was still going to be in coal.

GILBERT:  But with new investment, even if it's going to be underwritten, the fastest way to ramp it up  and to get it moving is gas isn't it?

MCKENZIE:  Yeah well I mean whatever fuel source is you, you know, I'm not going to preference gas  over coal and that going to be a decision for investors to make and I think those that pull  out a lump of coal and they look like its kryptonite. I think that plays on both sides of  politics. I think we've got some beautiful black coal, particularly in QLD and I think my  colleagues are keen to promote that industry, not just as an export industry right?

GILBERT:  Sure

MCKENZIE:  Because it means regional jobs. I'm not going to say coal yes or coal no. We have to use  science we have to use evidence and get the best outcomes for our consumers and our  businesses.

GILBERT:  For the other thing you touched on there was market control, as a country we do tend to  favour duopolies or very large companies.

MCKENZIE:  Mmmm we've almost got the supermarket problem...

GILBERT:  Indeed, but the problem is though that if you limit it to 20% of the market, like Sims is  suggesting, what happens if a company is on the skids and needs to be acquired by some  other entity to keep going, then that entity would go above that 20%?

MCKENZIE:  Well maybe there needs to be a mechanism to address that if and when it happens. I  mean these are the sort of questions now that we have that report, as a government we're  going to prosecute and examine the pros, the cons and the unintended consequences of  the recommendations themselves.

So I'm really buoyed by this report because it goes to the heart of what the National Party  and indeed the whole Coalition has been keen on seeing. It is not just 'Paris Agreement'  targets but having reliable and affordable power supply right across the nation.

GILBERT:

And let's look at a couple of other issues. Tony Abbott has said in a speech in Washington  that we can't depend on a Trump Presidency to deploy troops and to save us and that we  need to spend more on our own defence, what do you say to that?

MCKENZIE:  I don't think we are going to be changing defence policy on the back of Tony Abbott's  commentary around the US-Australia alliance at all. We do have an incredibly strong  relationship with the US. It was forged in the battlefields of World War 2 and has served us  well, we hold up our end of the bargain very much in terms of the relationship.

The Prime Minister has a very strong personal relationship with Trump and they are able  to work out a variety of issues in our relationship going forward. I think if you look at how  we, as a nation are investing in our sovereign defence capabilities, ourselves. That is not  on the back of assessing the US Australia relationship. That is us recognising that we  need to always act in our national interest. That is making sure we are economically

secure and that we are physically secure.

GILBERT:  One other thing that Tony Abbott referred to was the wall. He said Donald Trump  advocating for a wall was the same as Australia turning back the boats. Have you got any  thoughts on that intervention?

MCKENZIE:  No, I think President Trump's decision and campaign promise and subsequently working  through how he is going to deliver that, is up to him and domestic policy within the US. But  I'm very proud that we as a government have been incredibly strong on border protection.  We have seen a decrease of deaths at sea and ensuring that we have kept our  communities free of illegal arrivals.

GILBERT:  I'm going to play those comments from Tony Abbott in just a moment, before I speak to  Nick Champion finally on the Invictus Games 100 days to go.

MCKENZIE:  Yes 100 days to go! These are Australian men and women who have served in our armed  forces, they have overcome physical and psychological adversity, they have served us on  the battlefield and now they are competing for Australia at the Invictus Games along with  18 other nations. And Invictus as a concept is...

GILBERT:  It's in October?

MCKENZIE:  Yes it's in late October...

GILBERT:  Prince Harry and Meghan...

MCKENZIE:  Yes Prince Harry and Meghan are heading out and it's really going to be an opportunity,  not just for our 72 competitors to showcase their wears and to compete on an international  level, but also to say thank you to their 1200 friends and family who really support them  through their journey.

GILBERT:  It's a great initiative no doubt about that, helping with recovery and motivational...

MCKENZIE:  Yeah and speaking to individual soldiers themselves and just the role that in their own  recovery that focussing on competing has bought them is incredible, so I'm looking forward  to meeting many of them today.

GILBERT:  Minister for Sport and Deputy Nationals Leader thank you so much, appreciate your time.

MCKENZIE:  Always a pleasure!

(ENDS)

Media contact: Kate Woodbridge: 0409 679 924

