

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER

PROTECTION

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR



DUTTON GETS REWARDED FOR WRECKING THE LIBERAL PARTY WITH A

RETURN TO HOME AFFAIRS



Peter Dutton - the man responsible for the chaos, infighting, and division that has

consumed the Government over the past week and wrecked the Liberal Party -

has been rewarded by the new Prime Minister.



Instead of leaving Peter Dutton on the backbench, Scott Morrison has caved and

appointed his leadership challenger to his Cabinet, returning him to the role of

Minister for Home Affairs.



Scott Morrison needs to make sure his Minister’s ongoing failure to manage his

portfolio is put on notice and he’s not beholden to Peter Dutton, and his demands,

like Malcolm Turnbull was.



It’s time Peter Dutton gets on with the job he’s been given - rather than the one he

wants - and immediately take action on a number of pressing matters in his

portfolio including:



1. Explaining how the chaos and division inside the Government put the

security of Australia’s borders at risk with a suspected asylum seeker vessel

arriving in Australia for the first time in four years;

2. Cooperating fully with the Senate inquiry into allegations concerning the

inappropriate exercise of ministerial powers with respect to the visa status of

au pairs. The inquiry and its hearings in the coming weeks will investigate

why the Minister took steps to grant visas in a number of individual cases -

even in instances when his own Department deemed granting a visa high

risk;

3. Responding to, and acting on, the reasonable recommendations in the

report of the Labor-initiated Senate Inquiry following the leaked Nauru files

handed down sixteen months ago;

4. Prioritising the health and welfare of asylum seeker and refugee children in

the Australian-funded regional processing centre on Nauru following

numerous concerning media and stakeholder reports relating to the

psychological wellbeing of children; and

5. Immediately accepting New Zealand's offer to resettle children and other

eligible refugees from Manus and Nauru as quickly as possible. If Malcolm

Turnbull was able to negotiate appropriate conditions for the US refugee

resettlement agreement to prevent people smugglers exploiting vulnerable

people, Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison should be able to negotiate similar

appropriate conditions for any deal with New Zealand.



Meanwhile, David Coleman has been promoted to Minister for Immigration,

Citizenship & Multicultural Affairs - however this position is not in Scott Morrison’s

Cabinet.



This means the Minister responsible for one of the most complex areas of policy -

including Australia’s permanent migration intake, our humanitarian program, and



temporary work visas - won’t have a voice in Cabinet.



Labor hopes the new Immigration Minister will be able to maintain a strong voice in

the Government whilst cleaning up the failures of Peter Dutton. These include the

Department’s go-slow visa processing which has led to a record number of people

on bridging visas and the failure to deliver a temporary sponsored parent visa

which was promised at the last Federal election.



Labor believes it’s time for the Government to set aside their chaos and division

and finally get on with the job.



If they don’t, a Shorten Labor Government will.



MONDAY, 27 AUGUST 2018



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110



