

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER

ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL  SERVICES  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  FAIRFIELD WEST  SATURDAY, 26 MAY 2018

SUBJECTS: Labor’s bigger better and fairer tax cuts, Upcoming by elections,  Luke Foley’s comments, Russian involvement in MH17

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks for coming everybody. Another  desperate attempt by Scott Morrison today, yet again selectively leaking alleged  Treasury analysis. I note in passing by the way that he’s managed to release this data  exclusively to one newspaper but it appears in two other newspapers, that’s  a matter  for him to explain to the media involved. Here we are three weeks after the Budget and  the Treasurer still is being forced to drip-feed information about their tax cuts scheme  out selectively. The Treasurer should have had the guts to put all the data out, all  the information out on Budget night. We have asked repeatedly in Question Time in  Parliament for a breakdown of the figures for the tax cuts. Now the Treasurer is being  forced to drip-feed the data out in a way which he thinks is particularly clever. Well, it  doesn’t matter how he handles it, there are a couple of facts he can't run away from.  Fact one, the tax relief which we support which he is offering in 2018 is modest.

Fact two, they against Labor's tax cuts which would come in in 2019, which are  almost double the 2018 tax cuts, they voted against them in the Parliament. The party  which says they are for low tax voted for higher tax in the Parliament last week. They  offer tax relief on the never-never. After two elections' or three elections' time.  That's their desperate attempt to distract from the fact cut that their tax cuts in 2018 are  modest. The other fact that they can’t run away from is that  independent analysis,  independent modelling shows their 2024 tax cuts are far from ideal. 60 per cent of the

benefit going to the top income earners. $15 billion of the $25 billion annual cost going  to the top 20 per cent of income earners. We're more than happy to have a tax  debate. We're more than happy to have the next election all about tax. Mr Turnbull and  Mr Morrison say they're committed to $80 billion at least worth of corporate tax cuts but  it appears other members of their parties are undermining them as they go about that.  We are happy to stand by our policies. Our policies  are clear. In fact today, we are  launching our website www.biggerbettertaxcut.com.au where Australians can put in  their income and see the tax cuts under a Shorten Labor Government. In many cases  almost double what they receive under a Turnbull Liberal Government. Every  Australian earning more, sorry every Australians earning less than $125,000 a  year being better off under a Shorten Labor Government. So, Mr Turnbull, Mr Morrison,  you want an election about tax, we're more than happy. Our policies are clear. Our  policies are consistent. Our policies are better for working Australians. Happy to take  any questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, why won't Labor back stage two of the Government's income  tax cuts when the Grattan Institute is only taking issue with stage three of the cuts?

BOWEN: The Labor Party determines our policies based on all the evidence and  information available to us. Let's run just through it. Our position has been consistent  since Budget night. We support the tax cuts that come into force on 1 July this year. We  have concerns, significant concerns, about the alleged tax cuts in 2024. The 2022 tax  cuts we are taking our time to sift through the data. The Treasurer has drip-fed  information out in a most lamentable fashion. He should have put the information out on  Budget night, that's what a Treasurer who actually is serious about working with the  parliament would do. Instead we have to have a Senate inquiry to look at the data. We  have said very clearly we regard the 2022 tax cuts as different to the 2024 tax cuts but  not the (inaudible) that’s there that the 2018 tax cuts are.

JOURNALIST: What does Labor believe constitute a middle income?

BOWEN: What the economy will be doing in 2024 is not a question you can answer, not  a question I can answer, not a question Scott Morrison can answer. What is affordable  in 2024? What is the world going to be like, what's the world economy going to be like,  what's the Australian economy going to be? We'll take policies to be implemented in  2024 to the election, which may follow a 2018 election, hopefully the first term of a  Shorten Labor Government seeking re-election. Really, this is just a desperate attempt  to distract by Scott Morrison. 2024. Seven years away. The best he can offer. 2024-25  tax cuts. A Government which says the best they can do for you is in seven years will  give you more tax relief and this should distract from the modest tax relief in 2018 is  playing a desperate attempt at attraction.

JOURNALIST: $200,000 would be middle income?

BOWEN: People will make their judgements about what's middle- and high-income  themselves. We will put out policies out there to be judged. Our policy provides better

tax relief to every Australian earning less than $125,000, not on the never-never, not  two terms away, in the first year of a Shorten Labor Government. Year one. First  Budget.

JOURNALIST: Back to stage two of the Government's income tax cuts, what evidence  do you have to suggest that wage growth won't take average earnings to that level?

BOWEN: Wages growth has been very low recently. That's a matter of some concern. It  will be very difficult for the Budget to reach its wages forecast for this financial year, let  alone off into future financial years. The 2022 tax cuts are ones which are still an  election away, at least. We'll take our time work through the evidence in relation to the  2022 tax cuts which the Government is many instances only releasing today, some last  week, drip-feeding out as it suits them, put the data before the Senate, Senate Enquiry,  Senate Estimates next week. You can't make a case with respect that the 2022 tax cuts  are urgent. It's 2018. We should actually be a responsible Opposition and work through  those issues.

JOURNALIST: How much longer does Labor need?

BOWEN: It won't be before the Senate in the next sitting. Senate Estimates are still  sitting. We'll be voting in the Senate, of course, and referring these matters to a Senate  inquiry. But I mean you can say what you like about Labor's policies. We have been  crystal clear announcing more policy than any Opposition in living memory - many of  you are experienced journalists - more policy than any Opposition in living memory way  before an election and we'll announce our policies, the policies we take to the Australian  people, way before the election for the Australian people to judge. We won't be held to  the willy-nilly timetable of Mr Morrison who just dreams up tax cuts on the never-never,  seven years away and says we should urgently vote for them. He tried to get us to vote  for them the day after the Budget, even before the Budget reply. He may take a  haphazard approach to Budget manage, in fact he does. I don't.

JOURNALIST: New data challenges Labor’s claim that the Government’s income tax  are geared towards the wealthy. Do you accept that that’s not the case?

BOWEN: The top 20% of income earners get 60% of the benefit when the package is  fully implemented. Mr Morrison can dispute those facts, take on the independent  modelling if he wants to. They're the facts that have been outlined. He can drip-feed out  alleged Treasury data. He should be actually putting it out before the parliament as the  legislation is introduced to allow proper scrutiny.

JOURNALIST: It chips away at the argument that the Government is only for the top  end of town.

BOWEN: Again, 2024, I'm not sure what you'll be doing in 2024, I hope to be Treasurer  of Australia in 2024 but I don't pretend to predict what the Budget will be able to deliver.  The Budget may be able to deliver big tax cuts but I'm not so irresponsible as to say we

won't take our time to work these issues through. What we can do is say with great  confidence bigger, better, fairer tax cuts delivered in 2019, the first Budget of a Shorten  Labor Government,. Real tax relief not pretend tax relief later in the decade, real tax  relief in the first term of a Shorten Labor Government, almost double what Mr Turnbull is  offering Australians on low and middle incomes.

JOURNALIST: Heading into the by-elections, do you expect that the tax cuts and  Budget issues will remain critical in terms of…

BOWEN: Certainly hope so. Certainly hope so. We want tax cuts and the tax-competing  plans to be front and centre in the by-election campaigns and in the general election.  Whenever it may be held. We're ready for it whenever it may be held. We are against at  least $80 billion worth corporate tax cuts, we’re for better tax relief for low and middle  income earners, more immediate than the Turnbull Government is offering. We can  offer tax cuts in 2019. I think the voters in the by election and the general election would  regard tax relief in 2019 as a whole lot better than a pie in the sky promise of 2024.

JOURNALIST: Would you consider supporting the bill?

BOWEN: We have made very very clear that the way to guarantee the tax cuts in 2018  is to split the bill through the parliament. We will vote for the 2018 tax cuts immediately  without question. And Mr Morrison and Mr Turnbull, if they play silly games and hold the  2018 tax cuts hostage with their entire tax package on the never never will be making a  mistake, a significant mistake.

JOURNALIST: Mr Foley’s comment on white flight in the region, has that impacted you  in this area or (inaudible).

BOWEN: Luke Foley has said that he made a poor choice of words, he has retracted  those words. And of course I agree with him about that, I agree with him that he should  have retracted those words and apologised for them. But I say this: Luke Foley was  talking about a very important issue in this community, which is more services for the  communities that are actually welcoming refugees. I mean here in Fairfield, we have  welcomed more refugees than any other local Government area, together with  Liverpool. We actually take our responsibilities of accepting refugees seriously here in  Fairfield and I can tell you here in my electorate office, it is something we do every  single day. Not just me and my office, the council, the service providers, the schools  providing very intensive English training to new arrivals. That's good but the community  needs support as we do so. I think Luke Foley was right to raise those issues, was right  to actually put a focus on these communities, to have a high level debate about  refugees, sure, but the communities that are actually taking the responsibility of  welcoming so many people to our country. It is intensive, labour-intensive and resource-intensive and good on Luke Foley for raising the issues. He could have done it better,  he is the first to admit it but good on him for raising that issue.

JOURNALIST: Doesn’t it reflect on his judgement though? Putting it in those words?



BOWEN: He made a mistake, he acknowledged the mistake. It is a sign of good  leadership to acknowledge when you made a mistake and apologise for it. I would  rather him be raising these issues and talking about my community and other  communities in western Sydney which are dealing with the welcoming of refugees in a  very open and welcoming manner that can do with Government support - I mean, I've  been the Federal member here for 14 years. I haven't seen Gladys Berejiklian visit here  as Premier. She may have, if she has I haven't seen her. I haven’t seen her focus on  this community. Luke Foley is a regular visitor here at Fairfield. I can see him regularly  at functions, many ethnic functions. I see him in this community. He understands the  people of western Sydney very well. Gladys Berejiklian has shown no attention to the  people of Fairfield. Not one little bit.

JOURNALIST: What sort of reception is he going to get now though?

BOWEN: Fairfield welcomes all politicians, with respect. If Gladys Berejiklian bothered  to turn up, she would be treated with respect. Luke Foley is always treated with respect  when he comes here which he does regularly and I’m sure he will continue to do so.

JOURNALIST: If Russia won't acknowledge its role in downing MH17, should we expel  Russia diplomats? And if we wanted to send a clear message to the country then what  about the World Cup?

BOWEN: Look, the Government is dealing with this. Penny Wong has made statements  in relation to the Government's response. We are attempting to give the Government  the support that they should have in dealing with this issue. I think it would not be  particularly helpful for me to pre-empt expelling diplomats or dealing with the World  Cup. We would consider proposals the Government has to make on their merits as we  do always in relation to foreign affairs matters and particularly one as sensitive and  important to Australia as this. We are united in our disgust about what happened to  everybody on that aeroplane, of course, and strong action is warranted. We would give  support to well-considered strong action. It is a matter for the Government and It is a  matter for, frankly, for Penny Wong to respond to, as she has been doing.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT - JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra



