





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Education and Training   Manager of Government Business in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on 2GB Sydney Live with Ben Fordham   Topics: Eureka flag in schools   12/03/2018  15:08PM

Ben Fordham:  Well, as if our children need any more distractions from their grades, they could now  be bombarded with union propaganda in classrooms. The Teachers’ Union in Queensland has vowed to  splash the Eureka Stockade flag across schools in solidarity with the militant CFMEU. That’s the union whose  members were accused of threatening to rape the children of colleagues who refused to join their strike. Now  the CFMEU has roped in the Teachers’ Union to help them protest against the construction watchdog  because it banned the Eureka flag from all building sites. And as part of the protest, teachers will be given  stickers emblazoned with the flag, to stick on diaries or books that they use in class. The Federal Education  Minister Simon Birmingham joins me live on the line.

Minister, good afternoon.

Simon Birmingham:  G’day, Ben. Good to be with you.

Ben Fordham:  I mean, come on. Fair’s fair. You’ve got to keep this stuff out of the classroom, right?

Simon Birmingham: Look, people would rightly be wondering what on earth the Teachers’ Union’s  priorities are when this is the type of [indistinct] they come up with. Now, classrooms are learning  environments. They’re not for politicising the students who are there. I think you and I have had this  discussion before when, in Victoria, the Teachers’ Union started talking about supporting teachers who  wanted to wear t-shirts about closing the camps and pro-refugee t-shirts. Now, up in Queensland we’ve got  the Queensland Teachers’ Union wanting to go down this path. Now, the very clear message that I get time  and time again from parents around the country, is that state governments in managing schools have to lead  and that is keep the policies out of the classroom.

Ben Fordham:  Shouldn’t the Teachers’ Union be standing up for that point? Shouldn’t they be the  ones saying to the CFMEU: I’m sorry, we might agree with your argument, we might sympathise with your  plight, but we’re not going to involve classrooms in this stuff?

Simon Birmingham: Well, the Teachers’ Union should and, frankly, they’re letting their members down  with the type of antics and stunts that they’re pulling here, because I know that there are thousands of  hardworking teachers around the country who would be shaking their heads that their reputation is being  tarnished because of the actions of the militant individuals leading their union. These teachers, I know, just  want to get on and do the right thing by the kids, work hard in their schools, and that’s what the vast majority  will keep doing. We just need to make sure that the unionists themselves don’t get away with taking their  stunts into their classrooms.

Ben Fordham:  Alright, we’ll find out whether it’s happening in New South Wales this afternoon,  Minister. Thanks so much for your time.

Simon Birmingham: Cheers Ben.



Ben Fordham:  Simon Birmingham, the Federal Education Minister. If you’ve witnessed any of that  activity in New South Wales classrooms, we want to hear about it. 131 873 is the open line number.

Minister Birmingham’s media contact: Nick Creevey 0447 644 957        Benn Ayre 0428 342 325

Department Media:    media@education.gov.au

