Minister for Finance

Senator the Hon. Mathias Cormann  Minister for Finance  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for Western Australia

Transcription:

PROOF COPY E & OE

Date:

3/5/2018

Topic(s):

Tim Hammond, Commonwealth Bank, 2018-19 Budget, Border Protection

S



AMANTHA MAIDEN: Joining me now live to discuss all of this is the Finance Minister and  dad, Mathias Cormann. If I could just start with that, some people have been a bit brutal  about this and they have said, look there is FIFO workers, fly in, fly out in WA that do not  always see their kids. Should we really be sobbing into our Weet-bix for politicians? But at  the end of the day if good people are walking away from politics, that hurts all of us doesn’t  it?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I was saddened to see Tim make that decision, but I do understand  the pressures on families, in particular those of us I guess from faraway places like  Western Australia, who choose to pursue a federal political career. It is tough on our  families, as it is tough on families of workers in other professions. I do not take away from  that in any way shape or form, that is true. But in the end, all of us, we have to make  decisions about what is right for us and for our families. I understand and respect the  decision that he has made.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Did it make you have, I am sorry we are just going to have to  interrupt.

We are going to return now to the Finance Minister Mathias Cormann, who has very  patiently waited during that. Are you a cricket fan?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Yes I am. Congratulations to Justin Langer, a great West Australian  and a great Australian and we wish him all the very best.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: All right that is good. Talking of great West Australians, we were  talking there about this issue of families. When you heard Tim Hammond making that call  yesterday, did it give you pause for thought about your own parenting, being a dad, how  often you miss out on seeing your kids. Did it prompt any conversations do you think or will  it prompt any conversations between partners and their spouses?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Hayley and I we talk about this all the time. We talked about it

financeminister.gov.au/transcript/2018/05/03/sky-news---live-now

before I put my hand up. We talked about it on the way through. I guess our circumstance  was a bit different. I started this job before we were either married or had kids and it sort of  all evolved from there. Every family has its own circumstance and every family makes their  own decisions that suit their circumstance. As far as we are concerned, we have made a  decision that this is something which is an amazing opportunity for me to be able to serve  in this capacity. We know that it is not forever, but while I have this opportunity, we are  going to give it our best crack as a team.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: When does it end?

MATHIAS CORMANN: That is very much a matter for either the Prime Minister or the  Australian people. As long as I have the confidence of the Prime Minister and the Prime  Minister and the Government have the confidence of the Australian people, I will continue

to give it my best.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: I wanted to ask you one last family question before we go on to  your substantive issue of the Budget. You have spoken before quite movingly about  growing up, that you are really proud of your dad, because he had a problem with alcohol  abuse, with substance abuse, he lost his job and you had to really step up in the family and  really have a lot of responsibility in that family as a kid. What was that like for you as a child  and a teenager having to play that role in your family and helping your mum, a lot of kids  have that background, but do you think….interrupted

MATHIAS CORMANN: It was a long time ago. It was a difficult period in our family’s life,

but we came out the other end. My parents are about to celebrate their 50th wedding  anniversary in two years from now. This was a long time ago.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Let us talk about this breach in relation to the Commonwealth Bank  and the data breach. We are told that the Information Commissioner knew about this years  ago. Did the Government know that this has occurred?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I am advised that the Attorney-General was advised on this last  night and he is seeking urgent briefings. I am not across all of the ins and outs of it, but the  Attorney-General was advised last night and is receiving briefings as we speak.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Does it concern you that the CBA did not bother to tell its  customers if this material could have literally fallen off the back of the truck?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Since February there is a mandatory reporting requirement. So this  could not happen now. I am not aware of all of the ins and outs of it, but the Attorney-  General is receiving briefings as we speak.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Now you have ruled out the idea of carving big banks out of the  company tax cut. There still seem to be a bit of debate though about whether you could find  a different wat of doing that, set up a compensation fund. Why not put the GST on financial  services?

MATHIAS CORMANN: The issues that have emerged and may continue to emerge  through the Bank Royal Commission have to be addressed on their own merits. You do not

make decisions on tax policy settings based on the conduct of individual businesses. You  make decisions on the appropriate tax policy settings based on what is in the interest of  Australian workers, what is in the interest of Australian shareholders, what is in the interest  of the economy as a whole. If we do not reduce our business tax rate for all businesses, we  will do harm to the economy, we will send investment and jobs overseas. If we want to  protect investment into Australia, if we want to protect Australian jobs, if we want to ensure  that we can create more jobs and secure higher wages into the future, we need to ensure  that the businesses that have to create those jobs and pay those wages have the best  possible opportunity to be more successful and more profitable into the future. On current  policy settings, we are putting our businesses at a competitive disadvantage with other  businesses in other parts of the world. That will send investment and jobs overseas and  that will do harm to both shareholders, employees and customers here in Australia.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Are you still committed to a target of running a surplus that is one  per cent of GDP?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We have been committed to getting the Budget back into surplus  as soon as possible. We will get the Budget into surplus of one per cent as a share of GDP  as soon as possible….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: What about the target?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We have been on the record for some time now, we will get the  Budget back into surplus as soon as possible. The most recent forecast and projections are  for a return to surplus in 2020-21. The Treasurer will provide an update in relation to the  trajectory, the expected trajectory on Tuesday night when he delivers the Budget.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Okay because you are now talking about a different measure,  which is keeping tax to revenue to 23.9 per cent of GDP….interrupted

MATHIAS CORMANN: That is not a different measure, that is a measure that has been a  feature of our Budget ever since we came into Government. In fact….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: There is an argument, is there not, that that is a break on getting to  the one per cent of GDP for the surplus? That is Labor’s argument, that they can tax and  spend their way to a surplus that is bigger than yours.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Labor is reckless and irresponsible. I would encourage you to have  a look at Chris Bowen’s speech, his first speech to the Press Club as Shadow Treasurer in  December 2013, when he actually said the Government must stick to a 23.7 per cent tax as  a share of GDP cap. Now Labor is saying we will just increase the overall tax burden on the  economy, which will cost jobs. Increasing the overall tax burden on the economy will lead to  lower growth, fewer jobs, higher unemployment and lower wages….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Correct me if I am wrong here, I am happy to be corrected. If you  keep this cap on tax of 23.9 per cent of GDP and then you have to then offer tax cuts,  surely that makes it harder for you to run bigger surpluses?

MATHIAS CORMANN: No, you have to live within your means as a Government. The way  to sustainably fund the services that Australians expect is by securing stronger economic

growth. By securing stronger economic growth, 23.9 per cent of a bigger pie is a more  significant dollar number than 23.9 per cent of a smaller pie. What Labor is proposing to do  is to increase the overall tax burden on the economy, which will lead to lower growth, fewer  jobs and lower wages….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Isn’t it the case of if you do not run bigger surpluses, you never pay  down debt?

MATHIAS CORMANN: You are making an assumption….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: You tell me, you are the Finance Minister.

MATHIAS CORMANN: We will be delivering the next Budget on Tuesday….interrupted  SAMANTHA MAIDEN: But surely it is just a matter of logic isn’t it? Just explain it to me, I  did modern European history and drama in year 12, I stopped doing maths in year ten, so  you explain it to me. My understanding has always been that if you do not run bigger  surpluses, you do not pay down debt. Is that wrong or right?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Let me explain to you the situation we are in. When we came into  Government, the economy was weakening, unemployment was rising, the Budget position  was rapidly deteriorating. In the 11 weeks from Labor’s last Budget to the pre-election  economic and fiscal outlook, the Budget position deteriorated by $3 billion a week. We  have implemented a plan for stronger economic growth, for more jobs and to get the  Budget back into surplus as soon as possible and that plan is working….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: So keep it simple for people like me, yes or no, if you do not run  bigger surpluses, do you never pay down debt?

MATHIAS CORMANN: You can ask the questions and I answer them and we  are….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Is it yes or no?

MATHIAS CORMANN: You ask the questions, I will answer them. We are on  track….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: I will ask the question again, if you do not run bigger surpluses, do  you never pay down debt?



MATHIAS CORMANN: We are on track to get back to surplus. If you look at our debt  position as per our last Budget and half-yearly Budget update, it is projected to peak as a  share of GDP next financial year. That is in the last update and there will be a further  update on Tuesday.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: I am not sure if I got a yes or no answer, I will have to keep  studying….interrupted

MATHIAS CORMANN: You are just going to hypotheticals….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: It is not really a hypothetical, I am asking you as principle, unless  you run bigger surpluses, do you ever pay down debt?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We are committed to run surpluses as soon as possible and we will  pay off debt in that context.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Chris Richardson has suggested and there have been briefings by  the Government as well that revenue is great. That is good isn’t it? So revenue is better  than expected. I think Chris Richardson used the word “humungous, humungous”, now  does that mean that you are going to be able to get to surplus a little faster?

MATHIAS CORMANN: We let commentators put characterisations around it….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: How would you describe it? Not humungous?

MATHIAS CORMANN: I provide monthly financial statements, which provide updates on



how we are tracking both on the expenditure and on the revenue front. People can see that  compared to what was forecast, expenditure is less and revenue is higher. That is because  our plan and our prudent economic and fiscal management is working. The economic  growth outlook is better, employment growth is much stronger than what it was when we  came into Government and the Budget is on track to a believable surplus. The Treasurer  on Tuesday will provide a further update. The key here is, this is not the time to change  direction. Our plan is working. We have to continue to press ahead. We will continue to  make the decisions to put our economy and our Budget on the strongest foundation and  trajectory for the future.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: If the revenue is humongous, as Christ Richardson suggested, you  are on track to have a deficit of $2.6 billion, wafer thin, in 2019-20 according to MYEFO. If  you have got all that revenue, wouldn’t that be a surplus? $2.6 billion that is just a tiny  amount isn’t it….interrupted

MATHIAS CORMANN: You can ask me the question….interrupted

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Okay I am asking.

MATHIAS CORMANN: You can ask me the question to deliver the Budget for you today in  whatever way you want, I will not do it. The Budget will be delivered on Tuesday at 7:30pm  by the Treasurer. I will not be delivering the Budget for you today.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: I do not want you to let the cat out of the bag, but I am  wondering….interrupted

MATHIAS CORMANN: You are entitled to wonder.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: … if the deficit is only $2.6 billion 2019-20, if you might just have a  little rabbit in your hat?

MATHIAS CORMANN: Again, you can wonder whatever way you want. You will not have  to wait much longer. Quite right, we have made significant progress in repairing the Budget  since we came into Government. We inherited a deteriorating situation and we are now on  an improving trajectory with the most recent forecast and projection that we would return to  surplus by 2020-21. The Treasurer will be providing an update on how we are tracking and  the impact of our decisions in this Budget on Tuesday night.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Are you planning to offset removing the Medicare levy increases  you have announced recently or will you simply use the revenue uptick to pay for it?

MATHIAS CORMANN: That detail will be reflected in the Budget. What we have said is, in  all of the circumstances, including the fact that the Medicare levy increase was not going to  go through the Senate, we have made a judgement that we could afford to fully fund the  NDIS without increasing the Medicare Levy. It is also a matter of public record that we will  deliver personal income tax cuts in this Budget. Now the detail and the specifics will be part  of the Budget.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: We have got a poll today, Sky News ReachTEL poll reflecting the  change that is in Labor Party platform that they would like to see asylum seekers processed



within 90 days or released into community detention. Do you think that is a fair efficiency  method to say 90 days and then released?

MATHIAS CORMANN: No. I saw Penny Wong earlier on your program. It is clear that  Labor would again go soft on border protection. It is clear that Labor would again open the  floodgates. If we were to put arbitrary time limits on offshore detention, as is suggested by  the Labor Party, as was suggested by Penny Wong and as appears to be reflected in that  poll, we would open the floodgates again. We would put people smugglers back into  business and what happened under Labor when they were last in Government would  happen again. It is clear that Labor still has not learnt their lesson. They are still playing  with fire. They are still wanting to put people smugglers back into business should they  have the opportunity to get into Government.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Finance Minister Mathias Cormann, I think we are going to have to  leave it there. Good luck and Godspeed on your 5th Budget, may there be many more.  Thank you very much for your time today.

MATHIAS CORMANN: Thank you.

SAMANTHA MAIDEN: Thank you and good luck to your family as well.

