MEDIA LIIM fl L E'EASE

AUSTRALIA

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

WHISTLEBLOWERS RAISE CONCERNS OVER CHILDREN IN NAURU

After being reappointed the Minister for Home Affairs, Peter Dutton cannot and must not  continue to choose wilful neglect over taking appropriate action to address concerns  about the provision of healthcare to asylum seeker and refugee children in the

Australian-funded regional processing centre on Nauru.

Labor is deeply concerned by reports on the ABC's 7.30 in which whistleblowers who  have worked as medical professionals in the regional processing centre on Nauru as  recently as this year shared their experiences.

Labor strongly believes that medical transfers for refugees and children in Australian-funded offshore regional processing centres should be made available when a  treatment is not available on island and where treatment is recommended by  appropriate medical practitioners.

Labor remains very concerned that all is done to protect the rights of children in the  immigration processing network which is why we took a commitment to the last Federal  Election to establish an Independent Children's Advocate - an option Peter Dutton and  the Liberals have not taken up.

Many of the concerns raised by whistleblowers were previously canvassed in the Labor-initiated Senate Inquiry following the leaked Nauru files, with Peter Dutton failing to act  on the reasonable recommendations made in the Senate Inquiry's report for over  sixteen months.

Nauru and Manus Island were set up as temporary regional processing centres but  have become places of indefinite detention because of the failure of successive Liberal  Government to negotiate other third country resettlement options.

In the past week, Labor has written to both Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison urging the  Government to accept New Zealand's offer to resettle eligible refugees - including  children - from Manus and Nauru as quickly as possible.

If the Government was able to negotiate conditions for the US refugee resettlement  agreement to prevent people smugglers exploiting vulnerable people, they should be

able to negotiate appropriate conditions and protections for any agreement with New

Zealand.

Ensuring Australia maintains strong borders does not absolve the Australian  Government of its obligation to provide appropriate health, security, and welfare  services to asylum seekers and refugees while the Government continues to fumble  and fail to negotiate third country resettlement agreements for eligible refugees.

In addition to accepting New Zealand's offer, Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison must  immediately explain what they are doing to ensure the health and welfare of asylum  seekers and refugees, especially children, in the Australian-funded regional processing  centre on Nauru.

MONDAY, 27 AUGUST 2018

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110

