THE HON PETER DUTTON MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION

THE HON DR DAVID GILLESPIE MP

ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

18 June 2018

REFUGEE WEEK 2018

Refugee Week is an opportunity to recognise and celebrate people who come to Australia  through Australia's Refugee and Humanitarian Program and enrich our society through

business and employment.

Every year, Refugee Week is celebrated around the country. This year Refugee Week is held

between Sunday 17 June and Saturday 23 June and coincides with international events to

mark World Refugee Day on 20 June.

The Minister for Home Affairs Peter Dutton will take the opportunity to acknowledge

humanitarian entrants at a Refugee Week function at Parliament House this week,

highlighting their commitment to building a new life in Australia by seeking out education

and training, employment and entrepreneurial opportunities.

"Australia has a proud record of resettling people in humanitarian need," Mr Dutton said.

"We are one of the world's top contributors to international refugee resettlement efforts,

welcoming more than 880,000 refugees and others in humanitarian need since the end of

the Second World War.

"The Australian Government continues its long-standing commitment to the Humanitarian

Program providing more than 20,200 offshore visas in 2017-18 - the most in over three

decades."

The Australian Government's theme for Refugee Week this year is 'refugee

entrepreneurship and regional employment'.

The Assistant Minister for Children and Families David Gillespie said this year's Refugee  Week recognises that the successful settlement of refugees, including in regional areas,

The Hon Peter Dutton MP. Liberal Party of Australia. Brisbane  www.minister. hameaffairs.gov . au

strengthens our communities and contributes to the very foundation of Australia's

multicultural society.

"A large number of these humanitarian entrants have overcome challenges to engage fully  in Australian life and gone on to build successful careers in business, education, sport and in  the community sector," Dr Gillespie said.

For information regarding Australia's Refugee Week events visit www.refugeeweek.org.au/

For further information: Minister's Office —02 6277 7860

www.minister. homeaffairs.  go v. au

2

