

THE HON JULIE COLLINS MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND MENTAL HEALTH  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  HOBART  FRIDAY, 31 AUGUST 2018

SUBJECT/S: Plan to end local BoM weather forecasting in Tasmania, Liberal’s  decentralizing failure, Labor State Conference.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND MENTAL HEALTH: The  Federal Labor team is really concerned to hear these reports about the Bureau of  Meteorology moving weather forecasting to the mainland. We are outraged that this  decision has been made. Tony Burke and the Labor team will be writing to the Federal  Government today to seek assurances that this will not mean a loss of expertise in  Tasmania and this will not see a loss of jobs here in Tasmania. We are concerned  about all Tasmanians, but particularly Tasmanians who rely on these intricate, localised  weather forecasts for their day-to-day living. Whether that be farmers; whether that be  fishers; whether that be boating people; whether that be emergency services; or even  Hydro for our dams. We need this local information and we need local experts on the  ground to give us that local information. We should not be relying on forecasters in  Brisbane or in Melbourne for information when they don’t know Tasmania like the locals  know it. This is a bad decision for Tasmania and it’s a bad decision for federal public  services jobs in Tasmania. Federal Labor will be pushing really hard to stop this  happening and we encourage the Tasmanian Liberal Senate team to join with Federal  Labor in our fight to save these positions in Tasmania.

JOURNALIST: Do you think a critical service like forecasting should be the subject of  this centralising in an efficiency push?

COLLINS: What we’ve learnt in the last few days from calls to my office and from  talking to people is just how much Tasmanians rely on this local forecasting. It is not ok  for people who sit on the mainland to make decisions that impact our lives without  talking to Tasmanians. This is a bad decision for our state and we will fight it.

JOURNALIST: So you were saying people from different industries were contacting  your office, what industries were they? There were quite a few.

COLLINS: So we’ve had the boating industry, we’re had people contact from the fishing  industry relying on the weather forecasts and we’ve obviously had some staff at the  Bureau also talk to us about how concerned they about what this will mean Tasmania.

JOURNALIST: Given the Federal Government’s fascination with decentralising and  pushing some jobs into regional areas, do you think this flies in the face of that?

COLLINS This decision by the Federal Liberal Government absolutely flies in the face  of their commitment to put more jobs into Tasmania. They have repeatedly said that  they want more Federal jobs in Tasmania and everything they have done since they  have been in Government has taken jobs away from our state. Whether it jobs at the  Bureau; whether it is jobs at Centrelink and Human Services; whether it be jobs at the  Australian Antarctic Division - all the Federal Liberals have done is cut jobs from our  state.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the push to give rank and file members greater influence in  choosing State Labor leaders is a good idea?

COLLINS: We’ve got our State Conference, people put up rule changes and anything to  do with the State Conference is a matter for the State Secretary.

JOURNALIST: Why are there moves to place Lisa Singh lower on your Senate ticket?

COLLINS: That is another question for the State Secretary. We’ve got our State  Conference coming up in a week so people put a whole range of things on the agenda  and we’ll be discussing them there.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119

