Ministers for the  Department of  Education and Training  Media Centre

Interview on ABC RN Drive with

Patricia Karvelas

Tuesday 20 March 2018 Transcript

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham

I1ink:/birminghami

• Minister for Education and Training

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

Topics: South African farmers; Cambridge A naivtica;

Catholic school funding; South Australian election

Patricia Karvelas: Tony Abbott has put his support

behind Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton's call to

bring white South African farmers to Australia. Foreign

Minister Julie Bishop rejected the idea of any visa

assistance over the weekend, while the South African

Government has demanded an apology. Speaking on

commercial radio, Tony Abbott has had this to say

today: if the boot was on the other foot, we would call

it racism of the worst sort, and I think we should

acknowledge this as a very, very serious issue of justice

and fairness, and I think Peter Dutton was absolutely

right to say that under our humanitarian immigration

programme there ought to be a place for people who

are being persecuted this way.

Simon Birmingham is the Minister for Education and

Training, he joins us now. Welcome to the programme.

Simon Birmingham: G'day Patricia, great to be with

you.

Patricia Karvelas: So what's your view? Should white

farmers from South Africa be given special assistance

through our visa programme?

Simon Birmingham: Well, where persecution is

occurring, then any individual regardless of the colour

of their skin or their background is absolutely able to

make application through our humanitarian

programme. Australia will take around 18,000 people

through the humanitarian programme this year in as

new permanent residents. On top of that is of course

has been filling the 12,000 places of Syrian refugees.

And yes indeed, there may well be people in this

category in South Africa who would qualify and may

wish to consider applying.

Patricia Karvelas: Foreign Minister Julie Bishop

rejected the idea yesterday. You don't agree with her?

Simon Birmingham: I'm not sure that that's a correct

appraisal of what the Foreign Minister said. In the end

as long as people meet the criteria, then as I said, it

doesn't matter what the colour of their skin is, what

their race, nationality, religion or otherwise is. This is a

humanitarian programme in which it is based around

persecution and providing people with safety from

persecution. Ultimately, the grounds for that are very

clear. One of the reasons as a government, of course,

that we have implemented the tough border controls

that we've put in place is to get away from our

humanitarian programme simply being filled by people

who can afford to buy their way to Australia, and

instead make sure that it is filled through the proper

processes of individuals who are most needy and most

worthy and most suitable, applying and filling those

Patricia Karvelas: So you're saying that they can apply

if they want, but ultimately our programme shouldn't

change. We shouldn't give them a special visa category

or bring them in in any specific way?

Simon Birmingham: Certainly we are not looking for

any special visa category. What we are looking for here

and looking at here are questions of individuals who

may have been persecuted. In those instances, do they

fit the criteria and if so, then they should be treated just

like anybody else.

Patricia Karvelas: Some people might be wondering

why we are getting involved in South Africa's

problems, perceived or otherwise. Why are we talking

about this specifically? Is this a particularly acute

issue? Why has this come up now?

Simon Birmingham: Because I think it has got some

attention because the Minister for Home Affairs was

asked a question specifically about it, and interviewers

like your good self, Patricia, tend to like politicians to

answer the questions that they're asked. Ultimately,

Australia in its acceptance of people under our

humanitarian programme accepts people from all

manner of different conflicts, situations, difficulties

around the world. If that means

Patricia Karvelas: But do you support a non-discriminatory immigration and refugee programme

though?

Simon Birmingham: Well, absolutely. That's what I've

described before. That is the policy of the government.

That will remain the policy of the government. But

what you're saying there by getting involved, if simply

taking people or outlining the fact that individuals in

some conflict circumstances, in some areas of

persecution, may qualify for a humanitarian visa under

our very generous arrangements is getting involved,

well I'm not sure that's really the case. I think it is

simply offering a lifeline to individuals who face

persecution, who are in difficulty, and who would

qualify the same as anybody else under the

humanitarian visa arrangements.

Patricia Karvelas: Just on another issue, Facebook has

suspended election data analysis company Cambridge

Analytica over allegations it harvested the profiles of

more than 50 million users - crucially, without their

permission. This time last year, the Liberal Party met

with Cambridge Analytica. Did the party engage their

services?

Simon Birmingham: No. My understanding is that the

party does not have any relationship with this company.

Patricia Karvelas: Representatives of the Liberal Party,

government staff and Parliamentarians including the

Veterans Affairs Minister Dan Tehan met with

Cambridge Analytica. You're saying that was a

meeting but not a formal arrangement with the Liberal

Party?

Simon Birmingham: The advice I have, and I am not a

campaign director of the Liberal Party

Patricia Karvelas: I know.

Simon Birmingham: But the advice I have is that a

statement has been released by the campaign officials

or director indicating the party does not have a

relationship with this company.

Patricia Karvelas: What is the government doing to

investigate whether Australian users are caught up with

this alleged data mining, because this is a huge issue

for people and so many Australians are on Facebook.

This is a pretty alarming story, isn't it?

Simon Birmingham: Look, I have no doubt that if there

are risks to Australians that authorities would take a

look under the provisions of the Privacy Act. Those

provisions apply very clearly in terms of what is

protected and prevent entities from providing

information that is protected to political parties, and so

if there is an offense there I would expect that it would

be investigated and looked at. Clearly, if there are

allegations to be made - and it's hard to tell from the

questions the Labor Party have asked to date whether

they're making an allegation or just trying to create a

smear - but if they have an allegation to make, then  they should make it so that it can be properly

investigated.

Patricia Karvelas: Just very much in your portfolio -

and I want to get to the South Australian election,  which feels so long ago already now but the results just

came through Saturday night - but just on Catholic  schools. The Catholic education sector poured

resources into the Batman by-election to support Labor,  writing letters to families with children at Catholic

schools, robo-calling homes. Their message was that  Labor was the party to vote for if Catholic schools

funding was to be properly funded. How are you  expecting this to work at a Federal level? Are you

concerned about the intervention here?

Simon Birmingham: Well, I think Australians will be

concerned at the fact that Bill Shorten appears to have  abandoned all principle when it comes to school

funding. That far from standing by the Gonski  principles of needs-based funding, he is instead now  advocating a return to special deals here, or vote-buying exercises over there, and I think that

Australians across the board including many people

in Catholic education and parents of children in

Catholic schools would be concerned that there was a

lack of principle, a lack of consistency behind this. And

also I'd encourage them to look at the detail of what

Mr Shorten's promising, because he might be throwing

a couple of years' worth funding on the table, or

claiming to, but there's absolutely no certainty beyond

that as to what on earth he's proposing, whereas the

Turnbull Government has put in place clear, consistent,

needs-based funding arrangements that apply a formula

based on the need of different schools and is very

transparent. We're working to make sure that the data

that underpins that formula is of the best integrity

possible, and there's a review into aspects of that which

was asked for by Catholic education. I'm very pleased

that across most of Australia, Catholic education

authorities seem to be engaging very constructively

with the government in terms of that review process.

Patricia Karvelas: Tony Abbott was on the radio today.

I mentioned that, but he had a lot of things to say

including on your portfolio. He says the government

should rethink the funding policy when it comes to

Catholic schools given what's happened in Batman.

Will you reconsider?

Simon Birmingham: Well, the Government is

committed to school funding based on the principle of

need, and school funding that applies consistently

rather than simply politicking and vote-buying from

school funding. So we are already though addressing

what is the main principled concern that has been

raised by Catholic ed, and that is the calculation of the

socioeconomic status and the way that impacts then on

school funding, because essentially for non-government schools we discount the amount of money

they receive based on what's assessed as the capacity to

contribute of the school community. So wealthier

schools receive less money, less wealthy schools in

general in terms of their school community will receive

greater support, and that's about empowering as many

Australians as possible to make a choice around their

schooling so that they can choose to access non-government education. If they are from a school

community with lesser means they'll receive greater

support to do so. We're reviewing the data that

underpins that to make sure that is as credible as

possible in the future, and we're doing that through an

independent board as was recommended by David

Gonski. That board has representation on it from the

National Catholic Education Commission, and I'm sure

it will come up by June as it is scheduled with sound

findings the government can look at and act upon.

Patricia Karvelas: Just on the South Australian election,

if you look at the results they weren't as good for the

minor parties: SA Best, Nick Xenophon's Team, and

also the Australian Conservatives. Just on the

Australian Conservatives' part, I mean they also ran in

Batman and South Australia. What kind of electoral

force do you expect them to be going forward? You

feeling a bit more confident about the Coalition brand

up against this right-wing split, now that we've seen

the South Australian election play out?

Simon Birmingham: I think what we've seen if I look

at the contests where the Liberal Party's been in the

field- and people can talk about Batman all they like,

but essentially it was a Labor-Greens contest and the

government decided not to waste resources, time or

energy in contesting that ballot because ultimately the

Labor Party's held that seat since I think it was 1936,

and I'm surprised there's so much crowing going on

about managing to hold on to a seat that they've held

for more than 80 years already. But where the Liberal

Party's been in recent races and the Conservatives have

as well, such as the Bennelong by-election last year or

the South Australian election this year, the

Conservatives' votes has largely come, in the case of

NSW, at the expense of the Fred Nile party, and in the

case of South Australia, at the expense of the old

Family First Party. In fact in SA, they got even less

than Family First has gotten historically, so what we

seem to be seeing there is that this new party is

basically taking the votes of other long-established

right-of-centre Christian-based parties. That's probably

to be expected, but it does not appear to be attracting

the Liberal vote in any particular way.

Patricia Karvelas: Before I let you go I'm just going to

revisit an issue we've gone to, mainly because I'm

being inundated with text messages from our listeners

who are clearly concerned. On this relationship with

this group I asked you about, Cambridge Analytica,

you said that the Liberal Party has no relationship with

this group. But has it in the past?

Simon Birmingham: Not to my knowledge. Certainly

we've just had an election in South Australia, and I'm

assured that there was no engagement of them in

relation to activities in that election. So far as I'm

aware, that's not the case, and as I said before the

privacy law applies in a very clear manner, and we

would expect that if there have been breaches of the

privacy law that they would be thoroughly investigated

by the appropriate authorities.

Patricia Karvelas: Minister, thank you so much for your

time.

Simon Birmingham: Thank you very much, Patricia.

Patricia Karvelas: Simon Birmingham is the Education

Minister.

For more information

Media Contact: media education. gov.au

[link:https://mail.google.com/mai l /?

view=cm&fs=1 &tf= 1 &to=mediaeducation.gov.au ]

Non-media queries: 1300 566 046

[link:tel: 1300566046]

