

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND WORKPLACE  RELATIONS  MEMBER FOR GORTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  RN BREAKFAST  CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 22 MAY 2018

SUBJECTS: Workplace Relations Policy; Insecure Work; Stacking of the FWC;  Refugees.

HAMISH MACDONALD: Brendan O’Connor is the Shadow Minister for Workplace  Relations, he joins us now from parliament, a very good morning to you.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND  WORKPLACE RELATIONS: Good morning, Hamish.

MACDONALD: I noticed in one of the morning newspapers today that one of Craig  Laundy and Michaela Cash have described John Setka as effectively Labor’s Shadow  Workplace Minister. Is it him or is it you?

O’CONNOR: Well I can assure you that federal Labor will be determining the policy. I’m  the Shadow Minister for Employment and we’re engaged with unions and employers  about making workplaces fairer and making them safer. That’s my job and I’ll be doing  that. Meanwhile the senior Minister for Employment of the government is under  investigation for acting unlawfully - certainly her office acting unlawfully in providing  information to the media about raids by the federal police on the AWU offices. I’m happy  to defend my position vis a vis that of the Minister.

MACDONALD: How much influence will the CFMEU have on your workplace policies?

O’CONNOR: Well look, it’s an affiliate of the Australian Labor party and of course it has  rights to raise issues with us. Even if it wasn’t affiliated to the ALP - there are many  unions that are not - I engage with all of them as I do employer bodies and employers.

They’ve got rights to raise issues with us about, in particular, safety, one of the most  dangerous industries in Australia, with one of the highest fatality rates. Terrible  casualties. Of course therefore they will impress upon me and indeed my colleagues,  the things they would like to see happen in relation to our policies. I can assure you,  Hamish, that we engage with all stakeholders, and we will come out and continue to  come out with policies well before the next election. They will be fairer for working  people and will tackle job security, wage theft and the like.

MACDONALD: Sure, but John Setka has been clearly emboldened by the win in court  last week. He’s been listing his wish list of changes to workplace laws if you win  Government. Let’s talk about right of entry, and protected strike action - those are  among the things he has noted. Will you agree to those sorts of things in government?

O’CONNOR: As I’ve said, we will engage in relation to industrial action. There are rights  of unions, workers and employers in relation to industrial action -

MACDONALD: Let’s just narrow this down a bit. Should there be changes to the  restrictions around right of entry for union officials on worksites?

O’CONNOR: I think we need to look at that. It’s not about access for union officials to  worksites alone. It’s about access for workers to be represented in their workplace. We  know that the density of unionisation has shrunk in this country. We know that wage  theft is in epidemic proportions. One of the reasons for that, I think, is there has been a  lack of oversight that has gone on in many workplaces. Having said that, we have to  make sure we get the balance right when it comes to people entering workplaces.  Therefore we will examine these things. What we’ve done -

MACDONALD: That does sound like a yes. That you’re open to changes there?

O’CONNOR: We’re open to discussing with employers and unions changes to the laws  to make them fairer. What we do know is we have wide spread wage theft. We have  systemic underpayments. Look at the 7-Eleven scandal - $100 million underpaid to staff  and we need to make sure we get the balance right there. Of course we are up for the  conversations around these things. Always, when I’m looking at these matters, I’m  looking at the rights and obligations of parties on both sides of the bargaining table.

MACDONALD: What about increasing the number of union appointments to the Fair  Work Commission?

O’CONNOR: Well that’s a concern, given that Minister Cash and previously Minister  Abetz appointed 14 consecutive commissioners none of whom came from the workers  side of the bargaining table. Fourteen consecutive, almost all of them representing the  employers.

MACDONALD: So in your view should that be balanced up with more union officials?

O’CONNOR: Well it always was a convention, Hamish - right through from Menzies,  Fraser, Hawke, Keating up until Howard. Howard distorted it enormously because he  appointed 18 out of 20 coming from the employer side. We had some redress during  our period, but only mildly. We appointed employers and we always have - as has  Hawke and Keating Governments. But this government’s 14 consecutive non worker  representatives is a distortion. I think any government, Labor or otherwise, should be  looking at making sure that the independent umpire is balanced and one of the ways  you do that is consider the composition of the commission and of course we will  examine that as I’ve made clear.

MACDONALD: Could I invite you though for a direct answer though because if we  believe the polls, you could be in government pretty soon. Is it a yes or is it a no that  you would balance this up with more union appointments?

O’CONNOR: It may well be people from unions, it may be lawyers who’ve represented  workers. It has to be a balanced commission and at the moment it’s highly distorted.  You might also want to ask the government why they haven’t appointed anyone that has  represented workers, having appointed 14.

MACDONALD: In terms of Labor’s relationship with the CFMEU, it seems like you’re  pretty much in lockstep with this wish list put forward by John Setka?

O’CONNOR: No that’s not right -

MACDONALD: Well you haven’t put any distance between what he has said in his wish  list and what you’ve said you’re willing to look at and consider, it seems pretty  favourably if you win government.

O’CONNOR: That’s not  the case. The fact is the unions will put forward their log of  demands and we will consider them as we will do with employers.

MACDONALD: So what do you disagree with?

O’CONNOR: Our policies will be as a result of consultations. For example, we have to  look at the way in which we deal with disputation and limitations on strike action and  limitations around arbitration. There are a range of things we would not agree with some  union officials on - when they’ve raised with us the need for unlimited strike action. The  ILO does not even suggest that you’d have that form of arrangement. Certainly federal  Labor would not be supporting situations where there is unlimited strike action without  notice. That is not acceptable. So I would disagree with those union officials that put  that.

But let’s be very clear Hamish, one of the reasons you are raising Mr Setka with me  today is because last week there were criminal charges dropped against him after three  years, because evidence that was referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions by the  Trade Union Royal Commission was found wanting. It was found wanting because it  would appear there were contrivances as a result of - there were changes to the  evidence that was led in that Royal Commission and that is a question that needs to be  asked also. What happened there?

MACDONALD: To be fair, we did ask that question to Craig Laundy last week the day  after.

O’CONNOR: Well, can I just make that clear and I’ll just make this point, and I know  you want to get back to the point you want to raise, Hamish. There are questions for the  Boral executive lawyers, the ACCC lawyers and the lawyers that were representing the  Trade Union Royal Commission in revising the statements of those informants that were  in that matter. Because they do go to a perception that there was collusion at the  highest levels involving governments - and it’s a pattern of behaviour we’ve seen time  and time again. Minister Cash -

MACDONALD: Well if you’ve got any evidence of collusion, please feel free to pass  that onto us we are more than happy to look at it.

O’CONNOR: We will get to examining that through estimates because there are some  serious questions to answer there and it’s a pattern of behaviour by this government.

MACDONALD: Something John Setka has said is that “the CFMEU gets fantastic pay  rises and good conditions for our members because we fight outside the law. If you play  by the laws, you will never win”. What’s your take on that approach?

O’CONNOR: Well we don’t support people breaking the law. I don’t condone law  breaking. I understand people don’t agree with laws but we live in a democracy.

MACDONALD: But you’re happy to be supported by those people because they give  your party a lot of money?

O’CONNOR: Well, can I say to you - when I think of the CFMEU, you may think of John  Setka - I think of the more than 100,000 working people in forestry, construction,  maritime, outworkers, clothing workers and their families who need Labor to represent  them in the Parliament.

MACDONALD: But that doesn’t answer the question - are you happy to be supported  by an organisation that represents those to the tune of $11 million in political donations?

O’CONNOR: Well you’re talking about the Victorian Secretary of that organisation. I  don’t agree with everything Mr Sekta said, I’ve made that very clear - I don’t agree with

some of his comments - I’ve made that clear. Certainly his comments about my  colleagues, I do not agree with, and my former colleagues.

But the point is,- the party has a relationship with unions. We are there to represent  working people in the Parliament. That’s been one of Labor’s missions, to represent  working people at a time of low wage growth, job insecurity and rising anxiety about the  changing nature of the labour market, it’s important for us to work with labour.

Now that’s not to say that we agree with everything that’s put by union officials, and I’ve  already made clear we disagree with things that have been put by union officials. But  we will make workplaces fairer and safer, and we are focussed on that.

MACDONALD: Ged Kearney, your colleague made a maiden speech in the Parliament  overnight - some interesting comments on her intention to fight for a more humane  refugee policy, you’re a member of the Labor left, will you be pushing for the closure of  Manus and Nauru?

O’CONNOR: Well I’ve had a long standing involvement in this area being the former  Immigration and Home Affairs Minister and I’ve seen some terrible tragedies as a result  of the irregular arrivals that occurred, and in fact as a Minister was involved in dealing  with setting up a temporary morgue on Christmas Island when 40 people perished and  were recovered in that awful tragedy on December 15th 2010.

That has certainly led me to the conclusion that we need to deter unsafe arrivals,  particularly when people are not leaving places of persecution. That is, transitory  places, countries of transition. So I guess, you know, I dealt with this on a day-to-day  basis as the Minister and it’s a diabolical area of public policy, very complex.

MACDONALD: But on that question - will you push for the closure?

O’CONNOR: I just want to explain the level of interest and involvement I’ve had with  this area. We do have to do the right thing here. Now that means deter  vessels that  should not be leaving places where they’re not being persecuted. I think there is a need  for offshore centres, I’ve made that clear, but I don’t think it’s acceptable to see people  indefinitely detained.

I think Ged’s comments, in what I thought was a remarkable speech yesterday in the  Parliament, was making clear that we should not see people indefinitely detained. It’s a  cruelty and I can assure you that an incoming Labor government would be looking at  referring people and placing people into countries where they are signatories to the  refugee convention. But I do think we have to maintain a policy that deters people that  are not under persecution leaving ports on un-seaworthy vessels on perilous journeys.

MACDONALD: We have to leave it there - Brendan O’Connor, thank you very much for  your time this morning.

O’CONNOR: Thanks very much Hamish.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra



