

THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

ALI FRANCE

LABOR CANDIDATE FOR DICKSON

CORINNE MULHOLLAND  LABOR CANDIDATE FOR PETRIE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  BRISBANE  FRIDAY, 24 AUGUST, 2018

Subjects: Linkfield Road overpass; leadership spill; Peter Dutton; election;  health.

ALI FRANCE: Well, good morning everybody and thank you for being here today. I  have with me here today the Shadow Minister for Infrastructure, Transport Cities and  Regional Development, Anthony Albanese and the Labor candidate for Petrie, Corinne  Mulholland.

We're all here today to make an announcement that is going to be a game changer for  businesses and residents in Dickson and Petrie. I've had a lot of feedback from  residents who live in Albany Creek, who live in Brendale, Warner and Eatons Hill, about  congestion in this area.

And what they're telling me is they're frustrated about having to sit bumper to bumper,  day in day out, in traffic while they're trying to get to and from work and I absolutely feel  their frustration because I regularly travel across the Linkfield Road overpass, and the  traffic is always at a standstill before and after work.

We know that the Linkfield Road Overpass is a bottleneck and the RACQ has  determined that it is a key area for future government action. So I'm really pleased to  have Anthony here today, to make an announcement that will reduce congestion in this  area and will be of great benefit to all the residents here in Dickson. Now before I hand

over to Anthony I'm just going to let Corinne say a few words.

CORINNE MULHOLLAND: It's great to have Albo here in Petrie and neighbouring  Dickson. We are a fast growing community, in fact one of the fastest growing  communities on the Australian continent. We're a big, bold area here on the north side  of Brisbane and we are absolutely hungry for infrastructure, just as Ali has said. Our  community sits in traffic like you can see here today and our Federal politicians are  sitting in Canberra talking about themselves.

Our locals have been outraged by what they've seen in Canberra this week. They're  supposed to be delivering for us and they're not. So while Luke Howarth and Peter  Dutton are sitting in Canberra playing political games, we're here on the ground  standing next to this bottleneck, doing something about it. So it's great to have Albo  here talking about this announcement, great to be working with my federal colleague Ali  France delivering for the people of the north side.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Well thanks very much Ali and Corinne for being here with me  for this important announcement today. A Federal Labor Government will deliver $60  million for the duplication of this Linkfield Road overpass. This has been identified by  the motoring organisations as well as by the Queensland State Government as an  absolute priority, because of the growth that we're seeing in the suburbs of Dickson and  Petrie. They have currently two local members who are more concerned about internal  squabbling within the Liberal Party than they are about actually delivering for their  electorate. And it’s just like these two who opposed, of course, the Redcliffe Rail Line,  first promised in 1895, but delivered by Federal and State Labor as well by the Moreton  Bay Council. It’s just like these two who oppose Federal funding for the Cross River Rail  project. They've done nothing to fix this bottleneck. Well Federal Labor won't just put out  petitions, as if we’re not in any authority. If we're in government we will deliver and we'll  work with the Queensland State Government to deliver this vital project.

Nothing can symbolise more the difference between the current Government and  Federal Labor under Bill Shorten than this announcement here this morning. We have a  Government that yesterday put its hand up and said it's too hard to govern even though  they have an absolute majority on the floor of the House of Representatives. They shut  down Parliament and it's like workers walking off a workplace because they don't like  the boss. These same people who would criticise unions if they did that - did exactly  that yesterday.

Well we have been preparing for government with the hard policy decisions, with  decisions to fix up commuter parking at places like Mango Hill Station, with the delivery  that we did consistent with what we did last time when we were in office when we  actually delivered on projects like the Gateway North project, when we delivered the  Redcliffe Rail Line, when we delivered the upgrades to the Bruce Highway.

This is an absolute priority. It's something that Ali and Corrine have consulted with their  local communities about. They’re showing more leadership today than Peter Dutton or

Luke Howarth have showed in the many years that they have represented these  electorates. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, when was your visit here to make this announcement  planned and was it brought forward to coincide with the leadership challenge?

ALBANESE: Well we've been working on these announcements for a considerable  period of time and both Ali and Corrine have raised this issue. We have a policy  development process and this is my third visit to Dickson and third visit to Petrie in the  last six months. So we’ll continue to come back. We'll continue to have policy  announcements to make because we are doing the hard work in Opposition to prepare  for a stable and effective government.

And what we see at the moment is anything but that. I mean, Peter Dutton is putting  himself forward for the leadership today even though if you look at the Solicitor  General's advice, the same advice that told Tony Abbott "nothing to see here, no  problem'', the same advice that was relied upon by Government members to stay in the  Parliament, the same advice that was overturned by the High Court. Today the Solicitor  General has produced advice that says: "Well I think he might be OK, maybe not. The  High Court might determine something different, but we think, on balance of probability,  my opinion is it's OK''. And this guy thinks that that's an acceptable level of assurance,  that he even has a right to sit in the Parliament, that he wants to be the Prime Minister  of the nation. It's quite extraordinary.

JOURNALIST: It's been over a decade since a Prime Minister last served out their full  term. Do you give an iron-clad guarantee that you’ll support Mr Shorten’s leadership not  only in this Parliament but the next?

ALBANESE: It’s a bit of a boring question really. If you watch what’s happened on our  side of politics, I have my entire political career been loyal to leaders. I stood up on  23 June, 2010, and said that on that night what happened would be that we would  destroy two Labor Prime Ministers, Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard. I’ve been consistent  about my views and in spite of the fact that I stood for the leadership in 2013, what I've  done since 2013 is get on with the job of being part of the Labor team under Bill  Shorten.

JOURNALIST: And you won’t deviate from that principle?

ALBANESE: It's not words. It's what you do that's important. Have a look at what I have  done, which is to work each and every day, as a member of the Labor team. What’s  important is that you work as a member of the team. I continue to do that. I’ve done it  each and every day. Five Ministers misled Parliament, on Wednesday. It's a serious  offence to mislead Parliament. They stood up and they said when asked directly in the  Parliament, not at a press conference, in the Parliament where they are obligated to not  mislead, they said that they were loyal to Malcolm Turnbull. Have a look at what they’ve  done, have a look at what I’ve done. I stand by my record.



JOURNALIST: What about your colleagues,? I mean Labor started off this idea of  knifing a Prime Minister.

ALBANESE: Let's be very clear - what happened in June 2010 was a mistake. I said it  at the time. I think history has proven my judgement on that night to be right.  Notwithstanding the fact that I think both Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard were outstanding  Prime Ministers, there's no doubt that we were damaged by those events. But there's no  doubt also - I was the Leader of the Government in the House of Representatives in a  Parliament where we had 70 votes on the floor. We managed to do the National  Disability Insurance Scheme, the Gonski reforms on education. We did climate change  policy, we did infrastructure policy. We did policy right across the board that made a real  difference to the way this nation is run. What we've got under this mob is a Government  that on Monday said we can't have an energy policy, because we can't get agreement  to it. Regardless of the fact that everyone in the sector is saying what they need is  certainty in order to invest, in order to reduce prices and the cost of energy and to  reduce emissions.

This Government can’t function and we see that each and every day and the idea that  they will turn to Peter Dutton, who is a cold character - I mean it’s one thing to have a  hard head and you need that to lead the nation. But you also need a heart and a soul.  There's no evidence that Peter Dutton has either. He's a cold character who has no  empathy for people who aren't the same as him. And that’s a real problem for the nation  and it's extraordinary that they are considering putting him up as the Prime Minister.  And we saw that, we know what a Peter Dutton prime ministership will be like, because  we saw that when he's performed as Health Minister. He ended up being ranked as the  worst Health Minister in Australia's history, not by the Labor Party, didn’t say that - the  doctors of Australia said that. And he tried to of course introduce the GP tax. He ripped  $50 billion out of the health system and he initiated the inquiry into privatising part of the  Medicare health system. This is a bloke who can't be trusted to support Medicare,  a bloke who's saying that the Liberal Party should just go back to the past, a bloke who  wants Australia to be a nation that isn't one of the 21st Century.

JOURNALIST: Ali can we ask you a couple of questions?

FRANCE: Yes.

JOURNALIST: Hypothetically, Peter Dutton does become the Prime Minister today.  What’s it going to feel like for you challenging the Prime Minister at the upcoming  election?

FRANCE: Well, it doesn’t matter whether I’m up against a Prime Minister, a Minister or  a backbencher. My job is the same. I will be focused on talking to and listening to the  people of Dickson about the issues that they are really concerned about. And that is  health, education, penalty rates, TAFE. These are the things that I am hearing about all  the time and that’s what I’m going to be focused on.



JOURNALIST: What sort of impact do you think it will have on your chances? He’s  clearly going to have a much bigger profile.

FRANCE: Well I think Peter Dutton should be concerned. This is a marginal seat and  the people of Dickson will have a clear choice at the next election between somebody  who is going to fight for them on the issues that matter or somebody who is really only  concerned about furthering his own career.

JOURNALIST: What sets you apart from Mr Dutton in terms of your character?

FRANCE: My story I think everybody knows. I'm quite different to Mr Dutton. Seven  years ago I lost my leg in an accident and seven years ago I was in a hospital bed  coming to terms with the fact that I had lost my leg and I might never walk again. And  from that I spent many years in hospital in and out of doctors surgeries and I saw that a  lot of people were struggling. I see the issues that we are having now with cuts to our  health system. I went on to represent Australia in sport. I won a gold medal last year  and now I am taking on Peter Dutton and I feel stronger than I have ever been.

JOURNALIST: But in terms of, rather, do you have any reflections on Mr Dutton and his  character?

FRANCE: No I don’t. I’m purely focused on doing the best I can in Dickson and in terms  of what I’m fighting for in this electorate. This Government is going to be cutting $130  million from our Metro North Hospital. We’re going to lose over $13 million from our  local schools. Eleven thousand people are losing penalty rates. We’ve lost over 200  apprentice places here in Dickson. So I’m not  focused at all on Mr Dutton. I will be  spending every day up until the next election, talking to people, door-knocking and  campaigning on the issues that matter.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of the vandalism of his electorate office overnight?

FRANCE: Well I condemn that, I condemn any act of vandalism or aggression against  any Member of Parliament. I think that people should take out their frustrations at the  ballot box.

JOURNALIST: In contrast to Mr Dutton you are on record as having a very  compassionate view towards refugees. Where would you like to see Labor’s policy go in  that area?

FRANCE: I support - Labor’s policy on this issue is very clear and I support Labor’s  policy 100 per cent.

JOURNALIST: Do you support it because it’s Labor’s policy or because you share that  (inaudible).

FRANCE: I support it because it’s Labor’s policy.

JOURNALIST: Does that policy reflect your personal opinion?

FRANCE: Yes, it does. I want to see an end to indefinite detention. I want to - I think we  can be tough on people smugglers while at the same time treating people humanely.

JOURNALIST: Might that involve bringing them to Australia?

FRANCE: I completely support Labor’s policy on this issue and I have said that so many  times. I am 100 per cent supportive.

JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, where are you going to be at midday today? Any special  plans?

ALBANESE: Well, we will wait and see what happens at midday. But regardless of who  emerges from what is a rabble of a government, they will inherit just rubble. It is just a  mess and it is impossible to think that whoever emerges will be capable of uniting the  Liberal Party. One of the things that we have done is to work as a united team, is work  on policy and to be effective in doing it. And today is just another example of that. Labor  here, Shadow Minister with two local candidates, standing up for the issues based upon  the feedback that Ali and Corinne have had about the needs of their electorates where  they are running. Peter Dutton is senior member of the Government, or he was, for a  long period of time. He wants to be the Prime Minister. He’s out there doing a website  about this issue. If you want websites and petitions in the electorate of Dickson, then  vote for Peter Dutton. If you want someone who will actually get things done, vote for Ali  France.

JOURNALIST: Just one more question for Ms France. What will be your signature thing  that you pursue in Parliament? When people think about Ali France, what policy area  should they (inaudible)?

FRANCE: Health. I have been in and out of hospital over many years, I have been  sitting in doctors waiting surgeries over many years, and I know that people are  struggling. The things that I hear all the time, and the feedback I get from the people in  my electorate is that they are struggling with out-of-pocket health expenses. That they  can’t afford the extra for scans and tests. That they can’t afford the gap to go and see a  specialist. This is my number one issue, because I have been through it myself.

JOURNALIST: Is that a question of funding or do you have new and innovative ideas  that you might share?

FRANCE: Absolutely it’s a question of funding. Cutting money from hospitals impacts  patient care.

JOURNALIST: But other than funding do you have anything else in the health space

that you might pursue?

FRANCE: Funding makes a difference. Medicare; what I’m hearing from a lot of the  people in my electorate is that they are starting to pay money, having to pay more when  they actually turn up to a doctor's surgery. I spoke to a woman the other day who had to  leave her doctor that she’d been with for 20 years, because they started insisting that  she make the co-payment. Things like that I am hearing all the time. I think that  prevents people from going to see their doctor and I think that’s a real problem in our  health system. And we saw a report only last week in which one million people had said  that they had - that the cost of going to the doctor had prevented them from going to  see the doctor or they had put it off and I think that is a massive concern for this area.

ALBANESE: Can I finish up by saying that whoever emerges after noon today I think  has a responsibility to actually go to see the Governor General and to call an election.  This farce must end and it’s about time the people of Australia had a right to make a  judgement on this Government. When it comes to health and the need to defend  Medicare, when it comes to proper funding for our schools and our universities and our  TAFE colleges, when it comes to proper nation building infrastructure, this Government  knows that it is not capable of governing and it’s about time the Australian people got a  say. And when they do, I am very confident that Ali and Corinne will join the Labor  Caucus in Canberra after the next election.

[ENDS]

FRIDAY, 24 AUGUST, 2018  MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868













