











THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs  WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA

22 June 2018

EXPANDED AUSTRALIAN MULTICULTURAL COUNCIL

I am pleased to announce the new 13 member Australian Multicultural Council (AMC).

AMC members reflect both continuity and renewal, with five current serving members, and  eight new members.

The AMC brings together leaders from a diverse range of business and civil society  backgrounds, who will serve three-year terms and will continue to advise government on  ways to promote integration and Australia’s shared values.

Our multicultural society is the result of the successful integration of migrants who have  contributed to their local community and demonstrated the values that unite us and guided  by our shared values of respect, equality and freedom.

I look forward to working with the AMC’s expert advisers to guide policy, develop  engagement with and help encourage migrant participation in the broader community.

I would also like to thank former member Miss Faiza Rehman for her advice and contribution  to the Council over the last four years.

The Australian Multicultural Council members include:

Dr Sev Ozdowski AM, Chair*   Dr Bulent Hass Dellal AO, Deputy Chair*   Mrs Charlotte Vidor*  Mr Vasan Srinivasan*  Ms Helena Kyriazopoulos*  Mr Abeselom Nega   Ms Anthea Hancocks

Ms Leila Abukar  Mr Craig Foster  Ms Claudine Menegazzo  Mr Tsebin Tchen  Mr Jason Yeap OAM  Ms Marina Hogan

*current serving members



For further information: Minister’s Office - 02 6277 7770





2

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/alantudge

Australian Multicultural Council 2018-2021

Candidate Short biography

Prof. Dr Sev Ozdowski AM OAM  FAICD (NSW)











Dr Ozdowski is the Director, Equity and Diversity at the University of  Western Sydney and Adjunct Professor of the Centre of Peace and  Conflict Studies at University of Sydney. He was the Australian Human  Rights Commissioner and Disability Discrimination Commissioner at the  then named Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission from  2000-2005. He has also headed the Office of Multicultural and  International Affairs in South Australia for five years, and since 2006 is  the President of the Australian Council for Human Rights Education. Dr  Ozdowski was recognised through various Australian and international  honours, including an Order of Australia Medal in 1995, and was  appointed as a Member in the General Division of the Order of Australia  in 2016. Dr Ozdowski previously served as the Chair of the Australian  Multicultural Council 2014-2017.

Dr Bulent Hass Dellal AO (VIC)



Dr Dellal is the Chairman of the Special Broadcasting service (SBS) and  the Executive Director of the Australian Multicultural Foundation. He has  considerable experience in multicultural affairs and sits on several  boards. His service to multicultural organisations, the arts and the  community was recognised through an Order of Australia Medal in 1997.  During the 2015 Queen's Birthday Honours, Dr Dellal was appointed an  Officer in the General Division of the Order of Australia in recognition of  distinguished service to the multicultural community through leadership  and advisory roles, to the advancement of inclusiveness and social  harmony, to youth, and to the broadcast media. Dr Dellal was a member  of the Australian Multicultural Advisory Council until June 2011 and the  Australian Multicultural Council 2011-2014 and 2014-2017.

Mrs Charlotte Vidor (NSW)





Mrs Vidor is Co-Founder and Director of the Toga Group of Companies.  She has strong community ties through planning development and her  involvement in tourism boards. Mrs Vidor was the Director of the  JewishCare Foundation and continues to be involved in community  wellbeing and development. She was also recognised for her role in  boosting the tourism industry. Mrs Vidor was a member of the Australian  Multicultural Council 2014-2017.

Mr Vasan Srinivasan (VIC)



Mr Srinivasan is the CEO of Shiamak Davar International and Chair of the  Confederation of Australian Indian Association Inc. He is a well-known  community leader active in mental health and multicultural sectors  throughout Victoria and was awarded the Meritorious Service Award for  Excellence in multicultural affairs by the Victorian Government in 2013.  Mr Srinivasan served as a President of the Federation of Indian  Association of Victoria and was a founding member of the Federation of  Indian Multifaith Organizations Victoria Inc, and is currently the Chair of  the Confederation of Indian Australian Organisations of Australia (CIAA).  Mr Srinivasan was a member of the Australian Multicultural Council  2014-2017.















3

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/alantudge

Candidate Short biography

Ms Helena Kyriazopoulos (SA)







Ms Kyriazopoulos is the CEO of the Multicultural Communities Council of  SA (MCCSA), an affiliate of the Federation of Ethnic Communities Council  of Australia. She previously worked for Alzheimer’s Australia for over 22  years as the Access and Equity Unit Coordinator and the Secretariat for  the National Cross Cultural Dementia Network. Ms Kyriazopoulos has  over 30 years’ experience in the multicultural sector and currently sits on  multiple Boards, including Council of the Ageing, Aged Rights Advocacy  Service, and Welcome to Australia. She has contributed towards journal  articles and published works related to aged care and disability rights.  Ms Kyriazopoulos was a member of the Australian Multicultural Council  2014-2017.

Mr Abeselom Nega (VIC)



Mr Nega is the founder and CEO of iEmpower, an organisation that  works with partners in the community and government sectors to  develop and implement joint solutions to develop and empower young  people to become contributing citizens of Australia. The organisation  began its work in regional Victoria with a focus on Indigenous youth and  expanded into Metropolitan in 2008. During the course of his career, Mr  Nega has worked in the community sector as well as the state public  services within Queensland, NSW and Victoria governments. He is  currently a Member of the Victorian Government African Ministerial  Working Group (AMWG) and a Chaperon with the Melbourne  Employment Forum Board (MEF). Formerly, Mr Nega served as a  Commissioner of the Victorian Multicultural Commission (VMC) and a  Board Member of the Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights  commission (VEOHRC) and the National Accreditation Authority for  Translators and Interpreters (NAATI).

Ms Anthea Hancocks B.Sc, MA,  MBA, FAICD (VIC)







Ms Hancocks is the CEO of the Scanlon Foundation, a private  philanthropic organisation dedicated to social cohesion and the  transition of migrants into Australian society. She has an extensive  background in strategic planning, business development, community  service, education, communications and relationship and services  marketing through senior leadership experience in private, ASX listed,  government, professional services, academia and not for profit  organisations here and in the US. She is an accredited mediator, Director  of YMCA Victoria, Director of YMCA Learning Communities Pty Ltd,  Director of the Scanlon Foundation, Director of the Whitehorse  Community Chest and a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Company  Directors.

Mr Craig Foster (NSW)







Mr Foster is a retired Australian association football player and former  National captain who currently works as the Chief Football Analyst,  Presenter and multicultural broadcaster for the Special Broadcasting  Service (SBS). Mr Foster is a strong voice for equality and social justice,  serving as an Ambassador for Barnardo’s Children’s Charity and Football  United, a UNSW program affiliated with FIFA to assist the socialisation of  young refugees through football, as well as Director of the Nangala  Project and John Moriarty Football (JMF) working with indigenous  children to provide opportunities through football in remote  communities. Mr Foster created the Harmony Game, a small-sided  football game used by schools on Harmony Day to enable the children to  better connect and create understanding of their diverse backgrounds,  and was formerly a Director of COALAR, The Council on Australia Latin  America Relations, under the auspices of the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade.





4

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/alantudge

Candidate Short biography

Ms Leila Abukar (QLD)





Ms Abukar began her career as an interpreter for the Australian  Department of Immigration. She has significant experience as a  Community Advocate, working in a broad range of senior management  posts with government, council and non-profit organisations

She has worked as a translator and community worker, and ministerial  adviser. She is a past member of the Queensland Multicultural  Roundtable, the Council for Multicultural Australia and Refugees  Resettlement Advisory Council. She has also been recognised for her  community work with several awards including a Centenary Medal for  contributions to Crisis Counselling, Advocacy and Settlement for the  Somalia and African communities in Queensland.



Ms Claudine Menegazzo (NSW)



Ms Menegazzo is a first generation Australian and the co-owner of  Indigo Farm, an irrigation property producing potatoes for processors  along the eastern states, turf production for wholesale markets in  Victoria and NSW, as well as wheat, barley and livestock.  Previously, she  was charged with implementing the community engagement strategy for  the Catchment Action Plan implemented by the former Murrumbidgee  Catchment Management Authority. She has also held the position of  Corporate Affairs Manager at SunRice, one of Australia’s leading branded  food exporters. Ms Menegazzo represented Australia at the United  Nations 2004 International Year of Rice conference in Italy.

Mr Jason Yeap OAM (VIC)





Mr Yeap is a Malaysian-born property developer, lawyer and  philanthropist. He is currently the Chairman of Mering Corporation and  Director of the Tipperary Station Group. He has served on a number of  advisory boards and committees, including the Trade and Investment  Policy Advisory Council with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  and Murdoch Children’s Research Institute and University of Melbourne.  He was appointed a trustee of the National Gallery of Victoria (NGV) in  June 2005, reappointed in 2008 and 2011, and made Chairman of the  NGV Foundation in 2012.  He was awarded the Medal of the Order of  Australia in June 2010 for service to the arts and to the community. Mr  Yeap has served as a council member of the National Gallery of Australia  (NGA) from 2014 to 2017. In 2013, he was named an Ambassador of The  Australia Day Ambassador Program, and a year later he was announced  as a Patron of Multicultural Arts Victoria.



Mr Tsebin Tchen (NSW)



Mr Tchen is an Adjunct Professorial Fellow at the Asia-Pacific Centre for  Social Investment and Philanthropy, Faculty of Business and Law,  Swinburne University of Technology. He has extensive community, public  sector and political experience in a Victorian context and has previously  served as a Senator for Victoria from 1999 to 2005. Mr Tchen has over  40 years voluntary community involvement, and demonstrated extensive  links with community organisations, acting as an advisor to 20 Chinese  community associations. He was appointed Commissioner of the  Victorian Multicultural Commission in 2015.

































5

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au/alantudge

Candidate Short biography

Dr Marina Hogan (WA)



Through her long association with both Scoop Publishing and Scoop  Digital, Dr Marina Hogan has extensive experience in marketing services,  both print and digital, particularly in the areas of travel and  lifestyle, events and the arts.  She teaches part-time in the School of  Humanities at The University of Western Australia. She is Deputy Chair of  the Foundation for the Western Australian Museum and chairs its  Remuneration and Nominations Committee. Dr Hogan sits on the  Rottnest Island Authority Board where she a member of the Finance and  Risk Audit Committee. Until June 2017, she sat on the Governing Council  of North Metropolitan TAFE and its Governance Committee and was the  Chair of the Subiaco Primary School Board until early 2017.





