





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP

Minister for Families and Social Services

9 October 2018

MEDIA RELEASE

$163m funding to support newly arrived migrants and refugees

A total of $163.4 million in Settlement Engagement and Transition Support  (SETS) grants have been announced today - funding which will assist newly  arrived migrants and refugees to form a stronger connection with their new  communities in their first five years in Australia.

Federal Minister for Social Services, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said 78  organisations across the country will be funded to deliver services in engagement  and integration for newly arrived migrants and refugees.



“The SETS program is about helping reduce barriers for migrants so they can fully  participate in employment and the community more generally,” Mr Fletcher said.



“This is an important part of our Liberal National Government’s plan for keeping  Australians together.



“People settling in Australia have much to contribute to our society. It is critical  that we give them every opportunity to succeed and be part of a stable,  prosperous economy.”



SETS replaces the Settlement Grants program which had been in place for more  than 10 years.



This program fills a gap in the post-arrival period for eligible migrants who do not  have family and community support to rely on.







The grants fund activities that are focused on families and individuals and  increase community capacity.



Services include assisting with English language skills, building employment  readiness and encouraging homework for school students.



“It is important that our newly arrived migrants have a strong connection and  sense of belonging,” Mr Fletcher said.



“This program will help to build wellbeing, safety and prosperity - to the benefit  not only of newly arrived migrants and refugees but also to our entire nation.”



The SETS program will start on 1 January 2019. For a list of successful recipients  go to www.grants.gov.au

ENDS

Media contact:   Brooke Leembruggen - Media Adviser to Minister Fletcher - 0447 743 835



