



THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  BRISBANE  TUESDAY, 24 APRIL 2018

SUBJECTS: School funding; Live sheep exports; Medich donation to NSW Labor;  Asylum seekers; Adani mine; Liberal’s big business tax cut; Attack in Toronto.

CORINNE MULHOLLAND, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR PETRIE: It's fantastic to be  here in the heart of the Petrie electorate right here at Humpybong State School. My  name is Corinne Mulholland and I'm the new Labor Candidate for Petrie. Right where  we are standing is one of our oldest schools, it's over 100 years old, it's a very proud  school and it's been an absolute pleasure to have our Acting Leader, Tanya Plibersek,  here today, and also joining me out State Member for Redcliffe Yvette D'Ath touring this  great school. We visited a couple of girls in grade 5 who were teaching us all about their  fantastic robotics class that they're in and then we went onto grade 6 classes where  they're learning all about the impacts of climate change and what they can do as young  people to affect change in their lives. This school is symptomatic of many of the schools  right across Petrie. Schools that are great schools, with fantastic teachers and  principals, and great school communities who are doing wonderful things for our local  young people.

But while our local Federal Member and our Prime Minister, are in Canberra talking  about $65 billion worth of tax cuts for big business, schools like this are missing out on  vital funding. This school in particular, had it had the investment of the needs based  funding that Labor believes in, it would have been $660,000 better off. Right across the  Petrie electorate, our schools would have been $14.9 million better off. So I'm very

proud to stand here as the Federal Labor Candidate. One of the things I'll be doing as  one of my priorities is fighting for our local schools like Humpybong State School to get  their fair share of funding.

YVETTE D'ATH, QUEENSLAND ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND MINISTER FOR  JUSTICE: It's wonderful to be here in my local area with Corinne Mulholland our new  Labor Candidate for the Federal seat of Petrie, and of course the Acting Leader Tanya  Plibersek, to be talking about the importance of education. We know education changes  lives and we know, that governments at State and Federal levels need to be investing in  education. I'm very proud to be part of the Palaszczuk Government who has invested in  more teachers, in teacher aides, in our staff in our schools, infrastructure, solar and  even today the Premier has announced $1.5 million dollars to train 3,000 volunteers to  help with reading programs in our schools.

So the State Government is stepping up, doing our fair share but we cannot do it alone.  We need a Government that will work with us, that actually understands investing in  needs based funding models for education in this country and in our local community.  Labor has never resiled from the fact that we support true needs based funding for our  schools and it is only Labor Government that is going to deliver that for Queensland and  for Australia and for our local community. And that's why I'm so thrilled to be here with  Tanya who has always passionately committed to education and investing in education,  and to be here to see here first-hand what we can do with true investment, good  investment in our schools, but what else we need to do, to build on, and to work with,  State Labor Governments.

Tanya?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Yvette, thanks very  much for that. It's such pleasure to be here with Yvette D'Ath, a good friend of mine for  many years, and it's a pleasure to be here to support Corinne Mulholland in her  campaign for Petrie. This seat needs a strong voice, standing up for the kids who rely  on schools like this, for the teachers, the principals, the parents, who want to see the  very best for the young people of this area. We visited some terrific classes today, but  as Corinne said, imagine the difference an extra $660,000 over the next two years  would make in a school like this. Right across Petrie, right across Queensland, right  across Australia, parents are asking themselves how can I raise money at the next  sausage sizzle, how can I raise money at the next cake stall or school fete - I tell you,  it's pretty hard to make up for a $660,000 cut in a school like this - $500 million cut from  the State of Queensland from schools - and over the next decade $17 billion cut from  schools right across Australia.

Now you really have to ask yourself about the priorities of a Prime Minister who can’t  find $660,000 for this school, but can find $65 billion for big business tax cuts. You have  to ask yourself, about the priorities of a Government that can't properly fund schools and  hospitals but can find $65 billion for a big business tax cut. Or you look at the outcomes  of the Banking Royal Commission, the revelations day after day, you've got a  Government that can't find the funds to properly fund our hospitals and schools, is

cutting funding for hospitals and schools but can manage a $13 billion tax cut for the  banks, despite the fact that they're making record profits in some cases in pretty  dubious ways.

Any questions?

JOURNALIST: What do you make of the news that the ship at the centre of the live  sheep exports scandal has passed an AMSA inspection and could be back in operation  later this week?

PLIBERSEK: I think it is disturbing that year after year, we see these revelations of very  poor animal welfare practices in our live export industry. I think it's well past time that  the Government admit that they got it wrong when they junked Labor's inspector-general of animal welfare. They should restore an independent role to ensuring the  welfare of animals.

But look, I'd also say, as I've said for a really long time, we should look in Australia to  moving to a greater emphasis on the export of chilled and frozen meat and less live  exports over time. We want to value-add to our animal products here. And it's obviously  less-distressing for the animals. We support jobs in Australia. We should be looking to  value-add here.

JOURNALIST: Do you hold out any hope that the Government will adopt a temporary  suspension that Labor's calling for?

PLIBERSEK: I think the Government out to consider the temporary suspension that  we've called for. It's not that we hear of one or two instances of bad practice. We keep  hearing instances of bad practice. We hear from the industry that standards will improve  and then sometime later, some months or some years later that we are back to square  one. We need that independent inspector-general. We should pause to examine what is  going on in the industry, that several inquiries are happening at the moment. And over  time, again I'd say, less reliance on live exports and more value-adding here in  Australia.

JOURNALIST: When Sam Dastyari was general secretary of the New South Wales  Labor Party, he said if the businessman Ron Medich was found guilty of ordering the  execution of his business associate, that the hundreds of thousands of dollars that he  had given the Labor Party would be donated to charity. Now, he was found guilty  yesterday and it now appears New South Wales Labor has backed away from that  commitment. Do you think that's appropriate?

PLIBERSEK: That's really a question for the secretary of the New South Wales branch  of the Labor Party. It isn't a decision of mine.

JOURNALIST: So the federal Labor Party isn't going to be intervening and ordering the  New South Wales Labor Party to pay back that money?

PLIBERSEK: It's really a decision for the New South Wales branch. It's not my  decision. I am not going to defend it.

JOURNALIST: Do you have a personal view though?

PLIBERSEK: I am not going to go into personal views. It's not my decision, I am not  going to defend it -

JOURNALIST: Do you think they should have put the money aside rather than  spending it?

PLIBERSEK: Like I say, I'm not going to defend the decision that I have got no part in  making. It's best that you save your questions for the secretary of the New South Wales  branch of the Labor Party.

JOURNALIST: It must be disappointing though because if it was the Government in this  position, you certainly wouldn't hold back in criticising it. So, you must have an opinion  on it or at least be disappointed that they're -

PLIBERSEK: I'll say this, I wouldn't accept the money if it were me. I wouldn't accept  the money.

JOURNALIST: There seems to be a push to roll back some Operation Sovereign  Borders policies and processes….(Inaudible)

PLIBERSEK:  I certainly think that we have to get people who are on Manus Island and  Nauru settled in third countries as soon as possible. They have been on Manus Island  and Nauru for much too long. We are very supportive of the deal with the United States  to take some of the people to take some of the people from Nauru. And it is beyond me  why the Government wouldn't accept the offer from New Zealand to settle people from  Manus and Nauru in New Zealand. We do need to find a solution, a permanent third  country resettlement for these people. And more broadly, we have to have truly work on  a regional approach to dealing with the very large numbers of people who are seeking  asylum in our region. We have to have a proper regional processing arrangement that  treats people fairly; that gives people hope and makes sure that the business model of  the people smugglers is broken. We don't want to see a resumption of the people  smugglers being able to extort thousands of dollars from desperate people.

JOURNALIST: Does that include offshore processing?

PLIBERSEK:  Well, we've got a commitment to retain offshore processing but as I say,  the people who've been on Manus Island and Nauru for years at a time absolutely need  to have their futures resolved. They need a permanent place to settle in a third country.

JOURNALIST: One of the other issues up here is obviously the Adani mine. Do you still  oppose that and if you were in power, would you seek to reopen, I suppose, the federal  environmental approvals it has?

PLIBERSEK: Well what we've said about Adani all the way along is that it has to stack  up environmentally and economically. And there's no evidence that it stacks up  environmentally or economically. I think the people of Queensland are too smart to put  all their eggs in one basket when it comes to the hope for jobs as well, they've seen  people like Clive Palmer disappoint them in the past. So we certainly wouldn't be  handing over a billion dollars to an Indian mining magnate in the hope that it would  generate jobs, we've got real proposals on the table including very substantial  investments in infrastructure like the cross-river rail in Brisbane but in Gladstone,  Rockhampton, in Townsville, in Mackay, we've got proposals that go to road  infrastructure, upgrading port facilities, upgrading transport facilities, water, the  Rookwood Weir, the Rockhampton Levy. There's a range of infrastructure proposals  that would generate about 3,000 jobs in their construction and they'd also improve the  capacity for those regional centres to play a bigger economic role; particularly, the port  and road upgrades exporting the products in local areas to world markets. So we say  we're prepared to put real money on the table to see real jobs created in Regional  Queensland. Not talk about the never-never - as the Adani project that can't get a bank  or a business to back it - seems to be doing.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Palaszczuk Government's initial support for the project  provided false hope for the communities of Rockhampton, for Townsville that would  benefit most from the Carmichael Mine project?

PLIBERSEK: No I think it was absolutely the right thing for the Government to do, to be  open to job opportunities in regional centres. We know that unemployment is tough in  regional centres and I certainly think mining jobs are a very important part of our  economy in the Queensland economy. But this project has had a lot of opportunities to  stack up environmentally and economically and it hasn't. We've heard very disturbing  stories about falsification of environmental results and so on, we need to be aware of  those short comings of the project.

JOURNALIST: Just on the Government's proposed tax companies for big business,  what evidence do you have that companies won't reinvest?

PLIBERSEK: You have to be pretty simple, frankly, to believe the Government's  argument that these big businesses will pass on tax cuts as higher job numbers or  higher wages. The Business Council of Australia wrote to all of its members and said  we want you to sign on to this letter to the Senate that says: “dear Senate please give  us $65 billion of big business tax cuts and we will employ more Australians, we'll pay  them more, we'll do less offshoring, we'll pay our taxes”.  They have this list of things  that businesses were asked to commit to and all those businesses went through and  they crossed out this one and they crossed out this one: “Oh I can't agree to higher  wages, can't agree to more jobs, can't agree to paying our taxes, can't agree to less

offshoring”. You only have to take the businesses own word for what big business  tax cuts will do. Prominent economists have described this as basically a rounding error;  the Government’s claim for increased economic growth from the tax cut. We know that  companies- you know we had one of the big banks last year record profits again,  sacked 6000 staff. The idea that there is an automatic link between tax cuts and  increased wages is fanciful.

We've seen wages flat lining in Australia and we've got a Government that's cutting  penalty rates and arguing against increases in the minimum wage, why would we  believe them, that these tax cuts are going to lead to increased wages. We've got a  concrete, we've got a concrete proposal for lifting wages, that's restoring penalty rate  cuts, it's making sure people get proper increases in the minimum wage, that we have  an industrial relations system that sees increased wages. We don't have a promise on  the never-never, that if big business are feeling generous they might pass on some of  their vastly increased profits.

Don't forget, $13 billion of this tax cut over the next ten years goes to the big banks. Are  we really thinking that the organisations that are showing day after day that they are  putting profit ahead of everything else are going to suddenly grow a heart and hand that  $13 billion tax cut over to their staff? I mean give me a break, I don't think anyone really  believes that do they?

Can I just say one more thing before we finish. We've heard very disturbing news this  morning from Toronto and I do really want to say that we don't know a lot of the details  of what's happened there, we're watching as the world is very closely to see what has  actually happened. But our thoughts and our deepest sympathies go to the people of  Toronto and the people of Canada. Canada and Australia share so many similarities, in  culture, in personality, a sense of humour, we've fought side by side in major conflicts  throughout our history and we really are thinking about the people of Toronto  today. Particularly of course the families of those who've been killed or injured, but more  broadly this is a shock to their whole nation and our whole nation is holding them in our  hearts.

Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

