1





HON ALAN TUDGE MP

Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

The Integration Challenge:   Maintaining successful Australian multiculturalism

Speech to the Menzies Research Centre  Sydney, 7 March 2018

*** Check against delivery ***



The Prime Minister is surely right when he states that Australia is the most successful  multicultural country in the world.

More people from more countries have come here to start a new life than almost any other  nation and we have generally been able to maintain strong social cohesion in the process.

But it is more than this.  We have incorporated different cultural elements into our own while  maintaining our distinct Australian identity.

This is the great Australian multicultural achievement that I want to discuss today.  It is  different to multiculturalism in other nations.  I want to take you through the evidence to  support the claim of our success and what has underpinned it.

But I also wish to issue a note of caution: successful Australian multiculturalism is not God-given  and cannot be taken for granted.  Indeed, there is emerging evidence that we are not  integrating as well as what we have done in the past.  Moreover, there are external factors that  weren't present even a decade ago that make integration more challenging.

We want newly arrived migrants to succeed and make the most of the opportunities of this  great nation - just as previous generations have done. Importantly, we also want to maintain  our success as a cohesive society.  To ensure this ongoing success, we need to increase our  efforts and place higher expectations upon new arrivals, emphasising the fact that with rights  comes responsibilities.

2





Australian multiculturalism

Australian multiculturalism is different to what is termed “multiculturalism” in other nations  (particularly European ones) due to our strong emphasis on integration.

You will hear me use this word a lot, because I believe it is key to our success.

Integration means that a person who comes here shares our values, engages in the community  and has full rights to government services. In exchange they must obey the law, participate and  uphold democratic principles and support other Australians. They make friends at work and in  their neighbourhood and hopefully join or start sporting or other community clubs.

These things are the glue to building trust between all Australian citizens and consequently help  foster social cohesion. When a person comes to Australia, they pay taxes to a collective pool (to  fund things like welfare and healthcare) that is used to support those who need it in tough  times.  A person who has integrated into the broad Australian community has joined the  Australian family and is willing to contribute to it as much as benefit from it.

Under Australian integrated multiculturalism, there is shared responsibility. The existing  population has the responsibility to have open arms to newcomers, and the newly arrived  migrant has responsibilities to do their best to participate fully in our society.

This model of integrated multiculturalism is different to an “assimilationist” model or a  “separatist” model.

Assimilation is the idea that we must all be identical, and abandon our cultural and religious  heritage. We don’t expect or want that in Australia. Where there are conflicts in cultural  behaviours, Australian law and values must prevail, but otherwise we welcome the diversity  that people can bring from being born elsewhere.

For example, it is hard to imagine a modern Australia without the cuisine, the music, the  colours, and the vibrancy that others have brought, which has helped create our rich,  cosmopolitan way of life.

On the other hand, a separatist model of multiculturalism, while being the opposite to  assimilation, is when people bring their entire practices, languages and cultures and plant them

3



into the new land, with little desire to share or mix in with their local community. They live side  by side, rather than merged with the existing population.

While not the stated policy intent of Europe, the impact of their policies has been precisely this  in some places.  The then British Prime Minister, David Cameron, for example declared that:

“Under the doctrine of state multiculturalism, we have encouraged different cultures to  live separate lives, apart from each other and apart from the mainstream...We’ve even  tolerated these segregated communities behaving in ways that run completely counter  to our values.”

Author, Douglas Murray, writes that this separatism is resulting in the “slow death of Europe”  as groups effectively colonise parts of it and erode the values that made Europe so prosperous,  free and (consequently) attractive to migrants.

The successful Australian model is one of integration; not assimilation and not separatism.  We  need to jealously guard our successful model and introduce new measures to ensure it  continues, as I will outline later.

How do we know we have been successful at integrating people?

There is no one measure, but consider at least a few key ones.

The most important measure of integration, in my view, is employment. When people have a  job, they are contributing to society and have an immediate network of people that they  interact with.

With the exception of the humanitarian intake (which I will address later), new migrants to  Australia tend to get employed rapidly and have high skilled jobs.  A 2015 OECD Report found  that we had the third lowest rate of overseas-born unemployment of all 34 OECD countries  surveyed. There is almost no difference between the unemployment rates of Australia’s  migrants versus those born here, whereas across the OECD, migrants had an unemployment  rate that was 2.6 percentage points higher than non-migrants.

Further, only eight per cent of Australia’s migrants worked in low-skilled jobs, which is similar to  the Australian born population. Youth unemployment amongst the offspring of migrants was  also amongst the lowest in the OECD.

4



Related to this is business creation. According to the Migrant Small Business Report, published  by CGU, one in three small businesses in Australia are run by migrants, which is above the 28  per cent of the population they represent.  Eighty three per cent of migrant business owners  did not own a business before coming to Australia. Of course, there are many examples of  Australian migrants who have built large global businesses.

Levels of education are another indicator of integration. Australia’s migrants do better than the  Australian born population in educational attainment. Almost half of the working age migrant  population have a university degree versus just under 30 per cent for the Australian born, and  34 per cent for migrants across OECD countries.

The children of our migrants also outperform the Australian born in educational attainment,  and perform well above the OECD average for children of migrants. Migrant parents want to  secure success for their children, which in large part is done through education.

Poverty rates of children of migrants is low and home ownership is similar to that of the  Australian born population.

This hard data suggests successful integration, but anecdotally we also know that migrants have  flourished and reached the highest levels of society; in business, politics and the arts.  This is  not migrants merely from Britain, but migrants from Eastern and Southern Europe, Asia and  elsewhere.

We are all beneficiaries of the significant contribution of successive waves of migrants.  It has  built modern Australia.

What is particularly remarkable, however, is that Australia’s success at integrating migrants has  occurred despite a rate of migration which is much higher than other comparable wealthy  nations. Twenty eight per cent of the total Australian population were born overseas, which is  the third highest in the OECD (behind Luxembourg and Switzerland). The United States, known  as the great melting pot, has around 13 per cent overseas born.

Moreover, the diversity of countries that we now source from is much wider than the migration  from, certainly, the first half of the 20th century.

We should be immensely proud of what we have achieved as a nation to date. Australian  multiculturalism, rooted in a policy of integration, has been more successful than any other  nation.

5





Emerging challenges

There is, however, no room for complacency.  The challenges to successful integration are  perhaps greater than in previous decades, and there are early indicators that we are we not  doing as well as we once did.

The challenge is greater today because some diasporas are larger, the migrant intake more  diverse, and because technology can foster insularity.

Oxford professor, Paul Collier, points out in his book Exodus: Immigration and Multiculturalism  in the 21st Century that the pace of integration of a migrant relates to the number of  interactions the migrant has with the existing home grown population. The more interactions,  the more rapidly they merge. This, of course, makes intrinsic sense.  A person who sticks solely  to their own diaspora, communicates only in their own language, and has very little  engagement elsewhere will more slowly develop a shared identity with other Australians than  someone who is interacting on a daily basis - through work, school, and the community.

In past decades, despite the initial challenges of settling in a new country, new migrants  interacted with the existing population through work, school and elsewhere, because their  diasporas were relatively small.  They tended to maintain less regular contact with their country  of origin because of the high cost of flights and communications.

Today, however, diasporas can be larger, making it easier for the new migrant to settle initially,  but which may limit their external interactions.  Further, technology means a person can  communicate easily and cheaply back to their birth country or within their own diaspora in  Australia.  In short, a person can more easily today live within a language and cultural bubble in  suburban Australia.

The diversity of our intake can also contribute towards greater integration challenges. A person  who can understand and speak English and is experienced with liberal democracy is likely to  find it easier to integrate than someone who has little understanding of our values and  institutions.

None of these challenges are insurmountable for the success of new migrants or the cohesion  of the nation.  We will always have a non-discriminatory migration intake.  But they point to the  need to not take our success of past decades for granted.

6



Moreover, there are early indications that we are not doing as well as we have in the past,  pointing to the need to critically examine our policies.

The Scanlon Foundation’s Mapping Social Cohesion Report is the most comprehensive annual  assessment of our social cohesion. It uses a combination of community-wide surveys plus rich  data from multiple sources.  The report is typically very optimistic and remains so, but the most  recent report highlighted concerns about our trajectory.

First, it stated that across a number of its annual questions, there had been an increase of 5 to  10 percentage points (over ten years) in the proportion indicating negative views about  immigration generally or experience of discrimination.

Second, it highlighted that there is an increasing geographic concentration of the overseas born  population, particularly in Melbourne and Sydney. In Sydney, there are 67 suburbs with more  than 50 per cent born overseas. Of these, 28 suburbs have 60 per cent or more born overseas.

In some respects, there is nothing new about newly arrived migrants concentrating in particular  suburbs, but the Scanlon Foundation Report shows that this is getting more pronounced. And  with a greater concentration, there is less likelihood of interactions with the established  community. And therefore, slower integration.

This is particularly the case where the concentration of overseas born in particular suburbs is  aligned with a considerable absence of English being spoken or understood.  For example, in  the Melbourne Local Government Area of Greater Dandenong, of the population of 152,000,  61.7 per cent were born overseas with almost 17 per cent speaking no English or “not well”.

Further, the evidence suggests that English capability of new arrivals in general has  deteriorated. The 2016 Census, for example, shows that 24 per cent of the people who arrived  between January and August 2016 reported that they did not speak English well or at all.  This  compared with 18 and 19 per cent respectively in the 2006 and 2011 Census.

Poorer English means that the prospect of getting a good job is diminished. Professor Peter  McDonald from Melbourne University states that after 18 months of arrival, migrants who  spoke English very well were 3.7 times more likely to be employed compared with those whose  English was poor.

As well as diminishing the opportunity for the new migrant, a general deterioration in English is  bad for social cohesion.  Collier notes that a common language is highly convenient for a society

7



to operate and it underpins a common politics.  This is particularly the case in Australia when  we have compulsory voting.  Moreover, he notes that a common language makes people more  willing to support the provision of public goods such as universal healthcare or welfare.

The final concern that the Scanlon Foundation Report highlighted is the relatively high level of  negative feeling towards Muslims, which it notes is in part “fed by the reality - and the  heightened perception - of radical rejectionism of Australia’s secular democratic values and  institutions within segments of the Muslim population.”

Of course, compared to even a decade ago, the security challenges are heightened by the very  small minority who choose radical Islamism rather than liberal democracy.

Domestic community harmony, based on integration, is indeed an important part of our  national security.

In discussing the emerging challenges of integration, and before suggesting proposals for  change, it is necessary to discuss the challenges associated with our humanitarian intake.

This will always be the most difficult cohort to integrate, but unless we do it well, our society  will be diminished and the support for our refugee program will weaken.

The Centre for Policy Development in its recent “Settling Better” report states that “there is  overwhelming evidence that employment provides the bedrock for successful integration”.  I  could not agree more, but on this basis, there is room for improvement.  According to their  report, only 17 per cent of our humanitarian migrants are in paid work after being in Australia  for 18 months.

This is not good enough.  I know from my work in my previous portfolio of Human Services and  from my work in Indigenous issues, that the longer a person is on welfare, the harder it is to get  employment.  Long-term welfare dependence is debilitating for anyone, be they a refugee, long  term Australian citizen or anyone else.

Our goal should be that people arrive here and immediately have a place to work.  For some  this will be exceptionally difficult, but the attributes of our humanitarian intake suggest that we  can do better. According to the Building a New Life in Australia study, on arrival in Australia, 13  per cent of humanitarian entrants have a university degree and 19 per cent have completed 12  or more years of schooling.  Almost 70 per cent of men speak at least some English and 26 per  cent speak English well or very well.

8





We should explore whether more can be done before new migrants actually arrive in Australia,  such as English language training.  English language is again one of the keys: the Centre for  Policy Development found that humanitarian migrants with good English were 70 per cent  more likely to have a job after 18 months than those with poor English.

African leaders in Melbourne suggest to me that better engagement and greater employment  opportunities would also make a difference to some of the crime and social issues emerging  within the South Sudanese community.

Steps to encourage greater integration

The challenges outlined above are real and we must be alert to them, but they are not  insurmountable.

They indicate, however, that we need to re-examine our policies to ensure that they give the  new migrant the best chance of succeeding, as previous generations have done.

Professor Collier notes that in the absence of policies to the contrary, immigrants tend to  cluster.  In the absence of expectations about English language, people may stick to their  mother tongue and intersect only with their diaspora.

Our current policies do not address the challenges outlined above. In fact, there are very few  formal requirements that encourage integration, adoption of Australian values, and English  proficiency.

For example, consider the typical path of a person coming in under the family stream of the  migration program or a spouse of a skilled visa holder. This represents approximately two thirds  of the permanent migration program.

When they arrive, they have no English language requirement placed upon them. They must  sign an Australian Values Statement but there is no assessment as to whether they  demonstrate their commitment to these values through their actions while in Australia.  After  they become a permanent resident, it is almost a formality to become a citizen once a year has  expired and a citizenship test is passed.  This test is the only time that English is assessed at all.  And they can repeatedly fail the citizenship test an unlimited number of times.

9



On a practical level, this relative lack of policy has not mattered in earlier decades. New  migrants have flourished despite the absence of formal requirements for integration.

But given the challenges outlined above and the emerging deteriorating trends, it is time to  strengthen our policies in order to lift the aspirations placed upon new migrants from new and  emerging communities who want to make Australia their home.

There are at least five elements that we believe can meet these emerging challenges and  underpin continued successful Australian multiculturalism in the decades ahead.

The first is to place greater emphasis on the learning of English. As is outlined above, the extent  of English proficiency has deteriorated.  We would like to see stronger English language  requirements for permanent residency and citizenship.  This should be assessed through a  separate test, in addition to the written citizenship test.  The current citizenship test, while in  English, only assesses reading comprehension; and not the speaking, listening or writing of  English. All are important. Ultimately, this is beneficial to the newly arrived migrant, who, let’s  not forget has taken huge risks in coming to a new country, with the aspiration of succeeding in  their new life.

We can and do support people to learn English if their language skills are poor, but to reduce  barriers to successful integration and give the newly arrived migrant the best chance of success,  they must possess a level of English proficiency.

The second element is to actively encourage new arrivals to take positive steps to integrate.  In  most cases, a migrant is here for several years on a short-term visa before they become  permanent residents and citizens.  This provides an opportunity to assess their commitment to  wanting to integrate with our society.  The requirements would be made clear up front when a  person enters the country. It need not be onerous by ordinary standards, but could include  participation in the labour market, sending children to school and participating in community  groups.

Third, there needs to be a greater emphasis on articulating and assessing a newly arrived  migrant's commitment to Australian values, such as freedom of religion, equality of sexes, and  the rule of law.  We presently do character assessments, and we have a values statement that  must be signed for most visas and citizenship applications.  But there is an opportunity to have  a stronger values statement which a person agrees to upon entry to the country and is assessed  against before gaining full access to Australia's rights and privileges.

10



Fourth, from a security perspective, we would like to be able to assess people better before  gaining access to permanent residency and citizenship. Every person is assessed before coming  into the country, but obviously our data is richer when they are in the country.

Finally, we need to stop talking our country down - be it on Australia Day, in schools, or in our  public discourse. Rather we need to talk about and think about our nation and community as a  place that people will want to integrate into.

Douglas Murray’s analysis is that we have an unusual “vogue for self-blame”. He says that if we  are constantly talking ourselves down when other nations are not, then “the impression may  eventually be instilled, in Australian children as much as anywhere else, that Australia is the  country with more to apologise for.”

We must always be honest about our history and learn from it; we must be honest about our  present challenges. But Australia is an incredible success story on almost every dimension. It is  a place where we welcome people from around the world; where new migrants have become  leaders in all aspects of society; where women and men are equal; where freedom of speech  and religion is central. These values and attributes are worth celebrating and worth being part  of.

Many of these elements were the subject of national consultation and contained in the  Citizenship Bill that was presented to the parliament in 2017.  We are keen to engage further  on these, before again discussing these concepts with the parliament.

Conclusion

Australian multiculturalism is based on placing the migrant in the center of society, not on the  fringes.  We want all Australians, regardless of where they have come from to make the most of  the opportunities this great nation has to offer and we want their children to also have the  same opportunities.

For this to continue to occur, we need both the commitment of Australians to continue to  welcome new arrivals and the commitment of newly arrived migrants to integrate into our  community.

The Left focuses almost exclusively on the concept of "inclusion".  Inclusion is fundamental but  it implies that all the responsibility is on the host population to "include" newcomers.

11



But to become a fully functioning integrated society, newly arrived migrants also need to take  positive steps. There is an onus on all of us.

The fastest way to integrate is to learn English and get a job. The best place to integrate is in the  workplace.

We have been so successful as a nation to date, but this does not guarantee future success.   Rather, we need to work hard at integration by stamping out any remnants of racism, but also  by setting higher expectations upon those who want to call Australia home. With rights come  responsibilities. Ultimately this will ensure that the migrant has the best opportunity to succeed  and it is essential for the ongoing success of our multicultural nation.



