THE HON PETER DUTTON MP

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH DAVID PENBERTHY AND WILL GOODINGS

RADIO FIVEaa, ADELAIDE

24 July 2018

Subjects: Migration intake; Operation Sovereign Borders; Labor's border protection failures.

EO&E

DAVID PEN BERTHY:

We might find out a bit about that from our next guest is one of the most senior members

of the Turnbull Government, Peter Dutton, who is the Minister for Home Affairs. He's on the

line now. Minister, good morning.

PETER DUTTON:

Morning gentlemen.

DAVID PEN BERTHY:

Now look, Peter Dutton, we'll kick it off if we can. There's been a big, I reckon, toughening

over the last month in the tone of the discussion around population policy here in Australia

particularly coming out of our crowded cities to the east. There seems to be a view now that

Sydney, Melbourne, even Brisbane are pretty close to full. Is it the Government's view too,

that Australia is close to full? And if Australia is close to full to the east, does it follow that

cities like Adelaide could and indeed should expect to get a greater share of our migration

intake?

PETER DUTTON:

Well from the Government's perspective we want to make sure that we're running a

migration program that's in the national interest. So in - sometimes say a mining boom in

WA, we will bring more people in through the skilled workers program. When the economy

contracts, we don't have those jobs and we don't bring people in. So that's how the

migration program should work.

1

www.minister. homeaffairs.gov . au

But you're right, there's a lot of concern particularly in Sydney and Melbourne around

congestion, around housing affordability and people equate that back to numbers that are

coming in through the migration program.

It's a different debate perhaps in South Australia where there seems to be a lot of people

interested in getting more migration into the state and to try and drive the economy

through that population growth.

So it's a different picture across the country, but in the end we want - if we're bringing

people in, if we can't find an Australian to fill that job - we want somebody coming in who is

as young as possible with the most skills so that they can pay taxes for as long a period of

time as possible and contribute to the economy.

DAVID PEN BERTHY:

Our Premier Steven Marshall is on the record as saying that a higher population is not

something that South Australians should fear. Have you had any discussions with him

particularly in light of the growing concerns to the east about overcrowding, about whether

somehow a tweak could be made to where these new settlers are sent?

PETER DUTTON:

Well we are looking at ways in which we can provide incentive for people to come to

regional areas, to remote areas, to cities like Adelaide and it's a bit of a chicken and egg

story though because we want to make sure that the jobs are there, that the industry is

created. There's no sense in bringing people en masse into a community and people aren't

working. There's all sorts of social disharmony and reasons why you wouldn't do that. So we

need to get the sequencing right.

And I think Steven Marshall has done a great job out of the blocks and I think there's an air

of confidence - as we're seeing in Tasmania with Will Hodgman down there - where

business is starting to reinvest, there's job creation and people have the sense of confidence

and I think the migration numbers flow after that because people will chase opportunity and

they will chase jobs.

DAVID PEN BERTHY:

So get the business settings right first and then the people will come after that you'd hope?

PETER DUTTON:

I think that's exactly right.

WILL GOODINGS:

2

www.minister. homeaffairs.gov . au

So the permanent migration cap is 190,000 and cap being important as it's no longer a

target. Just 162,000 permanent arrivals in the last 12 months. Is that more around the  number you'd like to see continue, or you'd like to see it drop even further than that?

PETER DUTTON:

Well we've had some integrity measures in the Parliament around citizenship, around visas  and one of the things we've really stressed over the last 12 months is that we don't want  people coming in that are making fraudulent claims about their qualifications that are in  dodgy relationships that have fraudulent documentation as part of their application. And we  really have scrutinised many more applications over the course of the last year and that has  brought the number down.

Labor had a target of 190,000 and we changed that to a cap. It was 183,000 the year before  and down to 162,400 in the last 12 months. So that number has come back because of the  additional scrutiny and I think we end up with a better migration program as a result of it.

But it's been a bit frustrating in the Parliament because we've had a number of Bills where  we can't get Labor or Rebekha Sharkie to vote for those Bills and it makes it harder to run  the migration program when you can't get those Bills through the Parliament.

DAVID PENBERTHY:

Mr Dutton, we were talking last week about the speech that your colleague Alan Tudge gave  in London where he talked about the incorporation of some kind of values test into the  pledge, for want of a better word, that new citizens are expected to take with values going  to things like equality of opportunity for both the sexes, you know, the right of women to  get an education and so forth, respect for all religions, you know, scotching this idea that  there is only one God that people should ever worship.

What's the status of that, because that obviously overlaps with your portfolio and it's an  idea that certainly a lot of our listeners were very interested in?

PETER DUTTON:

Well Alan Tudge is doing that work at the moment. This is part of the look at ways in which  we could potentially see more people moving out of the cities into regions. So it's pretty  basic stuff. I mean, we want people to abide by the law, to integrate into our community.

We don't want people to abandon their cultural beliefs, their practices, but if you're in  Australia you abide by Australian law and you adhere to our way of life, to our cultures and  that's the basic rule.

And the people who came over a long period of time - say post-the Second World War -  came with nothing, worked hard, have amassed wealth, have educated their kids. There was

no welfare in that period of post-Second World War.

3

www.minister. homeaffairs.  go v. au

There is a very generous - one of the world's most generous welfare systems that operates

in the country at the moment. So a basic ask is that if you're of working age and you have a  capacity to work, we want you to work and not to come here for the welfare program and  that sends a clearer message to kids and to families, if the role models in the family have a  capacity to work and they are working.

So they're some of the fundamental elements that need to be reinforced and in some  communities around the country, people seem to have abandoned those principles and to  us as a Government that's not acceptable and as you say I think the vast majority of people  would support that.

WILL GOODINGS:

Minister, can I ask you about a story that's around today regarding Operation Sovereign  Borders and the work that's been done with other governments in the region to quash the  people-smuggling trade.

According to the information; 77 people-smuggling ventures have been disrupted, 2005  illegal maritime arrivals have been affected, 612 people have been arrested. Sounds like it's  a massive operation.

How much of that was set to come to Australia? How much are we still a target of people-smuggling?

PETER DUTTON:

Oh, we're absolutely a target. There's no question. In Indonesia at the moment, there are  about 14,000 people who are willing to get onto boats. We've turned back 33 boats. We've  disrupted over 70, as you say and 600 people have been arrested in countries around our  region so we've been working under Operation Sovereign Borders with many partners and  this problem hasn't gone away.

I mean, we know in the first half of this year on the Mediterranean there have been 1400  people that have drowned or are missing, 50,000 people have come by boat so far and  because we're not seeing boat arrivals get through at the moment because of Operation  Sovereign Borders, people think the problem's gone away and the reality is that it hasn't.

And again, I mean we try to introduce legislation to make sure that we keep people-smugglers out of business, but you've got Labor, the Greens, Rebekha Sharkie who have  voted against every Bill that we've put forward to try and make sure that we keep Operation  Sovereign Borders relevant and strong and to defeat the people smugglers who are still  willing to take cash today.

WILL GOODINGS:

4

www.minister. homeaffairs.  go v. au

So has it reached though, the policy, it's sort of maximum level of effectiveness with regard

to what it can do to dissuade the trade? If it's still ongoing, it's been in place for a period of  time now.

PETER DUTTON:

Yes, but you've got, you know, people smugglers at the moment who are marketing New  Zealand. Now, they mayor may not plan to get New Zealand. They might be —their intent  might be to run the boat up on to Christmas Island and not get to New Zealand, but New  Zealand is being marketed. So we end up with that problem and you've got the reality of  that situation.

When people talk about New Zealand being a destination that is a backdoor way into  Australia. They've got a comparable welfare system - housing, education, all the rest of it -  and it's a very attractive destination. And it's a backdoor entry into Australia because New

Zealand is the only country in the world where you can come to Australia and get a visa on  arrival. Every other country — the United States, United Kingdom, Canada —you need a visa  before you hop on the plane to get here.

And that's why a lot of this talk about 'oh well let's just send people to New Zealand' is quite  dangerous because the people-smugglers are marketing that as a reason to hop on boats  again and people believe that they can get to New Zealand and that's still a big problem for

US.

WILL GOODINGS:

Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton, thanks for your time.

PETER DUTTON:

Pleasure, thanks guys.

[ends]

www.minister. homeaffairs.  go v. au

5

