





THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  6PR PERTH LIVE - THE ODD COUPLE SEGMENT  TUESDAY, 30 JANUARY 2018

Subjects; WA infrastructure, weapons manufacturing, Australia Day, Labor Party,  National Integrity Commission

OLIVER PETERSON: Yes we do call this The Odd Couple. This afternoon we're joined  live here in Perth in the studio on 6PR by Anthony Albanese. Good afternoon.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: G'day Ollie. Good to be in Perth again.

PETERSON: It's good to see you here in Perth.

ALBANESE: It's a beautiful day here, I've got to say.

PETERSON: What are you doing here?

ALBANESE: I've been doing all sorts of stuff. We did a press conference at the Morley  to Ellenbrook rail line. We've got the $700 million. I've been down in Fremantle with  Josh. I've just had a meeting with Rita Saffioti, the Infrastructure Minister.

PETERSON: You've been busy.

ALBANESE: I've been to the City of Stirling. I had a tour of the urban renovation that's  going on around Scarborough Beach, the new pool and various proposals that are there  for light rail and a new road to take pressure off that growth in that city with the Mayor  and with Tim Hammond. Then I'm catching up with Tim Hammond later and tomorrow  I'm with Lauren Palmer, our new candidate for Hasluck, so I'm everywhere.

PETERSON: You're everywhere but on the phone, as we call it The Odd Couple, senior  Government Minister Christopher Pyne. You're not here. Good afternoon.

CHRISTOPHER PYNE: Ollie, how are you going? Anthony loves getting out of New  South Wales because he is hated there. He's always desperate to get to any other part  of the country...

ALBANESE: Where are you Christopher?

PYNE: I'm home in Adelaide. I got home this afternoon. I opened a new factory in  Canberra this morning that's creating remote weapons systems called EOS. And, of  course, yesterday we did our big defence export strategy announcement and spent the  day spruiking that in the eastern states so another very busy week for us. We're all back  on deck, no more holidays.

PETERSON: Jobs by manufacturing weapons? So who and what are we going to be  making Christopher Pyne and who are we going to be selling it to?

PYNE: Well we're in the middle of the biggest military capability build up in our  peacetime history - $200 billion. And the next logical step is to try and turn that into jobs,  manufacturing, advanced technology, work here in Australia and export as much of that  as we can to friendly countries overseas. So things like remote weapons systems,  ships, missiles, guns, protective vehicles like the Bushmaster, radar, sonar, we make all  of that in Australia. We should be exporting it. No government has tried to do it before  and the Defence Export Strategy is the biggest investment in defence export in all time  and obviously it will go to countries like the US, the UK, Canada, New Zealand, Europe  and then those countries in Asia where we're happy to export defence products to like  South Korea or Japan and there are others as well.

ALBANESE: My concern I guess is that the Government has dropped the ball in  advanced manufacturing in areas like renewable technology. Today, one of the things  that came about with the roundtable with Josh Wilson is talking to people from Kwinana  about the potential that's right here in WA for growth of industries around lithium.  There's a great prospect for that here in WA, so we need to look at the full scale of how  we create jobs in the 21st century in advanced manufacturing. We've been really good,  for example, over the years at having new innovation in renewables whether it's solar or  wind or wave technology here in WA. We often haven't been good at commercialising it,  making sure that we create jobs.

PYNE: That's true, we need to fix that.

ALBANESE: Wherever it is, I'm certainly for jobs, and that's one of the issues I've been  discussing here today, indeed with Rita Saffioti, it was about manufacturing of the rail  carriages. That's one of the things, as METRONET expands here, how do we make  sure we maximise the number of jobs and the economic benefit right here in WA from  that project?

PYNE: Anthony's also had some ideas about Australia Day too, which he has been  spruiking which he might like to talk about.

ALBANESE: I have ideas everywhere.

PETERSON: Absolutely.

ALBANESE: Christopher is taking over here, Ollie.

PETERSON: No, that's fine. I think Christopher Pyne read my mind because I was  going to ask about that next, Anthony Albanese. You'd like a referendum; you want to

bring the republic debate and recognising Indigenous Australians in the Constitution to  come to a head.

ALBANESE: One of the things we've seen increasingly in the lead up to Australia Day  is a debate that can be quite divisive about whether Australia Day should be  commemorated on January 26, about the implications for the First Australians, many of  whom feel not surprisingly quite traumatised, to be frank, about the consequences for  Indigenous people of European settlement.

So one of the things I've proposed is, there's been pretty broad support across not  everyone in the Parliament, but certainly Christopher is someone who supports  Indigenous recognition in our Constitution and a republic. So why wouldn't you, on  Australia Day, instead of changing the date, enhance the date? Make it one that all  Australians can feel a sense of ownership of, one that we recognise, not just what  Australia is today in 2018, but the fact that Australian history didn't begin in 1788, it goes  back at least 65,000 years.

But also take the opportunity on Australia Day to have a vote to say, do you think on this  day we should have an Australian head of state? And to advance that debate as  well. I've put this forward as an idea, I don't think it's the only idea. Noel Pearson had  some constructive suggestions on the weekend as well. His proposal is to have a two  day celebration; January 25, about prior ownership if you like, and January 26, about  the British declaring sovereignty over the nation. Whatever people think of that, of  course, it certainly wasn't with the consent of Aboriginal people.

PETERSON: So Christopher, does Anthony's idea have merit?

PYNE: Well credit to Anthony for at least having a view about Australia Day. You know  his boss, Bill Shorten, he wants to walk both sides of the street. He can't say whether he  is in favour of a national holiday being on Australia Day or not because he is terrified of  the left of the political spectrum and he doesn't want to offend the right of the political  spectrum. But good credit to Anthony for at least having a view about trying to make  Australia Day an Australia Day for everyone. I haven't examined his idea closely.

I am a republican, but I think it's too soon for us to try for a republic until the Queen is no  longer on the throne, and I am in favour of Indigenous recognition in the Constitution.  I'm disappointed that the model that the group came up with that we asked to look at is  one that is probably unlikely to be passed by the Australian public, which is effectively a  third chamber of the Parliament.

ALBANESE: That's not right, with respect, Christopher.

PYNE: I still think we should pursue Indigenous recognition, however, and whether we  do that on Australia Day is something I think we should be debating. It's a free country  and good luck to Anthony for having a go. I notice that he's not too worried  about whether Bill likes it or not, and quite happy to be putting himself out there.  This could be the year of Anthony Albanese.

PETERSEN: Yeah well that's a question, interesting, that Christopher Pyne raises. Is  Bill Shorten going to support this idea or is this, Anthony Albanese, your time to make  your play take over the leadership of the ALP?



PYNE: It's his time to shine.

ALBANESE: I have had a chat with Bill and it's up to him to speak for himself. I'm not  going to pre-empt that, but certainly it's consistent with Labor policy, which is to support  both Indigenous recognition and of course to support a republic. So it's a matter of how  you get there. One of the things I very consciously didn't do was say 'this is Labor's  view', because once you do that then the Coalition say 'oh, well, we're against it'. And  quite often the Labor Party does the same thing. In politics I think people want to see  ideas debated. People want solutions, not just arguments. And that's the spirit in which  I've put this forward. The fact that Christopher essentially was pretty supportive at least  of the concept that I've put forward there, if I was saying 'this is Labor and the Coalition  shouldn't do this' - you know, I've done it deliberately to try to lift up the debate in the  spirit, if you like of reconciliation.

PETERSEN: [inaudible] processing of asylum seekers when he was immigration  minister in 2014?

PYNE: Well, what we've always done since when we've been in government, when  Howard was in government, the Howard Government was in power and since we've  been in power is to stop the people smuggling trade. Now, Labor got it started again.  Fifty thousand unauthorised arrivals on 800 boats. When we came back into power the  Abbott Government made it absolutely clear that we were going to stop the people  smuggling trade. At least 1200 people that we know of had drowned at sea in that  period. There were 2000 children in detention and the Abbott and then the Turnbull  Government stopped the boats and kept the boats stopped. Now that is a major national  achievement. I haven't delved into all the ins and outs of Scott Morrison's role as  Immigration Minister but I'm sure everything he did was designed to end the people  smuggling trade and Labor is now saying that they agree with that. So Labor agrees  with the methods that the Government has adopted and that must really stick as a bone  in the throat of many people in the Labor caucus who of course had a very different  view when they were in power.

ALBANESE: Well, Christopher is really sticking to talking points of course of everything  being about Labor v. Liberal. What this is about is whether a minister acted  appropriately or not, and I note that he couldn't say that he did.

PETERSEN: Alright let's move on. Anthony Albanese, today Bill Shorten was talking  about setting up a federal watchdog to crack down on government or public service  corruption. Is this a dangerous tactic by the Labor Party? When you look to New South  Wales, there were a couple of state MPs that went towards the corruption watchdog in  NSW and are now behind bars.

ALBANESE: It's a good thing wherever corruption exists that it's weeded out and that  people are punished for it. I think it's about restoring faith in our institutions, including in  our parliament. It's something that in recent times has grown in support and it's  something that's about us fulfilling, if you like, the demand that's there and responding  to the public so that we can then get on with the business of government with the  confidence that's there, from the public, that if there is anything untoward going on, then  there will be a body with Royal Commission powers with the capacity to investigate it  and to recommend to the police that action be taken.



PETERSEN: Is it necessary, Christopher Pyne?

PYNE: Well, Bill Shorten has breathtaking hypocrisy. This guy is no anti-corruption  campaigner. I mean, for goodness sake, he did everything he could to block the  Registered Organisations Commission. He did everything he could to block the  Australian Building and Construction Commission. Now he's been embarrassed by the  behaviour of people like Sam Dastyari and has decided that he wants to have a  National Integrity Commission. Well, that's what we have the anti-corruption branch of  the AFP for. That's why we have the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement  Integrity. We have the structures in place to deal with corruption at the national level.  Now maybe we didn't get the state level, and that's why they set up groups like the  ICAC in New South Wales and the Corruption Commission in Queensland, but federally  we have those structures in place already. All Bill Shorten is trying to do is distract  people from the fact the took far too long to act on Sam Dastyari who is now not - still  actually a Senator by the way - I'm not sure he's yet resigned, might be resigning next  week to make way for Kristina Keneally. We are having a look at a National Integrity  Commission because there was a Senate inquiry into this last year. We're having a look  at their report and reviewing it, but we certainly aren't committing to it, not just because  Bill Shorten's on a knee jerk anti-corruption campaign.

PETERSEN: Alright, the battle of ideas is off and running in 2018. One last one as well.  I see Bill Shorten today says he wants to lower private health bills. Is there a  mechanism, gentlemen, in government to be able to put the pressure on the health  insurers to put down or put the brakes really on rising health insurance costs?

PYNE: What Bill wanted to announce today basically would put up health insurance  premiums by 16 percent according to Deloitte. Now, that is an independent report. Bill  Shorten and the Labor Party have never supported private health insurance. He twice  was asked today whether he would rule out getting rid of the private health insurance  rebate. He couldn't do it. There are 13 million Australians with private health insurance,  many of them pensioners and young people. Bill Shorten and Labor have never  supported private health insurance. Now he wants to try [inaudible] and what he wants  to do would increased private health insurance premiums by 16 per cent.

ALBANESE: So Christopher would have you believe that since lunchtime there's been  an economic analysis of what Bill Shorten said in his speech. I mean seriously, that's  farcical. What Australians know is a couple of things. One of the things they know that is  that if you look at the profit levels of the health insurance companies, the yield for  investment is enormous. It's up there, and beyond in some cases, of that of the banks.  They also know that - and I do as someone who has private health insurance, whenever  I've had any medical procedures done, I end up having to pay for them - because  they're told 'oh, no private health insurance doesn't cover that'. That causes a great deal  of frustration there as well. My view is private health insurance, and it's Labor's view,  has an important role to play in the health system, but let's [inaudible] people's living  standards and just raising it in itself will certainly do that, will put a focus on private  health insurance and on the fees which they charge. I don't understand why Christopher  thinks that that very concept is a bad thing.

PETERSEN: Well it's been good to see you in Perth today, Anthony Albanese.  Christopher Pyne, we look forward to welcoming you to Perth soon.



ALBANESE: He's not very welcome here, Ollie.

PYNE: I am. I'm very popular there in Perth. If you go down to Henderson, to the  maritime precinct, they want to carry me on their shoulders.

PETERSEN: I believe Christopher Pyne, that you're celebrating 25 years in the  Parliament this year and there's a wild party planned in Adelaide which I'm told will be  the biggest party that Adelaide has staged in years.

PYNE: Well, Anthony, he'll have come to make it a wild party.

PETERSEN: DJ Albo could attend.

ALBANESE: Anything's possible. I'll bring along a few desks to spin.

PETERSEN: Alright, Christopher Pyne. Thank you very much.

PYNE: See you soon. Thank you.

ALBANESE: Thanks Ollie.

PETERSEN: Good on you, Anthony Albanese. It's twenty-four past four.





[ENDS]

WEDNESDAY, 31 JANUARY 2018  MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868

