

THE HON LINDA BURNEY. MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW   ABC NEWS - NATIONAL WRAP WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  SUNDAY, 11 MARCH 2018

SUBJECTS: English test for citizenship

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Alan Tudge and Linda Burney welcome to National Wrap.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES AND MEMBER  FOR BARTON: Hi Patricia.

ALAN TUDGE, MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS,  AND MEMBER FOR ASTON: G’day PK.

BURNEY: How are you Alan?

TUDGE: Hi there Linda, good thanks.

KARVELAS: Alan this English test that you're proposing is not as difficult as the  original government proposal for an English test. But it is a lot more onerous than  what's currently required. Why do we need to do this?

TUDGE: What we're proposing is a moderate form of English that a migrant should  have to pass before they become a citizen. Now the reason being is that English is  fundamentally the glue to our society. It underpins your success in getting a job. It  goes to our social cohesion. And of course it underpins our democracy which is  fundamentally based in English. So we think it's in the interests of the migrants to  have a reasonable command of English. And it's also in the interests of society.

KARVELAS: Linda, Labor opposed the original proposal for high level English but  the bar has been lowered by the Government. Is it something you'd support now?

BURNEY: It hasn't been lowered very much. It’s still university entrance level and  that means that most of the people that came to work on the Snowy Mountains  Scheme back in the ‘50’s wouldn't qualify as citizens. There is already Patricia an  English test which is conversational English, and we believe that that's very

adequate. The other thing of course is that there isn't enough places for people to go  and learn English so they can actually qualify. Citizenship is not just about being  proficient in English. And we've been to many citizenship ceremonies where the  pride in the depth of people committing themselves to Australia is overwhelming.  Labor fundamentally believes that the test is still too onerous.

TUDGE: Linda said we're after university level English and Labor's repeatedly being  saying this. And it is absolutely wrong. We are after what is called level 5 English,  which is a moderate level. It means you have a partial command of the English  language, but will still make a great many mistakes in the process. And we think this  is a reasonable level of English for somebody to be able to fully engage in the  community.

KARVELAS: Linda Burney I mean even the Productivity Commission has found that  increasing the bar, making more people learn English would actually help them get  jobs. And there's no doubt that obviously if you have a better command of English,  you're more likely to get a job. That's pretty obvious if you look at most workplaces.  So isn't it a benefit to some of these migrants to actually do this?

BURNEY: Well I think we need to work in what's real. Alan, and I respect Alan very  much, says level 5, that is still University Entrance English. And most -

TUDGE: It is not Linda.

KARVELAS: Well, let just Linda finish.

TUDGE: Sorry.

BURNEY: Many Australians, if I could put it in parenthesis, wouldn't even be able to  pass that level of English. I think the other thing to do is to blow up this myth that if  you're a migrant or an asylum seeker or a refugee then you're going to be on the  welfare dollar. We know very well the productivity of migrant communities is  absolutely astounding. I represent a migrant community. We know that children of  migrants are doing exceptionally well both in university and secondary schools. And I  think it's really important we recognise the industriousness of migrants. And the other  thing is this, is I dislike very much this kind of them and us dichotomy that's almost  assumed within some parts of the parliament because when you look at Australia,  what you say back is an incredible story of migration. And I think people need to be  recognised for that.

KARVELAS: Alan Tudge, these people are already in Australia. I know it's not  retrospective, you've made that clear, but why make it harder for people already  participating in Australian society to become citizens? Don't you want them to be  citizens?

TUDGE: Absolutely we do want them to become citizens. But we also want a socially  cohesive society and you hit the nail on the head when you say that it underpins  employment. In fact the data shows that you're 3.7 times more likely to be in a job  after 18 months if you've got good English, compared to not having English. And it's  the same in relation to the humanitarian intake as well, so fundamentally it underpins

your ability to get employment. And that's particularly so these days when we’re  increasingly moving into a service economy and away from a manufacturing  economy or where there's more jobs which are labouring jobs, is vital and underpins  and is the glue to our society. We have got English language classes there for the  people who are here. It’s prospective, so if you've already applied for citizenship,  then it doesn’t apply -

KARVELAS: Sure, but if I can just cut in, we have communities of people living in  Australia where their English is not, you know, of this standard, and yet have been  contributing enormously on to the economy, and are very much part of this country.  So with respect, what on earth are you going to change by doing this given this is  already working? You talk about the Australian model being, the multicultural model  being, at threat or risk, but it doesn't appear that way if you actually look on the  streets of Australia?

TUDGE: Now in some respects you are right and I did a big speech earlier this week  Patricia in relation to this. And I basically said what Linda was talking about before  where we've been the most successful multicultural country in the world, we've  integrated people so well. But there are some indicators that we're not doing it quite  as well as we used to have done. And one of those indicators is that the little of  English language proficiency has quite markedly declined in the last decade. It used  to be only one in five migrants didn't have any English, or very poor English. And  now it's one in four. Just in a decade. And often that's concentrated in particular  geographical areas as well. We want to ensure that they can prosper and thrive as  previous generations of migrants have done. And we want to ensure that we  maintain our successful multicultural model which is fundamentally based on  integration and in order to integrate well, you have to have a basic level of English.

KARVELAS: Linda Burney, Alan Tudge has said, and he just said it there, he’s  talked about these geographical concentration of migrants being linked with poor  English standards. What do you make of this this concept that Alan Tudge has  raised, these clusters of migrants living in some areas? Because I've got to say, I’ve  lived in Australia since I was born. I was born in this country and there have always  been communities where people have clustered. I mean the Greek community in  Melbourne, I lived in a suburb where there were a lot of Greeks for instance and that  was fairly normal. Is there anything inherently wrong with that Linda Burney?

BURNEY: There is nothing inherently wrong with that. In fact it's in many ways, it's  reinforcing culture and maintaining language, and I just see this happen so much  with the great community in Earlwood and with the Lebanese community in Rockdale  and the list goes on. But I think the point that you've just made Patricia, to Alan, is  the key to why Labor does not support this level of English language testing, and that  is that there are people that have been living in Australia, many of them for most of  their lives, that will never be able to qualify under this rule -

KARVELAS: They're already citizens, Linda.

BURNEY: Well, no, many of them aren’t, haven't taken citizenship and those people  will become a subclass within the community because they haven't got citizenship  yet. And under the present rule, the rule that Alan is proposing, the level Alan's

proposing, that they will never be able to attain citizenship and I think that is very bad  for our society.

KARVELAS: Alan, I just want to question you on another thing that you've raised last  week, which is this values test. What are you talking about here? What sort of values  are you looking at people adopting?

TUDGE: So what I outlined in terms of what we'd like to see before a person  becomes a citizen, is firstly a basic level of English comprehension, and ability.  Second, an indicator that a person has made an effort to integrate into society. And  thirdly, that they're adhering to Australian values. Now in relation to that final one,  we're talking about some of the fundamentals: the rule of law, parliamentary  democracy, equality of the sexes, freedom of religion - those fundamental values  which underpin our society -

KARVELAS: - which while living in Australian they already have to comply with that  don’t they?

TUDGE: - well, yes and no. You do sign a values statement when you apply for your  citizenship presently but there's no assessment of it as such. And what we're  suggesting is perhaps you could sign a values statement when you first come into  the country. And then there's some sort of assessment against that when you are  applying for your citizenship. Now of course the vast majority of people are going to  fly through that. But there will be some people who might just say well hang on, you  may not have sent your daughters to school for example, because you have a  particular view about girls education -

KARVELAS: - but it’s the law in Australia to send your children to school.

TUDGE: It is, but as you know Patricia, there are a great many places where kids  are not going to school. And we want to ensure that their kids are going to school.  And that fundamental principle of equality of sexes is adhered to, and if you don't  want to adhere to that, that fundamental principle, then maybe this country is not the  right country for you.

KARVELAS: Linda Burney what do you make of these values tests that Alan Tudge  has just articulated there?

BURNEY: I just don't think Alan meant a word that he just said. I mean we have all  been to those citizenship ceremonies and the people that take citizenship are  absolutely grateful that they are committing themselves to this country. They make a  pledge that commits to this country. And I think the most important values are the  human values, the human rights values, that everyone's committed to. The thing that  Alan's talking about saying there’s some group of people that don't agree with his  Australian values and somehow Australian values sit somewhere in a mythical place,  is just not true. People who live in this country, people who make this country home  understand that the value is that that are important to us as a nation are the values  that they will learn about if they need to, that many of them already have them.

KARVELAS: Alan, I just want to ask you about a story about unemployed asylum  seekers on bridging visas, including those studying English, might have their income  support cut. Now this is as you want to revive language tests for new immigrants,  new refugees. Isn’t this at odds with your push to stop people getting income  support, welfare, when they're studying English?

TUDGE: In essence what the proposal is, and this is not responsibility, but it is  saying that if you're on one of those bridging visas because you've been an unlawful  arrival in this country and you're applying for a protection visa, in that interim period,  we want people who've got, if they've got the capacity to do so, to be searching for  work and working if possible -

KARVELAS: - But you also want them to learn English don’t you?

TUDGE: - rather than doing a full time course. Now if English is a barrier to that  person getting employment, then of course they'll still be able to do an English  language course. But what they won't be able to do if they’re already proficient in  English, they can't do a university course or some sort of other fulltime course.  Instead we're asking them to directly seek work and do work while there are waiting  for that that application to be processed.

KARVELAS: Linda Burney, that’s squarely in your portfolio area as the Shadow  Human Services Minister, is it a measure Labor opposes?

BURNEY: It’s a measure we will not support. The idea of cutting people off welfare  support because they're on a particular visa type is going to push people into  desperation. It's going to push people to the edge in many cases. One of the big  issues of course very quickly is that it is the Social Security system that is one of the  few areas that the federal government can cut to save money. But cutting to save  money should not cut off the opportunity for people, and this is what this measure is  going to do.

KARVELAS: A final word here, Alan Tudge last time you tried to get these reforms  through, the government failed. Have you got the numbers this time?

TUDGE: Well we're in negotiation with the crossbench and those negotiations will  continue for some time. But what I'm trying to do is outline the case of why these  things are important both for the migrant well as for society. I’m fundamentally a  person who believes in the Australian model of multiculturalism which is based on  integration, not based on separatism, not based on assimilation, but integration. And  in order to integrate people, you do need to have a reasonable command of the  English language. And that's what we're talking about here.

KARVELAS: Thanks to both of you for joining me on National Wrap. Thanks very  much thanks Linda, thanks Alan.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222

