

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP  BRISBANE  THURSDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2018

SUBJECT: Peter Dutton’s au pair intervention for a mate, medical transfers for  asylum seekers on Nauru.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Explosive revelations today reveal that Peter Dutton clearly misled the  House of Representatives and misled the Prime Minister Scott Morrison. Prime Minister  Scott Morrison must explain why Peter Dutton remains a Minister in his Government.  The new reports clearly show that Peter Dutton knew the employer of the Brisbane au  pair - it was his mate - and Peter Dutton used his ministerial intervention powers to  grant a tourist visa to the au pair. Misleading the House of Representatives is a serious  and sackable offence. Prime Minister Scott Morrison must demand an explanation today  of Minister Peter Dutton. If Peter Dutton won’t explain himself today, his position  becomes untenable. Peter Dutton has undermined the integrity of the immigration visa  system in this country. Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Aren’t these just the claims of a bloke who is angry and has an axe to  grind with the Government?

NEUMANN: Well Roman Quaedvlieg was the Border Force Commissioner appointed  by Peter Dutton. Roman Quaedvlieg has had a long and distinguished career as a  police officer and law enforcement official. The evidence according to the media reports  today show that he has a very different recollection and reports today show his  evidence is contradictory to what Peter Dutton has said in relation to this matter.

JOURNALIST: His previous evidence was that he was of the understanding there was  no personal connection. He seems to have changed his tune.

NEUMANN: Well there is a personal connection. Peter Dutton said in Federal  Parliament there is no personal connection. The Brisbane au pair situation - the  employer of the au pair - was Peter Dutton’s mate in the police force and it’s clear today  from the media reports that Roman Quaedvlieg has revealed Peter Dutton’s Chief of

Staff rang him on behalf of his boss, asking how Peter Dutton could intervene on behalf  of his friend. Peter Dutton obviously knew what he was doing and Peter Dutton  obviously remained having a personal connection with the police officer with whom he  served with in the Queensland Police Force.

JOURNALIST: Peter Dutton has been fairly clear on this that if he starts to peel back  the layers there would be plenty of Labor politicians who have also come to him and  asked for favours. Are you worried that this could start to get out of control and all sorts  of people could have made all sorts of recommendations to him to intervene in  Immigration issues?

NEUMANN: This is not about the use or having ministerial powers; it’s about the  process. It looks like if you’re a mate of Peter Dutton, or a mate of a mate, you get a  certain kind of treatment but if you’re anyone else in Australia, you some other kind of  treatment and that’s what it shows.

JOURNALIST: He said he hasn’t spoken to the bloke for twenty years. Do you have  any good mates you haven’t spoken to for twenty years?

NEUMANN: Well according to Roman Quaedvlieg the guy remained a mate, a friend, of  Peter Dutton and his Chief of Staff was ringing on behalf of the Minister to see how he  could help a mate out.

JOURNALIST: Do you think this is the tip of the iceberg? Do you expect more cases  like this to be revealed where the Home Affairs Minister may have intervened for people  he has a personal relationship with?

NEUMANN: I don’t know if there’s any other cases beyond these two and another one  that’s been referred to in media reports but I do know this - that the Minister must  explain the situation today and the Prime Minister must demand the Minister explain  himself or his position as the Minister for Home Affairs is simply untenable.

JOURNALIST: Asylum seekers - how much of a concern is it that a particular asylum  seeker with a medical condition can’t get a medical transfer to Australia?

NEUMANN: Well Nauru is a sovereign country but the Australian Government must  work with the Nauruan Government. Considerations in terms of medical treatment must  be on the basis of the best medical advice and issues related to the transfer from Nauru  must be based on appropriate medical advice, not political considerations. We shouldn’t  have to wait for a Federal Court order for this to take place.

JOURNALIST: Is this a case of one outcome for personal friends and a completely  different one for genuine asylum seekers?

NEUMANN: It looks like in terms of the au pairs situation, a degree of hypocrisy from  the Minister. I think if you walked through King George Square - where I am today -

they’d think the situation stunk. They would think the Minister treats his friends  differently to how he treats other Australians, other asylum seekers, and other people  seeking visa help. It’s quite extraordinary what’s happened here - it’s about the Minister  helping out mates, and mates of mates.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110

