

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY

MEMBER FOR PORT ADELAIDE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

RN DRIVE

TUESDAY, 17 JULY 2018



SUBJECT/S: AEMO report; democracy within the ALP; asylum seekers



HOST: The Australian Energy Market Operator has delivered its highly anticipated

forecast for the nation’s energy future. The verdict? Coal will remain a necessary

source for the next few decades but renewables are the ultimate future. All sides in

the political debate over energy are using the report’s findings to claim victory.



Mark Butler is Labor’s spokesperson on climate change and energy. Mark Butler,

welcome to RN Drive.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY:

Thanks, Damien.



HOST: The energy market operator says coal will need to remain part of our

energy mix for the next 2 decades to avoid major price increases. Does Labor

accept that conclusion?



BUTLER: We do. We think it’s pretty unremarkable and really reflects advice given

by most commentators and experts for some time. But the report also says there is

an irreversible transition underway in the system and the share of coal-fired

generation in the system will decline substantially over those two decades, and

almost exclusively be replaced by renewable energy. This is something that we’ve

been saying for a long time now.



HOST: Given the recommendation against building new coal-fired power stations,

is the government right to want to extend the life of the Liddell power station in the

interests of stabilising prices and supply, as would seem to be recommended by

this report?



BUTLER: Importantly it’s never been recommended by the market operator that

Liddell be extended. So, the Liddell power station in New South Wales turns 50 in

2022 and the operator has indicated that it will be shutting the station then and

replacing it with a portfolio of different energy; so renewable energy with some gas- fired generation, some battery storage and some pumped-hydro. And the

modelling of that plan showed that that would deliver power 25% cheaper than

power delivered by an extension of Liddell.

There could be an extension that would cost about $900 million for a 5 year

extension; money that would have to be recouped from New South Wales

consumers over a very short period of time. So the two options, really, about

Liddell involve on the one hand, a 30 or 40 year investment that will deliver

cheaper power, 25% cheaper, or a 5 year investment that will deliver more

expensive power.



HOST: So the recommendation from this report was that coal power stations

should not close early. So you’d accept that, that we shouldn’t push the envelope

and speed that process along, you accept that there is a lifespan for coal-fired

plants and that should be allowed to proceed?



BUTLER: I think what we see is the mix of power identified in this report, even in

their so-called neutral scenario, so without pushing levers particularly hard, would

see us get to 46% renewable energy by 2030, which is pretty close to Labor’s 50%

renewable energy target. So, I think this report really is a pretty strong vindication

of what we’ve been saying the direction of the energy system between now and

2030 should be and then beyond 2030, between 2030 and 2040, a number of

other coal-fired generators will come up for retirement and there will be another

burst of investment into renewables along with a whole range of storage

technologies like battery storage and pumped hydro storage.



HOST: It’s going to be expensive, modelling by AEMO shows that between $8-27

billion will be needed to replace the old and retiring infrastructure, should those

costs be borne by consumer, or by government, or a mixture of both?



BUTLER: Unfortunately in many cases these systems have been largely privatised

around the country by a series of privatisation decisions taken by State Liberal

Governments, mainly in the 90s but some of them more recently than that,

particularly in Victoria, South Australia and New South Wales. So, under that

model this is private investment recouped from consumers of the electricity

system. The important point I make is that this was always going to happen. It just

so happens that we built most of our existing electricity infrastructure 30, 40, 50

years ago. Inevitably you have to start building new infrastructure at some point in

time. Now this will be a cheaper and cleaner form of infrastructure, being

renewables, than the alternative, still being promulgated by people like Tony

Abbott, would be the case if you wanted to build new coal-fired generation; very

risky, very expensive and high-polluting.



HOST: Now the report says a failure to invest in energy transmission infrastructure

will lead to higher costs for consumers and less reliable network. Does this support

arguments for a bi-partisan approach to energy, so that the mistakes of the past

aren’t repeated? Do you really need to sit down and compromise with the Coalition

over this?



BUTLER: We’ve been trying to do that now for a few years around investment in

new generation and that’s really been the focus of the last few years, where do you

get your electricity from? In the past, particularly through the post-war period of the

20th century, electricity mainly came from big coal-fired generators in regions like

the La Trobe Valley in Victoria, the Hunter Valley in NSW and connecting that

electricity to the big load centres like Sydney and Melbourne and other major cities

was one challenge. We're going to get energy from quite different places in a

renewables future. The high solar, high wind energy zones are in quite different

parts of Victoria and New South Wales, and currently we don’t necessarily have

the right poles and wires to those areas. This plan very much charts a path for

making sure we build that, they’re like electricity highways if you like, and this is a

challenge being met around the world.



HOST: But you would be prepared to sit down with the Coalition to make sure that

that happens?



BUTLER: Look, this sort of plan, whether it is around generation, so making the

electricity, or transmission, to make sure electricity gets to the right place, should,

as far as possible, be bi-partisan because it involves very substantial investments

over long periods of time. And one of the real problems we’ve had, identified in this

report and other reports that have been released over the last few weeks, is just

the deep political uncertainty attaching to climate and energy policy over the last

decade or more, that’s really caused this energy crisis to emerge in Australia.



HOST: Mark Butler, if we could move on another topic, you lost a battle for the

federal presidency of the ALP to Wayne Swan. You’ve been championing moves

to give rank-and-file members a greater say in senate pre-selections, is that now

effectively dead?



BUTLER: No, it’s not. I don’t think so at all. I think for the last number of national

conferences there have been increasing demands by party members for them to

have more of a say on important decisions in the party, decisions over policy and

decisions over who represents the party in federal and state parliaments and I

expect at the national conference this year, which has been pushed back to

December because of the by-elections, there will be a debate again about

increasing even further the say that members have in those important decisions,

on things like who represents the Labor party in senate elections.



HOST: But Wayne Swan has argued that the party needs to focus on issues of

economic fairness, that’s the big picture as far as he’s concerned, and these

internal party structures are a distraction. That’s his view, is that your view?



BUTLER: Well, no it’s not. I think Wayne is an extraordinary advocate about

economic inequality that has become such a challenge for our society and I think

he’ll make a terrific president, but I think we can talk about both. I think we can talk

about the sorts of things that have driven the Labor mission for more than a

century, which is making Australia a fairer and more equal place, while also

making our party more democratic.



HOST: Is Wayne Swan just protecting the dominance of the factions?



BUTLER: No, I don’t think he is. I think he’s just a tireless advocate for improving

economic equality in this country; that’s what drives him every day that he wakes

up, I think. That’s what drove him to contest the presidency and I think he’s been a

great advocate for those things.



HOST: But you are diametrically opposed on this issue?



BUTLER: Well I just think there is a different emphasis. I believe in economic

equality as much as Wayne does and Wayne believes in having a vibrant, strong

party as much as I do. Sometimes we have different views about how to get there

and I intend to continue to argue the case for more democracy within our party at

the next national conference and beyond.



HOST: As you point out, this next national conference is in December, it was put

back because of the big five by-elections coming up later this month but there are

other clear divides in the party, on issues like asylum seekers, do you support time

limits for the detention of refugees proposed by Ged Kearney?



BUTLER: No, I don’t. I think that we’ve considered the issue of asylum seeker

policy now for almost 2 decades and it’s been a very difficult challenging debate

within our party and I think it’s been a difficult issue more broadly within the

community. But we’ve arrived at those policies through a range of different policy

debates, including at the last national conference in 2015. I think they achieved the

right balance and we should get on with the job of getting into government and

implementing them.



HOST: How do you feel about the damage done about long-term detention?



BUTLER: Well I think we all feel very strongly about it and we’ve all been very

critical of the way in which Tony Abbott and, since he replaced Tony Abbott,

Malcolm Turnbull have made the processing centres at Manus Island and Nauru

effectively centres of indefinite detention. They should have been regional

processing centres where people were placed for a temporary period while

alternative places of re-settlement were actively sought by the Australian

Government, but as soon as Tony Abbott came to power he put the brakes on that.



He turned away from the UN High Commission for Refugees as a potential source

for assistance there and really dragged the chain on trying to make any serious

resettlement arrangements with third countries.



HOST: Final question, your own seat in South Australia has been abolished by

redistribution, which seat are you going to run in?



BUTLER: Well we’re currently having discussions about that in the South

Australian branch to make sure that we put the best foot forward for our team and

for the party and most importantly for South Australia. We’re working very hard on

that I hope we’ll have something to say about that in due course.



HOST: Look forward to hearing it. Mark Butler, shadow spokesperson on climate

change and energy, thank you so much for speaking to RN Drive this evening.



BUTLER: Thanks, Damien



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TOM SKLADZIEN 0409 959 552





Authorised by Noah Carroll, ALP, Canberra.









