



THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS - ASHLEIGH GILLON - SYDNEY

MONDAY, 03 SEPTEMBER,  2018



Subjects: Morrison Government’s leaked infrastructure plan; high speed rail;

energy; CFMEU; Peter Dutton; asylum seekers.



ASHLEIGH GILLON: Let’s now bring in live from Sydney the Shadow

Infrastructure Minister, Anthony Albanese. Appreciate your time Mr Albanese.



ANTHONY ALBANESE: Thanks very much Ashleigh.



GILLON: This latest report on infrastructure announceables is embarrassing for

the Government, no doubt about it. But on the content of these announcements, do

any of these spends constitute pork-barrelling in your view? Do you have an issue

with the content of this leak? Because I understand Labor does broadly support the

funding of the projects outlined in this document.



ALBANESE: Well the first thing to be said, Ashleigh, is that this isn't a government

it's just a rabble. This is chaos. This isn't Mr Turnbull's list. This is a budget list.

This is a leak from a document that would have gone through the Cabinet and

Expenditure Review Committee process in the lead up to May's Budget. There are

a range of projects in the list that had already been supported by Federal Labor.

So once again we've been leading from opposition over projects like the Linkfield

Road Overpass, the Rockhampton Bypass, the Mackay Ring Road - Stage II,

Western Sydney Rail. The concern here is why is it that these decisions were

made in May - funding allocated but nothing's happened. Because they wanted to

just politicise the process rather than, in the case of Western Sydney Rail, get on

with the project. Get on with creating jobs and economic activity. Get on with

creating the certainty so that the investment along that north-south corridor that will

come with the new airport for Sydney, will be able to occur.



GILLON: Isn’t this just politics at this end of the election cycle, though? Mr

Albanese when you were the Infrastructure Minister, are you saying that the Labor

government never held back on announceables to time it with an election coming

up for a campaign?



ALBANESE: Well what we did was we listened to Infrastructure Australia and we

made sure that we had that infrastructure pipeline. So every single Budget where I

was the Infrastructure Minister - we did have new projects for each and every state

and territory. I mean there is nothing in this for Victoria in the form of transport. All

there is, is $150 million for the Geelong City Deal. I've been recently to both

Geelong and Darwin, who were promised City Deals, who have sat down with the

local councils with the State governments. These things have been announced

more than a year ago but not a dollar has flowed. So it'll be interesting to see when

the actual allocations were. Because this Government has also been very good at

making announcements for new projects, but when you look at the detail the

funding comes sometime after. Scott Morrison, Tony Abbott, Malcolm Turnbull - all

of them have left the Parliament. Funding doesn't start for six or seven years. So

we'll wait and see what the detail of this is.



With regard to high speed rail, there is $1.5 billion in there for that. We actually had

the High Speed Rail Authority ready to go in 2013, with funding to start the

preservation of the corridor. It was shut down by Tony Abbott. We've had Private

Members Bills before the Parliament. But under the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison

Government nothing has happened. So what we've had is five years of delay. It will

be interesting to see again when that $1.5 billion is actually going to flow.



GILLON: Well just another thing for Mr Morrison to contemplate today. He's also

saying today that he's open to a Royal Commission on energy companies. Is that

necessary, do you think? Is that something Labor would support?



ALBANESE: Well we'll wait and see what proposal is there. What we need is

some energy policy certainty. And the problem here has been five years of a

Government that doesn't have a policy. They knew what they were against, they

just didn't know what they were for.



GILLON: But looking at Labor’s position, we’ve looked at this closely. Do you think

a Royal Commission would be a good idea into the energy companies? Is it

warranted?



ALBANESE: We think that a policy on energy is a good idea. We think that

certainty to drive that investment in energy is a good idea. We think that driving

down emissions will also drive down costs of energy and that's what the

renewables sector is doing now. Were it not for Labor's renewable energy

target, we'd have higher prices now, but what we have from this Government is a

lack of policy. We saw them adopt a policy in their caucus room, in their party

room, announce it and then walk away from it just three or four days later because

of the pressure on Malcolm Turnbull's leadership. Well that didn't turn out too good

for him. We've had an EIS, a clean energy target from the chief scientists. We've

had the various versions of the NEG and now we have no policy from this

Government and what the Government is trying to do of course is say, look at the

energy companies over there. Well, how about the Government take some

responsibility for its own actions because it's part of the problem. Yes, energy

companies are part of the problem but government inaction is very much a major

part of the reason why we have higher prices today.



GILLON: Keen for your views on an issue that has been thorny for Labor. Is it time,

do you think, for Labor to cut ties with the CFMEU? John Setka using his young

children to send a pretty vile message targeting the building watchdog on social

media. It was a bit beyond the pale, wasn’t it?



ALBANESE: Well of course that is inappropriate. But the fact is that one of the

things that you don't see here this Government talk about is the role of unions in

keeping people safe, so that they return home from work at the end of the day. If

you had no unions on construction sites - I tell you what, you'd have a lot more

families not being able to welcome home their mum or dad at the end of the day.



GILLON: Well Scott Morrison says he is considering de-registering the CFMEU.

The union, as we all know, has had its issues. Do you fear this could be the final

straw? Every time another scandal comes up it does reflect badly on Labor,

doesn’t it? With your links to the union?



ALBANESE: No. Look this is - an individual sent a tweet. Let's put this in some

perspective here.



GILLON: He’s not just an individual he’s the head of the CFMEU, which is a big

donor for the Labor Party.



ALBANESE: No he’s not, actually. Dave Noonan is the head of the CFMEU

construction division. Michael O’Connor is the head of the entire CFMEU. He’s not

Ashleigh, he's the head of the Victorian division of the CFMEU. It's an

inappropriate tweet, but we shouldn't determine policy over what occurs in the

construction industry over a tweet.



GILLON: Labor is keeping up pressure on Peter Dutton over the au pair saga.

Today you've been named as making some 26 appeals to the Minister over visa

issues concerning your constituents. How are the appeals that you made any

different from appeals made by other members of the public?



ALBANESE: Well I'm not a member of the public, Ashleigh, I’m a Member of

Parliament.



GILLON: Sure, but if somebody makes an appeal about a certain …



ALBANESE: No. Let’s be very clear here, Ashleigh. There is an enormous

difference between - a member of the public goes to the Local Member of

Parliament about immigration, about health, about issues with Centrelink and

Members of Parliament make representations on their behalf, and someone who is

a mate making direct appeals to the Minister to overturn decisions of the Minister's

Department - you surely must see the distinction which is there. And the distinction

that is there as well, behind this Minister who has built a career on meanness and

lack of compassion. That's his whole Modus Operandi: ‘Vote for me, I’m mean, I

don't care about people, I'll make tough decisions’. And then these people, who

quite clearly had recommendations by the Department for very good reasons, one

of these people had breached previously the conditions of their visa. Someone

else clearly was found to be someone who was coming in on an inappropriate visa

and intended to do work in contradiction of that visa. Those decisions were

overturned. Not on the basis of representation from a Local Member of Parliament,

but based upon having that direct access to the Minister.



GILLON: You’re alluding there to the Minister’s treatment of refugees and asylum

seekers on Nauru and Manus. The Pacific Islands Forum is focusing on the plight

of refugees and asylum seekers there at the moment. We've seen another report

today looking at the plight of some 109 children still there. It warns they are at

breaking point. They are trying to kill themselves. It makes a very sad, depressing

reading. Would Labor - should Labor, do you believe, keep those children on

Nauru and Manus?



ALBANESE: Well we've said very clearly - the Government says that those

people shouldn't be on Nauru and Manus. That's what the Government says. They

just haven’t done anything …



GILLON: What would Labor do if you got into Government? When it comes

particularly to those children?



ALBANESE: Well if you wait, then you'll get the answer. What the Government

says is that - they just haven't done it. And Labor has already said very clearly, for

example with regard to the offer of New Zealand to take some of the people, that

should be accepted. And that other third countries of settlement should be found.



GILLON: But in the meantime would a Labor Government be quicker to bring

these children to Australia for medical treatment? If a child is threatening suicide, is

that the point, they need to be extracted from that situation?



ALBANESE: I’ve given you the answer Ashleigh. These people need to be settled.

They need to get that certainty. It's very clear that there are real mental health



issues behind keeping people in detention for that period of time. There are offers

which have been made that haven't been accepted by the Government. The

Government needs to explain why it is that they are just unprepared to find

solutions, that are not only in the interests of those refugees - people who have

been found to be refugees. And the interests of Australia as well because we're

paying enormous amounts of money - of taxpayers money here, to keep those

people in Manus and Nauru.



GILLON: Anthony Albanese joining us live there from Sydney. Appreciate your

time this morning, thank you.



ALBANESE: Thanks Ashleigh.



[ENDS]

MONDAY, 03 SEPTEMBER, 2018

MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868





