

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER

ACTING SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL  SERVICES  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 29 MAY 2018

SUBJECTS: Productivity Commission’s ‘Superannuation: Assessing Efficiency  and Competitiveness’ Draft Report; Liberal Party’s ideological war on industry  funds; default funds; Banking Royal Commission; company tax; Labor’s  Australian Investment Guarantee; Treasury refuse to provide year-on-year fiscal  impact of Government’s income tax cuts package; Labor’s bigger, better and  fairer income tax cuts; asylum seekers.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks for coming everybody. Labor  invented superannuation. It’s one of our greatest achievements, giving millions of  Australians the chance of a dignified retired that was denied them before the Labor  Party reformed Australia’s superannuation system. We are always open to good ideas  to build and strengthen superannuation. In office Bill Shorten and I, as respective  Ministers for Financial Services and Superannuation pioneered My Super and the  Future of Financial Advice reforms which made superannuation better value. And the  Government, the Liberal Government, particularly try to undermine and wind back the  FOFA reforms.

Today we see the report from the Productivity Commission. It is a serious report. It  deserves to be treated with seriousness and respect. It is only a draft report. They say  themselves that they need further consultation and will make further recommendations.  We will engage very constructively in that process. The recommendations appear to be

sensible. Many of the recommendations are about putting members first, which must be  at the centre of superannuation. So if the Government chooses to take a constructive  and cooperative approach on the Productivity Commission report they will find engaging  partners in the Labor Party. But I just say this. The Government of the day should be  working with the entire superannuation system on reforms and measures which are  good for superannuation.

This Government, and frankly this Minister in particular, have chosen to engage in an  ideological war against one part of superannuation - industry funds, which they call  union funds, which, of course, is not accurate. These are industry funds, jointly  managed by employers and union representatives. The Productivity Commission report  talks about a performance divide and finds that eight out of the top 10 performing funds  are industry funds. We will welcome and engage with good performing funds, whether  they are retail, industry, or whatever they are. And Kelly O'Dwyer has engaged in a  continual ideologically driven attack against one part of the superannuation industry. I  will work with industry funds, I will work with retail funds, I will work across the board in  superannuation and listen to good ideas when it comes to improving and strengthening  superannuation.

We want to see more Australians retiring into dignity  and less Australians retiring into  poverty. That means as strong superannuation system as is humanly possible. You  don't get that by continual attack on just one part of the superannuation industry. An  attack which should stop today with the Productivity Commission finding a performance  divide and industry funds performing very well. But we welcome this report. I thank the  Productivity Commissioners for their efforts. Again, there is some way to go yet. But we  are happy to engage in sensible reforms which build on those important reforms that Bill  Shorten and I developed when we were in office, My Super and FOFA reforms.

Happy to take questions on those or other issues.

JOURNALIST: When it comes to a default fund, what is wrong with putting workers into  one of the 10 best performing rather than one their union might have chosen?

BOWEN: I just said there are recommendations there which we are open to looking at  the final recommendations and discussing. It is important that there is a process to  enable members best interests to be represented. Whatever that process is. It has been  Fair Work Australia up until now. The Government has frozen the Fair Work process.  That’s unfortunate. They have refused to engage in that Fair Work process. Whatever it  is, it must be transparent, it must be genuinely independent. We will look at the details.

JOURNALIST: But do you see any problems with that?

BOWEN: As I said, David, or we engage in all the recommendations seriously.

JOURNALIST: So you don’t see a problem?

BOWEN: We will wait and see the final report. I am certainly not ruling out supporting  the recommendations of the Productivity Commission, because it is a serious report  which should be taken seriously by both sides.

JOURNALIST: On Labor history there has been argument for decades that super is a  form of deferred wages, basically, and therefore this system belongs with Fair Work  Australia or the industrial umpire, do you think there is an argument for that expert panel  to be part of Fair Work Australia?

BOWEN: I think these details reworked through, David. I think the principle that the  Productivity Commission has put forward is that it needs to be an independent process,  thoroughly independent with experts on it. The interaction of that between the panel and  Fair Work if there is any interaction. There will be submissions going forward to the  Productivity Commission before they make a final report. Let’s let the Productivity  Commission do its work. I'm not coming out here today and saying a holus-bolus  everything in the report should be ticked by the Government immediately, nor am I  saying that there are things that should be ruled out immediately. I am saying these are  big issues for the future of the superannuation industry. People of goodwill and good  faith should sit down, work through them, make their recommendations to the PC,  submissions to the PC, the Government should take them seriously and the  Government should drop its ideological and is politically driven attacks on one part of  the superannuation sector.

JOURNALIST: Under a Labor Government would there be changes of some kind to act  on the issues the Productivity Commission has identified?

BOWEN: It may be that this is done before the election. If it’s not done before an  election the indications I am making to you that we regard the Productivity  Commission's report as a serious one would be reflected in our approach in office.

JOURANLIST: Not before the election, you wouldn’t come up with a new  superannuation policy to deal with some of these recommendations?

BOWEN: Election might be soon or the election might not be soon. We don’t know it is  out of our hands.

JOURNALIST: Your intention is to deal with it in office?

BOWEN: I think I am saying pretty clearly, if the Government chooses to engage it  constructively, we will engage in a constructive manner from Opposition or Government.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that the system that Labor designed has now turned  into a bit of a rip-off?

BOWEN: Well as I said, superannuation is one of our great achievements. One of our  great achievements. Where would we be today without Paul Keating's superannuation

reforms? There would be more pressure on the aged pension, more people living in  poverty. We would not have as much liquidity in the economy. We would have found it  more difficult to get through the global financial crisis, we would not have the pull of  savings to be drawing down. Now of course 26 years later, are there opportunities to  review and improve? Of course. Any system that has been in operation for almost three  decades is going to need to be updated and refreshed. We did it in office with My Super  and the increase in the superannuation guarantee of course. The Government, the  Liberals, have taken a lot of convincing that superannuation is a good idea. Tony Abbott  famously called it all a con job. And they have found opportunities, regularly, to  undermine it. We take a different approach. Where there is a body of work like the  Productivity Commission has recommended, at this stage in a draft form, which is  serious, I think that deserves the attention of all serious people in this building as to how  superannuation be improved. The system was set up almost three decades ago. Of  course it needs to be refreshed and renewed from time to time.

JOURNALIST: This would appear to put pressure on the retail sector in particular,  because they have the largest proportion of underperforming funds. That on top of what  is coming out of the Royal Commission, what is going on in that banking sector that you  might think might end up with some real pressures in a key part of the economy?

BOWEN: I guess in fairness we need to see what comes out of the Royal Commission.  It would have been better if it had been held two years ago when we call for it. We  would now be through this period and it would now be being implemented. The  Government got that big call wrong and did not call the Royal Commission. As I said, I  have a good working relationship with the retail sector of superannuation. There are  areas of disagreement and there’s areas of agreement. I will work with anybody in  superannuation to lift performance. And to get better returns for members. It is members  money. Everybody should agree with that. It is members money and if returns are better  and fees are lower, then the individual is better off, our society is better off, the Budget  is better off. Now if there are funds underperforming, then of course they need to have a  look at their performance. That is a matter for them to explain to their members. What I  am not going to do what Kelly O'Dwyer does and highlight one sector of superannuation  and say I am at war with that sector ‘I don't like retail funds’. That is what she’s in effect  saying to industry funds. We take a more mature approach.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, on a different topic: on 1 July this year the legislated  company tax cuts for firms with turnovers between $25 and $50 million kicks in, we’re  not talking about banks, we’re talking about Uncle Fred’s Widget factory or something  like that. When are they going to know whether they are going to be able to get that tax  cut if there is a change of Government? Before they receive it or…

BOWEN: Phil, you asked me this question every so often which you're perfectly entitled  to do of course. I am going to give you the same answer that I give on other occasions  which is that the Labor Party takes this process very seriously. The Budget figures have  moved substantially in relation to corporate tax revenue. They’ve moved very  substantially. We continue to engage with the Parliamentary Budget Office about that,

as you would expect us to do. The Government has been less than forthcoming. In  talking about the way the company tax has moved they have provided the bare  minimum of information. I need to take a responsible approach, we need to take a  responsible approach. Our view on the big business tax cuts has been clear, has been  consistent. I’ve always said that we understood and respected once something was  legislated that it would change the framework for our consideration. You could not  accuse us of not having announced plenty of policy very early in the term. We will  continue to do so including our approach to what has been (inaudible)

JOURNALIST: These business owners might be a bit anxious. Are you mindful of that?

BOWEN: Of course and to those business owners I say a Labor Government will give  you the Australian Investment Guarantee, which will be a guarantee of cash flow  assistance for investments made in the future under a Labor Government. That will  apply to every single business in Australia, for every investment over $20,000. We want  to see businesses investing in Austria. The Australian Investment Guarantee, which is  our tax relief, which is based on the condition of investment. If you invest, we will help.  The Government says that “We will provide a tax cut and we hope that you invest”.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) in about five weeks when they get that money, should these  businesses invest or hold on to it?

BOWEN: Businesses will make their investment decisions based on a whole range of  circumstances and now the tax rate is just one. Many businesses tell me it is not their  top consideration, far from it on their investment decisions. Our position, as I said, has  been very full when it comes to policy development and release and will continue to be  so.

JOURNALIST: Your approach does means they will get one tax cut up to 50 million,  they will have one tax regime in 2018- 2019, then a different one under Labor, why not  just keep it simple for those businesses and keep the $50 million threshold once it is  passed into law rather than have yet another change to company tax rules under a  Labor Government?

BOWEN: I appreciate your policy submission.

JOURNALIST: I am just asking why not?

BOWEN: We have to consider all the elements, fiscal responsibility, the state of the  Budget, complexity and investment arrangements and the policies we have already  announced, including the investment guarantee, which the Liberals are not offering. I  mean when we go to the next election, the Liberals are not offering the upfront  depreciation that we are. We are offering much more, I hesitate to use the word  generous, because it’s not the right word, but a much fuller depreciation, which is tax  relief based on the condition of investing in Australia, whether you are a small company,

a big company, wherever you are based, if you invest in Australia we will provide that  tax relief. The Liberals aren't offering that.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen the Coalition has indicated that in Senate estimates, that it  has the year by year costings of the income tax plan but it has not released them yet.

BOWEN: Correct.

JOURNALIST: What is your response to that?

BOWEN: Well I mean Senator McAlister asked a very clear question: Do you have the  year by year breakdowns? The Secretary said yes. Will you release them? No. The  Secretary is acting on instructions clearly from the Treasurer, I respect that but what  does the Treasurer have to hide? Why not release the full information about his tax  cuts. He demands, he huffs and puffs and beats his chest, demands we vote for them  but says I’m not going to give you the figures. Well, the Treasurer should be treating the  Parliament and the people with more respect than that.

JOURNALIST: Should you be Treasurer then Mr Bowen would you release year by  year costings over 10 years on all policies?

BOWEN: If I was asked to and if I was asked to in relation to other policies, I would  provide as much information as possible, yes.

JOURNALIST: The decade-long costing shows that the bulk of the cost, about $44  billion comes in with raising the 19 per cent threshold from 37 to 41. That is much more  expensive than the later thresholds when you go into the $200,000 brackets. Does that  put the Government's argument in perspective that really the biggest tax relief is going  to those low and middle income earners?

BOWEN: Well I think what the Secretary has done in estimate is confirmed in relation to  tranche three basically all the benefits go to the top 20 per cent of top income earners.

JOURNALIST: And tranche two?

BOWEN: And tranche two as I’ve said consistently we see tranche two differently. Let’s  step it out just for the sake of completeness. Tranche one; we agree with. We’d vote for  it tomorrow. We have voted for it. In fact, we go further with bigger and better tax cuts in  2019. Tranche two has some complexities to be worked through but certainly we don't  rule out what we would do on tranche two. Tranche three we have deep concerns with,  can’t be clearer than that.

JOURNALIST: So do you accept that the Government is offering tax cuts to low and  middle income earners?

BOWEN: Well they are offering some in 2018 but not enough. The Labor Party will  provide tax cuts for low and middle income earners which are almost twice as big and  not wait until 2022 or 2024, or some other date on the never-never, to be provided on  the first of July 2019, in my first budget.

JOURNALIST: Is 75 per cent really almost twice as big?

BOWEN: You can characterise it how you wish. I think it is pretty clearly almost twice as  big as the Government 's.

JOURNALIST: Do you think there should be a time limit on the detention of asylum  seekers, either here or in Manus Island or Nauru?

BOWEN: I’ll leave Shayne Neumann to obviously comment on Labor policy. I know as  the former Immigration Minister that arbitrary limits are very difficult and our policy  development continues. We continue to say to the Government they should accept New  Zealand's offer, that is the most material concrete thing that the Government should do.  Accept New Zealand's offer and get at least some of these people resettled in New  Zealand as a matter of urgency.

JOURNALIST: I just want to go back to something Phil asked. Have you submitted a  policy to the PBO costing a change in going to a $50 million for company tax?

BOWEN: We talk to the Parliamentary Budget Office as you would expect about a  whole range of policy options across the board. I don’t usually provide a running  commentary and I'm not about to start.

JOURNALIST: Well there’s a chance?

BOWEN: Nice try.

Anything else? All good? Cheers.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT - JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

