

THE HON JASON CLARE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR RESOURCES AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 22 MAY 2018

SUBJECTS: Australia’s relationship with China, Ged Kearney’s maiden speech

KIERAN GILBERT: This is AM Agenda, with me now is the Shadow Trade Minister  Jason Clare. Thanks for your time. You must welcome the fact that the Foreign Minister  has had that meeting with Wang Yi her counterpart - it went for more than an hour.  Apparently constructive and she’s been invited to visit Beijing within the next few weeks.  That’s a good thing to see those relations on a firm footing again.

JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT: That is good  news. That’s what our ministers should be doing. China is our biggest trading partner.  We need to work professionally and constructively with them. It’s true to say we’re not  always going to agree on everything, but where we disagree we should sit down and try  and work those issues out. Part of the problem Kieran we’ve had over the last few  months is that government ministers have said some pretty unwise and some pretty  stupid things. That’s aggravated the Chinese and as a result some of our exporters are  dealing with the consequences of that.

GILBERT: On the Treasury Wines issue Julie Bishop says some people are  disproportionately magnifying any difficulties between Australia and China. Do you  accept her assessment?

CLARE: Well it’s not just Treasury Wines Estate it’s other wine companies as well. It’s  the Australian beef industry. Just over 12 months ago the Australian Government  signed an agreement with the Chinese Government to export chilled beef to China and

we’re still waiting for that to happen. What exporters are telling me is that because of  some of the stupid and silly things that government ministers have said over the last 12  months, they’re being delayed. They’re having to wait to get their products off the dock.

Remember Barnaby Joyce last year said that China was a bigger threat to the world  than ISIS. We had the Prime Minister come out and spit back the words of Mao Zedong  to the Chinese. Now that’s obviously made them pretty angry. What exporters are telling  me is that they’re wearing the consequences of that. I’m not arguing we should be  pandering to the Chinese, all I’m saying is we should act in a professional way and  avoid saying silly and stupid things. So if the Foreign Minister and the Trade Minister  have sat down with their counterparts to work these issues out that’s good. It should  have happened a long time ago.

GILBERT: When you look at where things are at now, as I say Julie Bishop visiting in  the next few weeks as part of those annual talks between Australia and China. The  Prime Minister before the end of the year as well going to Beijing. Is this sort of a bump  in the road? Is this normal when you’re dealing with a country with a very different world  view to ours?

CLARE: Look it happens. It’s happened in the past. I remember in the first year that  John Howard was Prime Minister there was a clash over Taiwan. What John Howard  did was sit down with the Chinese President…

GILBERT: What about when Kevin Rudd called the Chinese you know, I don’t want to  repeat the term but rat so and so.

CLARE: It’s another good example. We’re two different countries with two different sets  of values. We’re a democracy, they’re not. There are always going to be issues where  we disagree and there are going to be trade issues that flare up from time to time. When  that happens it’s the responsibility of government ministers to sit down and work those  issues through. If the Foreign Minister has done that then that’s terrific and I’d urge the  Prime Minister to sort those issues out at his level as soon as possible as well because  there are exporters that are hungry to export their goods to China. It’s a big market with  enormous opportunity. It’s already our biggest trading partner. One in three dollars we  make from exports goes to China…

GILBERT: It’s still growing and growing…

CLARE: … and growing. And has the potential to grow even more. That’s why it’s  important that we take a professional approach to the work that we do with China.

GILBERT: Finally I wanted to ask you about Ged Kearney’s comments. What did you  make of them? You’re a former Minister for Home Affairs and you had coverage of  these issues. Is Bill Shorten under pressure from the Left of the Party to soften the  approach? Certainly from Ged Kearney he is.

CLARE: No he’s not. Well I heard what Ged said and what she said is that she’s  opposed to indefinite detention. My question is who supports indefinite detention? Even  the Liberal Party doesn’t support indefinite detention. They’re seeking to transfer people  form Manus and Nauru to the United States. Our position is pretty clear Kieran we’ve  said that we will turn back the boats, we’ll maintain offshore processing and we will  support the regional transfer of people from Manus and Nauru to third countries. That’s  what we will do. But that won’t stop Peter Dutton or any of the rest of them from trying to  scare the Australian people because that’s all they’ve got left. Their only policy is a $17  billion tax cut for the big banks.

GILBERT: That’s true. What you’re saying is right in terms of her speech but on Twitter  she said: “I’m deeply passionate about this issue. You’ll be hearing more about my push  at the upcoming National Conference to humanise our policies on asylum seekers and  refugees.” Clearly she doesn’t think you’ve got the right balance.

CLARE: Let me just repeat what I said before. We support turning back boats. We  support offshore processing. We support the regional transfer of people to third  countries. That’s what we’ll do in government. But I’m not under any illusions Kieran  that’s not going to stop Peter Dutton and the rest of them from putting on the scary face  and trying to scare the Australian people because frankly that’s all they’ve got that. Only  that and a $17 billion tax cut for the big banks.

GILBERT: That’s your view, that’s Richard Marles’ view, that’s Bill Shorten’s view but  it’s not Ged Kearney’s view. She said it in her own words she wants to humanise your  policy so that means a change in policy at the Conference. He’s going to be under  pressure there. There’s no doubt about that.

CLARE: Kieran we’ve been totally transparent. We’ve put out our draft platform. I’ve  just expressed  what’s in it. You don’t see many other political parties do that.

GILBERT: Mr Clare thank you so much we’ll talk to you soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KORENA FLANAGAN 0418 251 316

Authorised by Noah Carroll ALP Canberra

