





THE HON. MALCOLM TURNBULL MP  PRIME MINISTER

TRANSCRIPT

20 June 2018

Doorstop, Parliament House  Canberra



SUBJECTS: Telstra; Tax relief.

E&OE…

PRIME MINISTER:

The loss of so many jobs is very, very tough, heartbreaking news for the Australians, the Australian  workers at Telstra - eight thousand over the next three years - that have been affected.

I've spoken with the chief executive about this last night. Telstra is putting in place a fund, as you know,  to support the transition of the employees that leave Telstra onto new occupations and new  opportunities.

But it's a reminder of why it's so important to have a strong economy. A strong economy where new  jobs are being created all the time so that while one company reduces its workforce there are other  businesses, new businesses and including in that telco sector which is a very dynamic one, that are  creating new opportunities.

The most important thing is to maintain a strong economy and that is what our policies are doing and  that is what our economic plan is doing. It is what our tax relief is doing at the corporate level and will  continue to do and of course it is why our personal income tax reform is so important.

A strong economy ensures that people who lose a job in one business will be able to find a new job or  start their own business. Andy Penn, as I said, has given me an undertaking that Telstra will be putting  the $50 million he mentioned to work to ensure that transition is supported. But the greater security for  the future of those employees comes from having a strong economy and the greatest threat to that is  Bill Shorten and the Labor Party.

JOURNALIST:

[inaudible] stage three of the tax cuts?



PRIME MINISTER:

I’m sorry I didn’t hear that question.

JOURNALIST:

[inaudible] stage three. Will the House reinstate them?

PRIME MINISTER:

Of course, we are committed to our comprehensive plan to deliver long term personal income tax  reform.

This is a comprehensive plan that is founded on the aspiration and enterprise of Australians.

Under our comprehensive personal income tax plan, when it is fully complete in 2024-25, 94 percent of  Australians will not have to pay more than 32.5 cents in any extra dollar they earn.

Labor says they're mystified by aspiration. We know Australians are inspired by aspiration and they want  to see a government that encourages them to have a go and get ahead.

We've just heard Mr Paloulian, who has talked about his story here as a refugee who has gone into  business and he's talked about the way he has set up his tennis coaching business, how he was inspired  to get ahead, start his business. That is the Australian spirit.

We believe in aspiration. We're not mystified by it like the Labor Party is. We recognise it, we embrace it  and our tax plan will empower it. Thanks very much.

[ENDS]

Press Office of the Hon Malcolm Turnbull MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



