1















THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT

SKY NEWS

INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS KENNY



15 April 2018

Subjects: US air strikes in Syria; South African farmers; Australian citizenship; leadership.

EO&E...........................................................................................................................................



CHRIS KENNY:   Alan Tudge, thanks for joining us. The first ever guest on Kenny on Sunday.

ALAN TUDGE:   Great to be with you, Chris.

CHRIS KENNY:   I want to start with the news of the day and of course we have had these air strikes in Syria,  led by the US, of course with the support of the UK and France.

Australia has given diplomatic support, if you like, to these air strikes, but what is the end  game here?

Air strikes cannot put Syria back together again and there is no country in the West that has  the appetite to actually go in there on the ground either with soldiers or peacekeepers.

ALAN TUDGE:   No, those military strikes as you said led by the United States but supported by the UK and  France and they were very much in response to the use of chemical weapons by Syria.

No country in this day and age should be using chemical weapons and this was in response  to that usage by the Assad regime.

They are a brutal regime and I hope that will be a warning to them to stop using them on  their own people or using them on anyone for that matter because we should be beyond  that in the 21st century.

CHRIS KENNY:   But is there an end game here in terms of what is going to happen in Syria? Is Australia at  risk of being drawn into any sort of settlement or any sort of end game in Syria?

2



ALAN TUDGE:   From what I understand this was a surgical strike done in response to the use of chemical  weapons in this particular instance.

There is no further action contemplated, to my understanding. Australia was not asked to  be involved in the strikes according to the Defence Minister.

We just hope that the Syrian government led by Assad will actually start to behave as an  appropriate international citizen, a good international citizen, rather than being the brutal  regime that he has been to date.

CHRIS KENNY:   Let’s segue back to your portfolio then, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs, and of course  one thing Australia has done to help the situation in the Middle East is that we have taken  as a country a special group, a special intake of 12,000 Syrian refugees.

You are now being lobbied to take a similar special intake of humanitarian migrants, white  South African farmers, is there any chance that that could be taken up?

ALAN TUDGE:   Certainly we are looking at the situation. I have just been over in Perth for the last few days  and I attended a large South African farmers forum attended by probably 600 people.

In that forum I heard some brutal stories of family members who had been murdered or  raped or tortured or all three.

We are a very generous country to those who are in need and we do not distinguish which  country people come from. If they are facing persecution then we will consider their  application.

We are closely looking at the situation in South Africa. I suspect that we may well be able to  take some in but they will be each considered on their merits and according to the criteria  of our humanitarian intake.

CHRIS KENNY:   We have had a lot of South African farmers, indeed many other South Africans migrate to  this country because they are concerned about the situation in South Africa.

They have come under skilled migrant intakes and the like and we are still getting those  applications.

Have there been any South African farmers who have actually applied under our  humanitarian program?

ALAN TUDGE:   There have been many South African- many applications from South Africans to our  humanitarian program. I do not know the details in terms of what occupation they had.

But you are right, we have had in the vicinity of 60,000 South Africans come to Australia in  the last ten years under the Skilled migration program.

We have had a further 10,000 come in under the Family stream. Typically they might be a  spouse of an existing Australian citizen.

3



That is certainly a pathway for many South Africans to come to Australia.

They have made a tremendous contribution here in Australia and we hope that they will  continue to apply for those programs as well as if they are facing persecution to apply for  the humanitarian program.

CHRIS KENNY:

That is the point though here isn't it, I mean I think it's been a good exercise for Australia to  talk about this issue, to try and draw attention to the plight of South Africans farmers.

What really needs to happen is their security and their property rights need to be protected  in South Africa. But in terms of those who do want to escape South Africa, don't most of  them have the skills, the means, the opportunity to actually come here through our normal  migration process?

ALAN TUDGE:

Well that is certainly how most people have come here in the past. When I was at the South  Africans farmers forum in Perth last week, my message to them was to look at those visa  streams as well.

Because that is indeed been the way most South Africans have come here. Our  humanitarian program does not distinguish who you are or what country you are from.

If you are facing persecution we will consider the application. From what I heard at the  forum, I heard many gruelling stories of people who on the face of it appeared to have  suffered from persecution and so that avenue is available.

We have had applications already. They will be considered on their merits and many of  them may well get to settle in Australia through the humanitarian program.

CHRIS KENNY:

Of course just on the politics of this with you in those meetings in Western Australia was the  Liberal MP, the Liberal backbencher, Andrew Hastie, who's been very prominent in this  debate.

The Labor Party have now circulated a fundraising letter accusing him of, through this issue,  linking up with extreme right-wingers and looking to remove the non-discriminatory aspect  of our humanitarian program. This is pretty ugly campaigning isn't it?

ALAN TUDGE:

This was disgraceful. This was on the day of the South African farmers forum which I  attended as the Government representative, it was organised by Andrew Hastie.

The Labor Party did a fundraiser off the back of that. They were so disgusted that we would  listen to the voices of South Africans, that they said, let's campaign and raise funds off the  back of this.

My message to Bill Shorten is that he should apologise for the grubby nature of that and for  trying to exploit the South African tragedies. If any money has been collected in that way  that should be given to a humanitarian cause because it was a disgrace.

4



I don't think I have ever seen such grubby politics frankly, Chris.

When we were there listening to story after story after story of people who had their family  members murdered or tortured or raped or all three and the Labor Party's campaigning  against us because we were listening in and suggesting that we might be generous in  response.

CHRIS KENNY:

Yeah it's very ugly stuff and it's also very hypocritical and paradoxical if you like because as  you and I have just discussed there is a debate to be had here about whether or not South  Africans farmers are there other options.

But to say a special provision for them would be an end to our non-discriminatory  humanitarian program is absolutely inflaming a situation and dishonest.

Because Labor never said there was end to our non-discriminatory program when we  created a special category for 12,000 Syrians.

ALAN TUDGE:

Yeah of course. Of course. It was a disgrace. I can't say any more about that.  It is so  appalling and they should do the right thing and apologise to all of the South Africans  Australians in this country.

And if they raised any money they should give it to a good humanitarian cause.

CHRIS KENNY:

Yeah, well good luck on that one.

ALAN TUDGE:

That would be the appropriate response [indistinct] Labor members. [Indistinct].

CHRIS KENNY:

Fat chance of that happening. Now I want to get back to an issue that you've spoken about  as Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs. I think you've made some great  speeches talking about integration being at the heart of our multicultural success.

A lot of people seem to want to ignore this issue and ignore any problems when it comes to  integration.

But you roll out all the statistics that demonstrate your argument and that is that if people  are migrants to this country, the more that they speak English, the more that they engage in  study and in work, the better they integrate, the more independent they are, the better  everything flows in terms of their financial welfare and the rest of it.

Are you concerned that in particular in this country our large numbers of migrants from  Middle Eastern countries, Muslim countries, over recent decades are not integrating to the  extent that we've seen with previous cohorts of immigrants?

ALAN TUDGE:

5



Chris, I certainly am concerned that in recent times the data shows that we are not  integrating our migrants quite as well as we did in the past.

I do not think it is cause for alarm but we should take count of it and put in place measures  now to prevent the further deterioration.

The key bits of data which I have looked at is the fact that we've got a higher concentration  of the overseas born in particular pockets and often that is overlaid with a complete lack of  English as well.

You have got many suburbs now which have a one in five or one in four people who are not  speaking English and typically from the same country background.

Whereas ideally in the past we've built our multicultural success on the base of people  integrating together and having a common language so that you can communicate with  each other, work together, play sport together and therefore all get along.

I want to ensure that we can maintain our success of a unique multicultural model based on  integration and not go down a more European pathway if you like, where you have got  more separatism rather than integration.

CHRIS KENNY:

I couldn't agree with you more. Strangely you have to be brave to speak about these issues  in this country at the moment.

Of course there are hard elements that want to end particular kinds of immigration. They  want to end Muslim migration and cut migration very heavily elsewhere and you have  others who just don't want to talk about this issue.

But the real story here is if we have a problem with integration we need to do better. Now it  should be up to the individuals primarily, I would suggest Minister, but what can a  government do to try and ensure that our migrants do integrate?

In other words they keep their culture, keep whatever aspects they want of their culture,  their language, their religion, the rest of it, but do become integrated into our Australian  community.

ALAN TUDGE:

That is exactly right. And in the speeches I have made, Chris, I have talked about three  different models of multiculturalism which exists.

One is based on assimilation where you almost have to give up your heritage and leave that  behind and we do not necessarily need or want that.

And one is based on separatism which you sometimes see in European countries whereby  communities live side by side rather than join together.

Ours is based on integration where people merge together, you learn from each other, you  work together, you play together, et cetera.

We are putting a few building blocks in place to guarantee our integrated multicultural  success.

6



One of them is to ensure that people have at least a basic understanding of the English  language as a prerequisite before becoming a citizen.

Because other than passing a multiple choice questionnaire at the moment there is no test  before becoming a citizen.

I think that is absolutely fundamental because, Chris, if you cannot communicate with each  other you cannot integrate.

CHRIS KENNY:

Exactly.

ALAN TUDGE:

I think this is basic common sense. Now, we are not after university level English as the  Labor Party keep saying and keep misleading the Australian public.

We are after conversational level English, so that a person can go to the shops, interact with  the shopkeeper, can chat with their neighbours and get along with other Australians. I think  that is fundamental.

We also want to put a values test in and a test to ensure that people are making an effort to  enter the workforce and join community groups.

Those three things together I think can make a difference.

CHRIS KENNY:

Yeah as you say it is nothing but common sense and I think most Australians have got pretty  straight forward [indistinct].

ALAN TUDGE:

It is nothing but common sense but the Labor Party, Chris, today is out there campaigning,  particularly against our requirement for English language.

I mean it is the glue to our society. It underpins your success of being able to get  employment. And of course our democracy depends upon people being able to engage in  our national language.

To me it's a no brainer. Many of the multicultural bodies support it but for some reason the  Labor Party is campaigning against it.

CHRIS KENNY:

Okay, I can't let you get away this Sunday without asking you about the current leadership  shenanigans within the Liberal Party.

Former Prime Minister Tony Abbott is out there putting quite strongly alternative points of  view on immigration policy and on energy policy in particular, challenging his own Coalition  government's policies at the moment. Should he stay quiet?

ALAN TUDGE:

I am always very reluctant to give advice to a former Prime Minister. I mean…

7



CHRIS KENNY:

He is not reluctant in giving advice to the rest of the party.

ALAN TUDGE:

I have had discussions with Prime Minister Abbott about my views. At the end of the day,  Chris, as you know, disunity is death in politics.

Now, we need to present a united front. We have got a good agenda to sell to the Australian  people, we have got good plans for…

CHRIS KENNY:

Well therefore should Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull give Tony Abbott a job, put him in  Cabinet or the ministry, do something, to put his talents to good use rather than have him  as a destructive outsider I suppose?

ALAN TUDGE:

At the end of the day that is up to the Prime Minister who the makeup of his Cabinet is.

I just think we've got a great story to sell in terms of record jobs growth, wages now starting  to increase. We have got downward pressure through the NEG on electricity prices and  other cost of living issues which we're trying to address, massive infrastructure spend.

And the contrast to the Labor Party which as we get closer to the election the Australian  people start to focus more and more on, is $200 billion of more tax on every day  Australians.

Taxes on your business, a tax on your house, a tax on your investment, a tax in your  retirement savings.

CHRIS KENNY:

Okay, good segue. We'll get on to all of that when Turnbull and Abbott stop bickering I  suppose. I really appreciate you joining us tonight, Alan Tudge.

ALAN TUDGE:

Thanks very much, Chris.



[ENDS]

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs  WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA

