Labor  t.

A  FAIR GOFOR  I TRANSCRIPT AUSTRALIA  THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - TOM CONNELL  FRIDAY, 20 JULY, 2018

Subjects: ACTU, ALP National Conference, asylum seekers, multiculturalism,  AFL.

TOM CONNELL: Joining me for more on this is Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese,  here in the studio. Thanks for your time.

ANTHONY ALBANESE: Morning Tom.

CONNELL: Interesting front page today on union - on this union push, what did you  make of it?

ALBANESE: They've maintained the same position that they had at the last ACTU  Congress and I expect the ALP Conference will maintain the same position that we had  at the last ALP Conference so - much ado about nothing.

CONNELL: They've maintained their position but you haven't?

ALBANESE: Yes we have. We've had our policy in place since 2015.

CONNELL: You had some quite strong comments to make recently though, about you  know conceding that Coalition policies work. And obviously Labor's had this policy for a  while. I guess the next question is though

ALBANESE: Well we set up, Tom, in 2013 Labor acknowledged that our policy had  issues, wasn't working. And we tried to, indeed before then - you might recall, with the  legislation about Malaysia and the agreement that we'd signed there

CONNELL: I do recall that, a very long debate in Parliament

ALBANESE: That the Liberals and the Greens voted against. So the fact is, Labor did

change our policy when we were in government, to try to stop the boats coming. The  Liberals combined with the Greens to oppose that legislation. We then were able to  change policy in 2013. We then, in 2015, had our National Conference.

CONNELL: And at National Conference you were opposed to the boat turnback policy.  What are you going to do at the next National Conference, will you support the policy?

ALBANESE: I'll support the policy that's gone forward. The fact is you can be tough on  people smugglers without being weak on humanity. And what people have seen is that  on Manus and Nauru people have been there now for more than five years. That is far  too long. These people need certainty. We've seen 12 people lose their life on Manus  and Nauru. Now Australia has an obligation to these people, to have a duty of care if  you like. The fact is, that five years is far too long the Government should have settled  these people who've been found to be refugees in third countries and they've been far  too slow at it.

CONNELL: Just on this though, the National Conference - you will no longer vote  against the boat turnback party policy?

ALBANESE: There is no proposition at the moment before National Conference.

CONNELL: Well, It sounds like there will be with the unions

ALBANESE: We'll see what the unions actually do at National Conference. What  happened last time

CONNELL: You previously voted against the boat turnback policy

ALBANESE: That's true

CONNELL: Will you do that this time?

ALBANESE: I did in 2015. I don't expect that there'll be a debate.

CONNELL: What if there is?

ALBANESE: I don't expect that there will be

CONNELL: Okay, but this is something that you voted against last time

ALBANESE: I'm not dealing in hypotheticals. I support the existing policy as determined  at the 2015 Conference. The fact is that the boat arrivals have stopped. The weakness  in the Government's position is that they haven't provided permanent settlement in third  countries, for those people who've been on Manus and Nauru for too long. So what the

policy in 2015 was, to be very clear, was very different from the Government's

approach. It went to a doubling of the intake, it went to finding regional settlement so  that people don't have to get on boats. So that there is some hope of them being settled  from the countries in which they have made their way to, without getting on boats. So  we've provided for an increased funding of the UNHCR, regional processing, an  increase in the intake in terms of asylum seekers, an end to temporary protection visas  - there's a whole framework adopted at the National Conference

CONNELL: I understand that obviously - the Government has since increased its own  intake since the time of the Abbott Government. They're working on a solution with the  US. You say let's go with New Zealand and I understand that

ALBANESE: They are taking a long time.

CONNELL: Sure and that's been a long held criticism and a lot of people would agree  with you. But can I just clarify that position for you. Are you leaving open that you could  vote against boat turn backs again at National Conference?

ALBANESE: No and there's no proposition. There's no proposition for that, and let me  tell you Tom

CONNELL: But there was last time and you voted against it.

ALBANESE: That's right and that's a fact. And I don't expect that it will come up again. I  think there is support for the policy. I think there is support for the existing platform. I  support the existing platform. I can't be more consistent than that, Tom.

CONNELL: But this is what happens, is that you have a big policy debate and this is the  point of the National Conference everyone can really say what they want

ALBANESE: And it gets resolved. I didn't actually speak at the National Conference.  Another thing that's been written about - my speech at National Conference, I didn't  speak

CONNELL: You stuck your hand up...

ALBANESE: ... at all. Of course I did, I stuck my hand up with the Left as I have at  every National Conference in which I have been a delegate. But one of the things that  happened, Tom, is that some of those union delegates who voted one way at the ACTU  Congress before the last National Conference, voted a different way - when they got to  the ALP National Conference. So I don't expect that - this is not a subject of major  debate at the moment in the lead up to the ALP National Conference.

CONNELL: I did want to get on to the Australian values test that's being spoken about  today or was spoken about by Alan Tudge overnight. Is this a fair enough approach to  continue our success story - that Malcolm Turnbull in particular likes to talk about?

ALBANESE: I find it pretty extraordinary that it would appear that Alan Tudge has gone

overseas and talked Australia down, said that there are a whole range of problems with  Australia. Normally what happens when Ministers and Shadow Ministers travel  overseas, is that they talk Australia up. And one of the things we should talk about is the  success of our multiculturalism, is the fact that we can be a bit of a microcosm for the  world, when we see so much conflict, in the world. Here in Australia, we have people  living side by side of different races, religions - different backgrounds and they're living  overwhelmingly in harmony.

CONNELL: Okay, so I understand your position on that and he should have talked  Australia up. We're nearly out of time, but just what about that Australian values test  he's talking about, does it have any merit?

ALBANESE: We have Australian values. We had a week ago

CONNELL: Talking about a test for it.

ALBANESE: What's the test?

CONNELL: I don't know.

ALBANESE: I tell you what - well you're asking me to comment on something that you  don't even know what the question is, with respect.

CONNELL: Well is there an idea that you could put in place - we've got the English  language test - that there's some sort of test where you ask people, I mean it might be,  for example, the things that were mentioned - female genital mutilation, Sharia Law,  women

ALBANESE: We're obviously against that, and we're against

CONNELL: But a test to just make sure people know what we stand for in Australia, as  an example.

ALBANESE: We'll wait and see what is proposed, but of course we support Australian  values. Everyone supports Australian values. Every member of this parliament, no one  would object to that.

But I'll tell you what Australian values were on display a week ago: Aliir Aliir and Majak  Daw marking each other in an Australian Rules contest. Two African recent - relatively  recent arrivals, engaged in our unique Indigenous sport of Australian Rules Football.  You know, the fact is that within a very short period of time people do settle. People do  share those Australian values and we see it on display. Walk into any primary school in  the country and what you'll see is little kids of different background who don't see  colour, who don't see religion, they just see other little kids.

CONNELL: You're speaking to my heart now because it was a cracking game and

unfortunately my mob are the Brisbane Lions, beat Hawthorn. But we'll talk about that  next time maybe, Anthony Albanese.

ALBANESE: Good on you.

[ENDS]

FRIDAY, 20 JULY, 2018  MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659 868

