THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP

MINISTER FOR CITIZENSHIP AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

TRANSCRIPT

SAA ADELAIDE  INTERVIEW WITH LEON BYNER

14 June 2018

Subjects: English language

E&OE...

LEON BYNER:  A mandatory basic English language requirement for all new permanent resident immigrants  is going to be considered, they haven't done it yet, they are considering it, by the current  government.

They have concerns that by 2021 more than a million people in Australia could have little or  no English skills. So let's talk to the Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs Minister, Alan  Tudge.

Alan, thanks for joining us today. Tell us what is behind this?

ALAN TUDGE:  G'day, Leon. In essence, it is because we have had a rapid increase in the number of people  coming into the country, now residing in the country, who don't speak any English and as  you mentioned in a few years' time we will have 1 million people who speak no or little  English.

That's not good for the individuals concerned, who won't have the opportunity to take  advantage of everything that Australia has to offer. But nor is it in the interests of society  and our social cohesion, that's particularly what we are concerned about.

Consequently, Leon, we are looking at instituting a formal English language requirement  before a person gets their permanent residency and before they get their citizenship.

LEON BYNER:  Would you have them fill out a kind of exam?

1

ALAN TUDGE:

In essence, they already do a multiple choice questionnaire before they get their citizenship  and that is a citizenship test as such.

We are looking at here a conversational English language test, which would assess your  ability to speak and to listen because at the end of the day, it is your speaking and listening  skills which are most important to you.

Being able to interact with your neighbours, with your broader community. That is what we  are looking at.

LEON BYNER:  There will be some people who will kind of try and twist this another way, but I put this to  you, we welcome people from all lands.

But if you don't have a working knowledge of your language, first of all it makes it much  harder for you to access services that you might be entitled to.

It makes it harder when you want to apply for a job. It makes it very difficult when you want  to do a whole lot of things. Is that really what is behind all this?

ALAN TUDGE:  That is a little bit of what is behind it. I mean, from the individual migrant's perspective, you  are exactly right.

If you are looking for work, your chances of getting employment as a male without English is  about 40 per cent. If you have got good English it is about 80 per cent.

If you are a refugee coming into the country, you are 85 per cent likely to get a job if you  have got good English, your 15 per cent likely if you have got no English. It is as stark as that,  Leon.

So there is a direct interest that people have to learn at least functional English so that they  can get work and of course that they can access those services and get involved in the  community, to join the local sporting club or local Rotary or whatever you want to join.

But also it is important for social cohesion and what we don't want to do is go down the  path of some European countries where you start to develop parallel communities, if you  like.

Whereas I think the success of Australia's multicultural model has been very much that it  has been founded in integration, where we blend together, where we work together, we  play together regardless of where you have come from.

LEON BYNER:  Given the way this is being talked about today, I would be surprised if this wasn't a

bipartisan thing.

ALAN TUDGE:  I hope it does become bipartisan, but the Labor Party has been campaigning uphill and  down-dale, Leon, against any requirement for migrants to have to learn English.

I find that very disappointing. They are doing so, I think, for base political purposes, to try to  spread fear into some of the migrant communities. Whereas as we have been discussing, I

2

think, it is actually in the interests of the migrant and it is in the interests of society for there

to be a common language.

LEON BYNER:

What do the peak migrant groups say about this? Do they welcome this?

ALAN TUDGE:

Yeah, many of them do. Many of them have been talking for some time about the

importance of English language acquisition.

And some of them have even come out today in support of the speech which I am making at

lunchtime here in Sydney.

So that is important. I have worked very closely with them in terms of developing up the

concept. We will do a little bit more consultation before we put the final proposals to the

parliament.

LEON BYNER:

Alright. Alan, thank you for joining us. That is the Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

Minister, Alan Tudge.

I have got to say that if you are familiar with the local language, you do get an advantage

from that, I would have thought.

I know we live in a time, and I have said this a few times recently, that everything is now

contestable, everything becomes an argument, and I don't know that we are the better for

it. But I hope this is embraced by all sides.

I can, and I am sure you can too, you can see some real logic in this, that if you know the

local language, or have some idea of it, then there are things that you can get from that

community, as well as give back as a member of the community that are rightfully yours.

[ENDS]

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs

WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA

3

