

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 5 DECEMBER 2019

SUBJECTS: Repeal of Medevac Bill; Australia’s reading, maths, and science scores  plummet; Angus Taylor and Prime Ministerial standards.

LISA MILLAR, PRESENTER: To Federal politics, it's Parliament's last sitting day of the  year. And this week has seen the Medevac laws repealed and a major global study reveal  the failures in Australia's education system. For more, the Shadow Minister for Education,  Tanya Plibersek, joins me now from Canberra. Good morning and thank you for joining us.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Good  morning, Lisa.

MILLAR: Look I'll get on to education in a minute because I do want to discuss with you  what we learned over the last day or two in regard to that, but can I start with the repeal of  the Medevac Bill. If the by-product is, and there is still a lot to learn about this of course,  but if the by-product is removing the remaining 400 or so asylum seekers, refugees, and  getting them to New Zealand, is that not a good thing as far as Labor is concerned?

PLIBERSEK: Well we've been arguing for the government to accept New Zealand's  generous offer for years now. I think the initial offer was 250 people a year. If we had  accepted that offer years ago, we would have seen the resettlement of hundreds of people  by now. So, of course, we’re supportive of resettlement in New Zealand but we don't know  that that's the deal. This is a secret deal between Senator Lambie and the government and  we don't know whether the government will uphold its end of the deal. Medevac was not a  complicated piece of legislation, it wasn't a complicated issue. It was simply that people  who were too sick to be treated on Manus Island or Nauru could be brought to Australia for  medical treatment. The Minister retained the ability to reject people on character grounds,  he did that on a number of occasions, so essentially what the Senate agreed to do  yesterday is deny sick people medical treatment in Australia and I would hope that if the  government has promised to accept the New Zealand offer, that happens quickly. But I  don't think there was any need to deny sick people medical treatment to get to this place.  The government should have accepted the offer years ago.

MILLAR: And you're suggesting that there's no guarantee the government would uphold  the deal, but surely they'd have to continue relying on Jacqui Lambie's support, so if they  have made this arrangement, she has delivered her vote based on this, then they'd have to

follow through, that would be crazy not to?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, I think in a normal world that would be true but we've got a pretty  shifty government, pretty shifty Prime Minister so we'll see.

MILLAR: On the education front yesterday, our program and other media were  overwhelmed with people messaging in, upset about these numbers, upset about what’s  going on with education. Watching Question Time yesterday, you were firing back at the  government, blaming them. Isn't that part of the problem, that people are sick of the blame  game?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I agree. But you've got a government that has cut funding to schools  and turned its back on reform. It has to take some responsibility and we saw the Federal  Education Minister yesterday trying to blame the states. I was simply saying that this is a  national problem. The results have gone backwards in every state and territory, in every  school system and it needs some national leadership. I don't think that's a controversial  thing to say. We've got from being one of the best countries in the world, when these tests  started, for reading, maths and science, around the top of the pack, to barely in the middle.  And our analysis shows that if this trend continues, by 2030 we'll be around the bottom of  the pack. So for example, on the current trend we'll go from being the fifth best country in  the OECD for maths, so amongst the developed world we were the fifth best, we'll go to  being, on this current trajectory, the fifth worst country in the OECD for maths.

MILLAR: But what would you do right now? What would you do?

PLIBERSEK: Oh well, there's so much that we need to do differently. We need to reform  our schools to make sure that our kids are getting the basics under their belts. In those  early years in particular, we need to supercharge investment. One of the reasons we did  needs-based funding is so that schools themselves could decides how to allocate  resources and I saw many primary schools, in those early years of needs-based funding,  do things like hire literacy specialists so their kindy kids, so that kindy, Year 1, Year 2 -  when children are getting the building blocks of their education we can invest in those early  years. We need to know-

MILLAR: But it is a trend that has been going on…

PLIBERSEK: Sorry Lisa, can I give you a couple-

MILLAR: Yeah.

PLIBERSEK: That's not the only answer, there is a few things we need to do. We need to  lift the standards to get into teaching degrees, we've seen a horrific decline in the  standards and the marks you need to get into teaching degrees. High-performing systems  around the world take their teachers from the top 30 per cent of academic achievers.  Teaching used to be a prestigious, sought-after job in Australia. We need to make sure  again that people are competing to get into teaching degrees the way that they compete to  get into medicine. And, of course, we need to address funding. There will be parents this  weekend who are on the tongs at the Bunnings barbeque raising money for their school.  This government cannot continue to pretend that funding doesn't matter. Of course it does.

MILLAR: I just want to touch briefly on the Angus Taylor issue. It would appear - there’s  only one more sitting day - that Angus Taylor likely to survive as much as the Opposition



has tried to bring him down over this. We've learnt that reports of the identification of a staff  member in his office who obtained the documents. You haven't really made any impact  here on this - he’s going to get through it OK, isn't he?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think this is a question for the Prime Minister. If the Prime Minister  had any courage he would enforce his ministerial standards and sack Angus Taylor.  Honestly, what we are being asked is to believe is that there is a document on the City of  Sydney website, it's there correctly on one date. It's there correctly on another date.  Magically on a third date, a document with completely different numbers is downloaded  only by the Minister and then the document goes back to having the correct numbers on  the next date and the next date.

MILLAR: So should the staff member stay in the office?

PLIBERSEK: Ministers are responsible for their staff. That's our Westminster tradition. If  the staff member has done something wrong, then the Minister should come into the  Parliament and say this is what has happened, this is the truth, I’m sorry, I was misled, if  he was misled. But he must account for the fact that he has used a document that is plainly  a forgery and the Prime Minister needs to make him account for that. I mean, this comes  on top of a Minister who has mis-used his Ministerial powers to benefit a company related  to his family, in the Jam Lands saga. He has not properly accounted for shareholdings in a  trust. I don't know what it takes to get sacked in Scott Morrison's government but surely  this misleading and using his position for personal benefit really does tip over the edge into  inappropriate Ministerial behaviour. The Prime Minister has a responsibility to enforce -  they're the Prime Ministerial standards - they're his standards and if he is not prepared to  do that he should explain why.

MILLAR: Tanya Plibersek, I bet there will be a few people relieved that the end of the year  is sight. Thanks for joining us.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you Lisa.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350









