

THE HON JOEL FITZGIBBON MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SUNRISE   MONDAY, 18 NOVEMBER 2019

SUBJECTS: Israel Folau; asylum seeker transferred to Australia

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE, HOST: Rugby Union star, Israel Folau, has linked the bushfires  and drought devastating Australia to the legislation of abortion and same-sex marriage. Folau’s  comments have come during a sermon to a Sydney church.

*Audio of Israel Folau*

DAVID KOCH, HOST: The footballer warned there is worse to come if the laws are not  reversed. For more, we are joined by Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Labor MP, Joel  Fitzgibbon - morning gents. Barnaby, is that a stretch to link the fires and drought to same-sex  marriage and abortion laws?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Yeah, of course it is. But what happens  now, Kochie, is he throws rocks at us so he feels good, we throw rocks back at him so we feel,  you throw rocks at both of us so you feel good, and not one of those actions is making a  sandwich for a person fighting the fires, or doing back burning. Not one of those actions is  actually in a firetruck trying to stop these fires. Israel can concentrate on what he wants to say,  and I don’t really care, and we will concentrate on the fire.

ARMYTAGE: Yeah, look it does suck up the media cycle doesn’t it? Joel, I’m all for freedom of  speech, but he is a high profile sports star, we listen to our sports stars and he knows these  sorts of comments are going to go viral and consume days and days of media; should he stay  silent?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: You’ve just made a good point Sam. It  bewilders me - Israel is a good footballer, no one can question or challenge that, but it  bewilders me why the media pays so much attention to what he has to say, and if they didn’t it  wouldn’t be sucking up so much of the media. But he’s had a few good coaches over course of  the last week. I find it somewhat amusing what Barnaby had to say. Barnaby was out there last  week talking about the voting habits of those who tragically lost their lives in the bushfires. We  got Senator Jordan Steele-John screaming arsonist at people. The Deputy Prime Minister, no  less, screaming at people calling them lunatics - the list goes on. And so, Israel is in the  sense…

TRANSCRIPT I 1G1~Ri[f:

JOYCE: I’d like to have a reply to that.

FITZGIBBON: … in the same boat as the rest of them, and they are all attention seekers and  that’s the truth of it and we shouldn’t *inaudible*.

JOYCE: Joel, I just think I should get a right of reply…

FITZGIBBON: Hang on Barnaby, I didn’t interrupt you. No I didn’t interrupt you…

JOYCE: It’s just that you talk forever.

FITZGIBBON: You are as Israel; you’ve done the same thing as has the Deputy Prime  Minister.

JOYCE: Oh for god’s sake, that is ridiculous. First of all, that is ridiculous and I will interrupt  you on that one. First and foremost, what I was doing, the statements were clumsy, I  apologised for it, it was to precisely try and take away from the invective group of people. If you  look at the transcript, and I presume you haven’t, I said quite clearly you cannot blame one  group of people or another group of people. It is about fires and it’s about trying to make sure  that we basically work together as a group. Prior to that, there was an assertion it’s all about  the people who vote for the Greens and I said that was ridiculous. A person’s political voting  pattern does not make a bushfire. What we have to do is have a conversation in the future  about policies that could better help us fight these fires. But what you’ve done Joel - but what  you’ve done Joel just then is precisely what you said you weren’t going to do is to create the  invective and throw fuel on the fire.

FITZGIBBON: Nice try Barnaby, but you chased a headline. You got the wrong headline, you  apologised, yes, but the damage was done and people like Israel are now following your  example.

JOYCE: You just said that I’m that same as Israel Folau. That is incredible, Joel. Sometimes  you are just so …

FITZGIBBON: You don’t play football anywhere near as well - I’ve seen you.

ARMYTAGE: I want to get your thoughts on this gentlemen; let’s change topic because this  interesting this one. An asylum seeker who botched a DIY penis enlargement by injective  himself with palm oil has been transferred to Australia under controversial Medevac laws for  reconstructive surgery. Barnaby, what do you make of this scenario?

JOYCE: Well it sounds like this individual had a pretty checkered past. He had also been up  for assault against one of the guards and so this person seems to be someone who is creating  real problems. For whatever reason he is now in Australia. I suppose it does bring into focus  the Medevac laws and why would we be bringing someone who is basically self-harmed,  created an assault, and is now in Australia - why is that?

KOCH: And, Joel, he threw boiling water on a security guard and this surgery is going to cost  taxpayers $10,000.

FITZGIBBON: Yeah I think it is a bit early on a Monday morning to be talking about do-it-yourself penis enlargement, but Barnaby is just wrong there. The Medevac laws have made no  change to this situation. Peter Dutton would have brought this person back to Australia pre-



Medevac laws because despite the ridiculous nature of the events that led to it, he would have  already always been brought to Australia if he self-harmed and faced such serious injuries. So,  the Medevac laws have nothing to do with it. The problem here, of course, is that we still have  people stuck on Manus after all of these years in terrible conditions, and we need to be  working together to fix this stupid problem and it is stupid. And that’s all about third party - third  country processing and settlement, something we should have been doing many years ago but  Barnaby and his people voted against the Malaysia solution. It’s about time we all came back  to the table fix this problem and get these people off this island.

BARNABY: Well, we had to fix up the problem that had *inaudible* 50,000 people came into  Australia under your watch and the borders were completely under control under the Labor  Party. Nobody has forgotten that. I don’t think you guys have reconciled how you are going to  deal with that into the future even to this day.

KOCH: Alright, ok gents, thank you for that. Have a good week we will catch you next Monday.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641





