

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

ABC INSIDERS

SUNDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2019



Subjects: Ensuring Integrity Bill, Angus Taylor, China relationship, CPRS

and climate change



FRAN KELLY, HOST: Penny Wong, welcome to Insiders.



PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE

SENATE: Good to be with you Fran.



KELLY: Is that what Labor is doing in that vote, voting to protect union thugs?



WONG: I think that the Government should have a think about this point - it's

pretty hard to get a bill called Ensuring Integrity through the Parliament, when

you don't demonstrate any. And the facts are these: this is a bill which was all

about cleaning out the trade union movement, taking out the trade union

movement, so that the Government had a clear run for WorkChoices 2.



And the political agenda was exposed by the Government's double standards.

They were demanding standards of working people and their representatives

that they weren't prepared to impose upon the Westpac management, and that

they weren't prepared to live up to themselves, as demonstrated by Angus

Taylor and the Prime Minister's lack of transparency on this issue.



KELLY: Sure, but on the unions, isn't there some logic for Labor. John Setka,

remains the head of one of the most powerful arms of the union movement.

Isn't it time there were laws in place to allow the courts to do what Labor did,

which is to get rid of him?



WONG: And Labor did succeed in ensuring John Setka is no longer a member

of the party.



KELLY: But he’s still a very powerful unionist in this country.



WONG: There are laws to deal with misbehaviour of unions.



KELLY: And yet, he's still there.



WONG: And laws to deal with people who behave in ways, and for example, if

there is criminal behaviour, or way that is are not appropriate for leadership of

trade unions. But let's be clear, the Government wants to make it about John

Setka. They don't want to make it about nurses and midwives. They don't want

to make it about police officers. They don't want to make it about teachers.

They don't want to make it about firefighters. But these are the people who are

represented by trade unions, and this was always legislation that was about

ensuring that there was a pathway to further attacks on wages and conditions.



And can I just remind you of one thing that occurred in the Senate this week,

which I thought was very significant. Twice, Marise Payne was asked, as the

Minister representing Christian Porter, whether she would rule out any watering

down of unfair dismissal laws, any watering down of industrial laws, including

the Better Off Overall Test, and she refused to do so. I think that that makes it

very clear what the agenda was in this legislation. It should have been

defeated, and I think that it is a good thing for the country that it was.



KELLY: And when did you know it was? A lot of people were saying, you

should have seen Penny Wong wandering around the chamber with a big smile

on her face through all of this. When did you know that Pauline Hanson was

going to dud the Government?



WONG: I was pretty stressed. I think that it would be odd if I was smiling. I had

listened, unlike, apparently, Christian Porter, to what Pauline Hanson and One

Nation had said publicly. I listened to their second reading speeches, and they

had made clear that they had not yet decided to vote for the legislation. So I

thought that there was a chance that they would not, and I'm pleased that they

didn't, because I think that it is much better for the country.



KELLY: Meanwhile, on another issue, police are investigating the origins of the

documents used by Energy Minister Angus Taylor to make criticism of Sydney

City Mayor Clover Moore. The Government says Angus Taylor has done

nothing wrong. If the police investigation finds no criminality, will Labor accept

that Angus Taylor is in the clear?



WONG: What is the standard that we expect of Cabinet ministers these days? I

mean, this is a bloke who's used doctored documents, false information - and

he’s admitted that they were false - on ministerial correspondence, to attack

the Lord Mayor of Sydney. He's doing that instead of doing his job, which is

actually tackling climate change and reducing energy prices - neither of which

he's done. And then he's misled the Parliament about it. If that's the standard

that this Prime Minister, that Mr Morrison thinks is acceptable, it's unsurprising

that people don't regard his Government as having any integrity.



KELLY: If there's a police investigation and it finds no criminality, once that’s

wound up, is that the end of it?



WONG: If, if, if, let's allow the criminal investigation to proceed. But I make a

broader point which is about the standards of behaviour expected of a Cabinet

Minister. I find it inconceivable, and I think that most of the public do too, that a

bloke who is supposed to be making sure that their energy prices are down, is

spending his time using false information to attack a political opponent using his

ministerial office to do that. Is that really what we want Cabinet Ministers to be

doing?



KELLY: Labor was critical this week because the Prime Minister picked up the

phone to the New South Wales Police Commissioner to find out what this

investigation was about. He hadn't heard of it. The Commissioner, himself, says

that the PM didn't ask anything inappropriate. Is Labor just beating this up?



WONG: Well, justice not only has to be done, it has to be seen to be done. And

that phone call has been criticised, not just by Labor, but by the former

Independent Commissioner against Corruption. It's been criticised by counsel

assisting. It's been criticised by Malcolm Turnbull. And I thought the question is

why did he do that? If there was no information other than what was on the

public record, then what is the purpose of him ringing the Police

Commissioner? And this is access that members of the public don't get. You

don't get to call the Police Commissioner about an investigation that might

affect you. And I think that the Prime Minister's judgement, and frankly integrity,

were put into question by not only that he did that, but that he then misled the

Parliament four times subsequently, as he fought, aggressively and

defensively, to explain his behaviour.



KELLY: You were also Shadow Foreign Minister, Foreign Affairs Minister. I

want to ask you about China and there's a lot of issues around the whole China

relationship. But in the latest Quarterly Essay, Peter Hartcher records a

meeting you had two years ago with Bill Shorten and Richard Marles and a

senior member of the Chinese Politburo, Meng Jianzhu, where he asked Labor

to drop its opposition to an extradition treaty with China, and threatened

according to this report to mobilise 1.2 million Chinese Australians to vote

against Labor if you didn’t do that. Can you confirm that threat was made?



WONG: Look Fran, you wouldn’t - you would expect that someone in my

position would say to you it's not appropriate for me to discuss the details of

what occurs in conversations with foreign governments.



KELLY: Well someone at that meeting has told Peter Hartcher.



WONG: Well, I have a job, but I will say this, and this is important. Labor was

under a lot of pressure to ratify that China extradition treaty, and it was

pressure from a range of places. It was pressure that included not only the

Prime Minister, Mr Turnbull, and Julie Bishop, but the Coalition Cabinet,

including Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison, were demanding that we ratify that

treaty. I refused and Labor refused. And my view after that meeting was that we

should continue to do so, and we did. But for Labor, we would have an

extradition treaty with China. I would also say this: that meeting and

subsequent events have confirmed my view that it's very important that we are

resilient, as a democracy, in the face of the potential for foreign interference.

That resilience goes to how political parties operate. That resilience goes to the

banning of foreign donations, which Labor pressed the Government to do. The

Liberals dragged their feet on that until just before the last election, and it also

goes, frankly, to the way in which this Government is handling the allegations in

relation to the member of Chisholm.



KELLY: In terms of other allegations, last week, we learnt that a Chinese man,

Wang Liqiang, had sought asylum in Australia, telling ASIO he was a Chinese

spy, revealing details of political interference by China in Hong Kong, Taiwan

and in Australia. It now seems, apparently ASIO doesn't regard this man as the

key operative that he might have painted himself as. Should he be offered

asylum?



WONG: I’m not going to, obviously, the Labor Party, as Senator Keneally

indicated yesterday, we have been briefed in relation to these matters, as is

appropriate. As the Director-General of ASIO has indicated publicly, these

matters will be investigated as they should be. I am concerned that we appear

to have national security advice being provided to particular journalists. I don't

think that that is the appropriate way in which these matters should be dealt

with.



KELLY: If this is a tactic to gain asylum, it poses a challenge for Australia,

doesn't it? Because there's the threat of copycat asylum seekers. There must

be thousands of people around the world who might have some level of

connection with Chinese operations who could claim?



WONG: Which is why these matters should be soberly and carefully assessed,

and considered by intelligence agencies and governments should make

decisions. But this goes to a broader point. We have a challenging relationship

at this point with China. We have a continuing need to engage. They're a very

important trading partner. But we will have continuing areas of divergence,

because we're a democracy and we will always ensure that we safeguard our

sovereignty and our democratic values. We need to assert our interests and

reflect our values. In doing so, I think it's really important that we equip

parliamentarians to better understand the relationship and to safeguard against

foreign interference. We also need to ensure that the Government leads the

discussion, and it is regrettable that the Government at the moment is not

leading the discussion. And too much of the discussion, with all due respect to

my friends in the media, has been led by journalists or by backbenchers like

Andrew Hastie.



KELLY: Just on that case, Andrew Hastie is championing this man's cause

publicly. Does it concern you that he's so public in his intervention to this? I

note that Peter Jennings from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute has

welcomed Andrew Hastie talking quote ‘openly and honestly.’



WONG: Mr Jennings is very close to the Coalition Government, so that's

unsurprising. But it's up to Andrew Hastie how he behaves. The point that I've

made before and that I’ve made before on this show, is that the reason that we

sought that Parliament be better briefed about the relationship is that

judgements have to be made by politicians, by Members of Parliament and

Senators about what is-



KELLY: Just to interrupt you, if more Parliamentarians are better briefed, isn't it

more of a chance that more parliamentarians are going to start talking about

these things in the media?



WONG: Or maybe they can make sensible judgements about how things

should be handled and what should be handled publicly and what should be

handled in different ways. And maybe people can make sensible judgements

about whether getting a headline or a story is actually in the national interest.

Whether the national interest is better served by handling things in a different



way.



KELLY: Senator Wong, could I just ask you finally, tomorrow, it's ten years

since the Rudd Government lost the code on the CPRS by one vote. I’m sure

you’ll never forget that, you were the Climate Change Minister at the time.

Australia has failed to come up with an enduring emissions reduction policy

since then. Do you think back and think was there more that you could have

done, should have done, to get that vote passed?



WONG: That vote and what's occurred subsequently, has reinforced my view

that we have to find common ground if we are going to act on climate change. If

we are going to ensure that we are going to create clean energy jobs, reduce

emissions and create more renewable energy. The thing that is quite clear is

that neither the Coalition nor the Greens political party have learnt the lessons

of the last decade. The Coalition is still in denial, and division. And the Greens

political party have to decide - are they actually prepared to look for change, to

look for common ground, to act for change? Or are they really going to make it

their political objective to take votes off the Labor Party and have a political fight

with the Labor Party? Because, I think what we've seen in the recent election,

even in the bushfires - they haven't learned that we have to persuade people.

They haven't learned that we have to find common ground. They just want to

shout at people. And I don't think that that is going to lead to action on climate

change for the whole country.



KELLY: Senator Wong, thank you very much for speaking to us on Insiders.



MEDIA CONTACT: ALICE CRAWFORD 0419 555 635



Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











