

PETER KHALIL  MEMBER FOR WILLS

REBALANCING MASS DISPLACEMENT

Next week, the first United Nations Global Refugee Forum will take place,  where member states will try to co-ordinate a response to the largest global  refugee crisis since World War II. It is the first step towards a necessary  international processing and resettlement agreement.

Marise Payne, Australia’s foreign minister, has not committed to attending. Nor  has the Morrison government made any public statement about what role  Australia might play in the UN talks. This is unsurprising, given Australia’s  approach to refugee policy: singularly focused on the domestic politics,  consistently sidestepping broader engagement with the global challenge. We  are a successful multicultural migrant nation with a history of welcoming  refugees. Yet our potential to contribute to a global solution remains unrealised.

The UN refugee forum represents an opportunity for Australia to change this  and lead the development and negotiation of a co-ordinated global agreement,  one that could process and resettle hundreds of thousands more refugees each  year. This new approach should be based on the principle of each country  doing its fair share to respond to the crisis - replacing the policy disarray that  defines the response to refugees worldwide and, in Australia, to the detriment  of our security and prosperity.

We bear witness to population movements across the world at unprecedented  levels and think we can avoid the cost or the impact. But no matter how  insulated we believe we are from these forces, by virtue of our geography and  our current fortress mentality, the waves of future mass migrations could well  breach the gates.

The sheer scale of the global humanitarian crisis can no longer be denied.  There are more than 70 million displaced people globally. Of these, 41.3 million  are internally displaced, 3.5 million are seeking asylum and 25.9 million are  refugees. Of the refugees, 1.4 million face imminent threat and are considered  in need of urgent resettlement.

When a voter in my electorate asks about refugees, their focus is usually on  domestic policy. I answer them, and then ask a question of my own: How many  of the world’s 25.9 million refugees were resettled last year?

They will usually guess two million, maybe three million people. When I tell  them it was just 92,400 people, they begin to comprehend the scale of the  challenge. The “queue” is not moving anywhere fast, or getting any smaller.

Desperate asylum seekers, with their lives at risk, seek refugee status by using  people smugglers to take them to safety. As such they have been described as  “queue jumpers” and perceived to be circumventing due process. But with  UNHCR facilities overwhelmed and minuscule global resettlement of refugees  annually, there is very little in the way of a queue in the first place.

The immensity of the challenge and the ineffectiveness of responses, both in  Australia and abroad, are clear to anyone who cares to examine the numbers.  In 2018, Canada accepted 28,076 refugees, the world’s highest contribution;  followed by the United States, 22,900; and Australia, 12,706. Meanwhile, some  developed nations such as Portugal accepted as few as 35 refugees for  permanent resettlement.

As the “queue” barely moves, it is developing nations - including Sudan,  Lebanon, Bangladesh, Turkey, Pakistan and Uganda - their resources already  stretched, that host 84 per cent of the world’s refugees and displaced people.

The UN’s forum represents a consensus that nations cannot continue to  respond reactively or in isolation. The sheer scale demands nations work  together. Yet Australia has been unable or unwilling to do this.

It has been almost two decades since Tampa and the Howard government’s  response, which laid down the blueprint for zones of cruel, indefinite offshore  detention that persist to this day. Some argue indefinite offshore detention has  made us safer and insulated Australia from the broader global crisis. However,  it only suspends our engagement with a growing global challenge.

This callous approach does not serve our national interests in addressing the  global crisis and it is unsustainable in the long term, because the “deterrent  effect” of indefinite offshore detention is not the primary reason people- smuggling operations have reduced. The trade has reduced largely because of  covert and overt anti-people-smuggling operations, including targeting financial  transactions and turnbacks.

Australian political leaders have been unable to articulate alternatives. Instead  of collaborating with other countries towards a best-practice model, we have

shifted responsibility, not really even to other nations but somewhere out there,  some nebulous elsewhere. Anywhere but here.

Our approach has failed globally and domestically. The strength and security of  our country has been diminished in a fundamental way. We have taken some of  the most important building blocks of our modern nation - immigration, refugee  policy and multiculturalism -and securitised and politicised them. The toxic  debate has corroded the broadly held view that immigration, including of  refugees, has benefited Australia’s social, economic and cultural life in  countless ways.

We are losing the bipartisan commitment to the fundamental story of migration  to Australia; one of nation building, with a pathway to citizenship at its heart.

Ultimately, this corrosive debate around refugees and migrants weakens our  democracy and social cohesion. Australia has become more polarised, less  stable, less secure, because we cannot move past the toxicity and enact viable,  humane solutions or successfully capitalise on the advantages that the cultural  diversity of our migrant nation affords us.

The conservative side of politics post-Tampa has created a framework that  positions asylum seekers and refugees as external threats to be feared. The  refugee is viewed as potential terrorist, welfare cheat, taker of our jobs, criminal  and eroder of Australian values.

Labor has operated uncomfortably both within and outside this framework,  attempting to ameliorate the worst aspects, trying unsuccessfully to establish  the Malaysia solution in government and more recently from opposition  chipping away at its periphery, by passing the medevac bill into law.  Nonetheless it endures, and we have not been able to reach beyond. But it is  time we start, because the global refugee crisis is likely to worsen.

Repressive and failed states, sectarianism, violent conflict, the impacts of  climate change and natural disasters will continue to drive new conflict over  depleted resources and population displacement. Our current blinkered  solutions do not address these impacts. The alternative must be to work  towards a new international agreement.

This is why I propose that Australia lead the development and negotiations for  an international refugee processing and resettlement agreement - the “Fair  Share Agreement” - with multiple countries agreeing to lift their ambitions and  resettle hundreds of thousands more refugees each year around the world.

A “Fair Share Agreement” would draw on the distinctly Australian value of

egalitarianism. Each country’s increased commitment to settling refugees would  be calculated fairly based on negotiated and agreed-upon metrics and set data  points. These could include population, GDP per capita, geography, net  migration numbers, strength of resettlement services and relative historical  refugee intake. Developed countries that opt out of increasing their intake  would, under the agreement, make commensurate financial contributions to  resettlement services.

Coupled with the retention of anti-people-smuggling operations, a “Fair Share  Agreement” with multiple countries taking more refugees each year would  finally get the “queue” moving. This would not only be a more humane  alternative to indefinite detention, but over time significantly reduce the demand  for people smuggling.

Sceptics will question whether there is any hope of success. However, we only  have to look back a generation to see how multilateral agreements worked.  Between 1975 and 1995, Australia accepted about 130,000 refugees from  Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. Under multilateral agreements, 69,877 refugees  were resettled in Australia between 1975 and 1982 - of these, only about 2000  people arrived by boat. Most flew to Australia once their claims were processed  through regional agreements in Asia.

History shows us viable alternatives to our current policies. An answer to  Australia’s domestic challenges on refugee policy lies in engaging and co- ordinating with the international community. If Australia wants other countries to  commit to shared responsibilities, we must also lead.

While the present government won’t, the Labor Party must draw on its  internationalist DNA to provide alternatives and leadership. Labor has a proud  lineage of international vision and achievement - then prime minister John  Curtin’s wartime leadership, Doc Evatt’s leading role in founding the UN, and  former foreign minister Gareth Evans’ many contributions to international  relations.

Last month, Anthony Albanese affirmed the centrality of multilateralism and  regional engagement as principles underpinning Labor foreign policy and  national security. Australia is a better nation, a safer nation, when we embrace  global leadership roles.

My hope is that with political courage tethered to an internationalist vision, we  embrace the task of leading a global effort that enhances our national security,  moves us beyond debilitating domestic debates and changes millions of lives  for the better.





This opinion piece was first published in The Saturday Paper on Saturday  14 December 2019

MEDIA CONTACT: LAURA ADAMS 0481 393 341









