

THE HON JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

WEDNESDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2019



SUBJECTS: National account figures; Medevac repeal, Murray Darling Basin Plan



CHRIS KENNY, HOST: Let’s catch up with the Labor Party’s agriculture spokesperson,

Joel Fitzgibbon. Joel Fitzgibbon thanks for waiting there while we listened in on Josh

Frydenberg. First up, can I get your thoughts on those National Account figures -

economic growth at 1.7 per cent? Obviously everybody would like to see it stronger than

that.



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Well, Chris I enjoyed your reflection on

Josh’s performance there. I was thinking something very, very similar - he was trying to

sound like rain man. But, you made the important point that the numbers are disappointing,

and you recall that when we received the June quarter figures, Scott Morrison said - which

were fairly poor and disappointing themselves - Scott Morrison said oh well you’d expect

the September quarter figures to be better. Well, they haven’t been and that is very, very

disappointing. And I noticed Josh likes to invoke the drought when things are going bad for

the Government, and earlier in Question Time this week, the Prime Minister was quick to

claim that the latest figures, the latest accounting showed that our carbon emissions had

fallen just a tincy wincy bit, but what he didn’t tell the parliament is that occurred because

so many cattle have been turned off, and of course a big reduction in methane. So, they

invoke the drought when it suits them, but they don’t invoke the drought when it doesn’t

suit there narrative.



KENNY: Sure, but there can be no argument that the drought is hurting the economy,

right? It’s really dampening our output.



FITZGIBBON: There is no argument but it’s not an excuse not to have a stronger economy

and it’s not an excuse not to do more in the economy, whether by infrastructure - they

claim to be doing a lot. Well, I think more could be done. We talked a lot about what could

be done with tax cuts and they are obsessed with this budget surplus which many, many

esteemed economists, and people like Paul Keating, have said getting the economy

moving again is more important at this stage than a budget surplus.



KENNY: Paul Keating also said we’re going to have a recession we had to have. Surely

we don’t need another one of those?



FITZGIBBON: Chris, can I just say this too? I’m not offended that you said I was the

spokesperson for Agriculture, true…



KENNY: Sorry, you are resources as well.



FITZGIBBON: I’m also spokesperson for resources. I want to acknowledge the role the

resources sector is playing in helping to ensure that these figures are not worse.



KENNY: Indeed, demand is still strong in the resources sector and very important for us.

Let’s just go to this Medevac repeal which is of course is the big development in Canberra

today. A big win for the Coalition in winning back support or control of that area. You’ll be

very keen though, of course, to find out what happened with Jacqui Lambie. She’s made

reference to some sort of secret concession. Do you think we will - obviously I guess you

think we should know - do you think we will find out what’s going on here?



FITZGIBBON: As you know, Chris, I’ve been here a very long time and I’ve never dealt

with a Government more secretive than this one. And the question here is whether the

Australian community is the winner and we simply don’t know because the Government

refuses to tell us what deal has been done. Now, Jacqui Lambie says there is a deal; the

Government seems to be saying there isn’t a deal. They both can’t be right and my money

is on Jacqui Lambie and I think the Australian people are absolutely entitled to know what

the deal is, but more particularly, absolutely entitled to be assured that it’s a good deal for

Australia.



KENNY: Yeah I think, I mean if she says there are national security implications for

revealing the details that’s one thing, but if that is the case we would expect the

Government to acknowledge in broad terms that something has be promised or conceded

to.



FITZGIBBON: Well, national security terms is a very broad statement and we have no idea

what that means, but we do know this is a secretive government - god knows what they

told Jacqui Lambie. The next question is can Jacqui Lambie trust them? Obviously she’s

made a judgement on that front but, gee, if I were her I’d be very, very cautious.



KENNY: You’ be pretty relieved though wouldn’t you in the Labor Party that border security

is now back in the Government’s hands, therefore, any failures, any problems belong to

the government because as it’s been unfolding, this, I think, rather rash decision late in the

last term of Government to back Kerryn Phelps and the Greens meant Labor was rightly

being blamed for the way the Medevac laws were being gamed?



FITZGIBBON: And the decision was always in the Government’s hand, Chris. Peter Dutton

had total control over who comes to this country on national security terms under the

Medevac bill.



KENNY: They are opposed to these laws, these are laws that the Government didn’t want,

laws that were forced upon the Government.



FITZGIBBON: But they were not laws that took away from Peter Dutton total control over

who comes here and who doesn’t in national security terms. On that basis, the

Government was spinning the Medevac laws and they’ve tried to take political capital from

that. But we stand by values here, Chris. We want to make sure we don’t restart the boats,

we want third country settlements, something that the Government hasn’t been able to

achieve - that’s why we are having this debate by the way - and we want to make sure

that when people are in real need medical assistance they are able to secure it. These are

people…



KENNY: So Labor would take Medevac laws like this to the next election, they will be part

of your board protection policy at the next election?



FITZGIBBON: I don’t know what I said to enable you to say that, Chris. I said Labor will

stick to the key values and that is that refugees be treated humanely, they be found third

country settlement, and when they are sick they get the medical attention they need.



KENNY: Well sure, so the laws were right, they shouldn’t have been repealed, then, ipso

facto, Labor would take these laws as part of its policy suite to the next the next election on

border security.



FITZGIBBON: No, that’s not what I said either. I said that on national security grounds

under the Medevac laws Peter Dutton retained total control over who comes here on

national security grounds. But rather then Peter Dutton deciding whether someone is sick

or not, an independent medical panel was making that decision. As I understand, more

people come here on medical grounds under the old system then under the Medevac

system. So in that sense…



KENNY: Sorry, we are almost out of time. I just wanted to give you a quick chance to give

us your thoughts on the water debate. Given the drought, given the argy-bargy over the

Murray Darling Basin Plan and the allocations between the states, is it right to revisit all of

these agreements now? Or should they be left alone and we just deal with the facts as

they land at the moment?



FITZGIBBON: Over the last few days, Chris, we’ve had hundreds and hundreds of very,

very angry farmers on the front lawns of Parliament House and that’s because this

Government has been unable to properly implement the Murray Darling Basin Plan, and

what have we seen by way of an announcement now from the Government? Another

review, a review by a highly regarded person, Mick Keelty, but a guy who still doesn’t have

the powers he needs to undertake the review because the Government still hasn’t

legislated having announced this in August, and having said in August that the states had

already given the legislation a green light. So the question becomes: what in the hell are

we waiting for?





KENNY: Alright, thanks so much for joining us, Joel Fitzgibbon - appreciate it.



FITZGIBBON: It’s a pleasure Chris.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



