

ANDREW GILES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

MEMBER FOR SCULLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

SATURDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2019



SUBJECTS: Shergold report on refugee resettlement; Social media and news.



JOURNALIST: It's time now for our Saturday Pollie Panel. This week, we're discussing

refugee resettlement in regional Australia, and the impact of tech companies on the national

conversation. Joining us this morning is Labor MP Andrew Giles and Liberal MP Julian Leeser.

Thank you, both, for joining us this morning. We'll start off with the refugee resettlement review

report, which after a long wait came out yesterday officially to the public. Now, Julian, we might

start with you because you have been chairing an inquiry into regional migration. What did you

make of this report?



JULIAN LEESER, MEMBER FOR BEROWRA: I think it's a very important contribution to the

discussion about the resettlement of refugees, and I think regional Australia has a very

important part to play in that. The discussion about migration is very different in regional

Australia to the discussion about migration in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane. We went to

Murray Bridge, Mount Gambier and Adelaide in the last few days and we heard from

businesses and community groups about the benefit of refugee migration there. I think of a

business just outside of Mount Gambier, Holler Fresh, which grows, picks and packages herbs

for the supermarkets all around the country, they rely on refugee migrants, a number of whom

now are on pathways to citizenship and they've become citizens, to fill a labour shortage there.

There are serious labour shortages in regional Australia, which refugee migrants can fill. And

local communities, particularly local councils and local NGOs in regional Australia, are crying

out for people and wanting to make refugees and other migrants welcome.



JOURNALIST: Andrew, do you back the gist of this report? That we need to encourage people

to settle in the regions?



ANDREW GILES, MEMBER FOR SCULLIN: Look I do back the gist of the report and I think

reading it we now know why the Government sat on it for 10 months. It's a damning indictment

of failures in refugee resettlement. The report makes clear too often we've placed refugees in

too-hard basket and gone beyond that acknowledge this is at our collective cost. I do think the

report sets out a useful framework, but it has to be an integrated framework, as the author

said. It's not clear that the Government has adopted all of the recommendations in full.



JOURNALIST: What does that mean? What would an integrated framework look like?

GILES: What the report says is it sets out seven recommendations and beyond and around

those, it says they really need to be looked at together. And just to take up one of the things

that Julian said, I mean, there's real enthusiasm in regional communities and in businesses

and in local government to see refugees come and make an economic contribution. One of the

ways in which they could do that, the report says, and Labor has been saying, is through an

expanded community sponsorship program. And that's something the Government doesn't

seem to have fully embraced and something that I'm concerned about.



JOURNALIST: It was the community-sponsored visa pathway; there was also a suggestion of

employer-sponsored pathway and a university-sponsored visa as well. Julian, why doesn't the

Government take those recommendations forward?



LEESER: Well, the Government has said a couple of things in relation to those. In relation to

community sponsorship, they're going to review that particular program. They've also said that

we should look at skilled refugees, and doing a trial of about a hundred skilled refugees.

Because one of the issues that the report highlights - and you hear from time to time - is that

there are refugees who had skills in their countries of origin and they're not necessarily able to

use those skills. But I think in terms of a coordinated approach, one of the most important

things that the Government is doing in response to this is the creation of the role of a

coordinator of refugee migration. And this is really important because many of the services that

refugees rely on are not just Federal Government services. We heard in, say, Border Town in

South Australia, the difficulties of people getting driver's licences in order to get them from the

town to their work outside town. That's obviously a state responsibility. We often hear about

the difficulties of housing refugees in regional communities, again, a state responsibility. So, to

have somebody who's coordinating the federal and state services is very important in terms of

making the experience of refugee migration a success.



JOURNALIST: What about the responsibilities of the Federal Government in those areas, to

make sure that the facilities are there for the refugees, for them to settle in these communities?

You know, that there's the right healthcare, that there are the right jobs for them? What about

the Federal Government's responsibilities?



LEESER: Well, the Federal Government takes the responsibilities very seriously, and that's

why we have been settling people in communities where local governments and the

community, and businesses, want to have refugees. I mean, I talked about communities in

South Australia, you think about the very successful settlement of the Yazidi community in

Toowoomba. Part of this is having community infrastructure, part of it is having jobs, part of it is

having adequate social services, and part of it is having appropriate English language training

and skills. And one of the things that the Government has said it is going to do is to re-look at

the way in which English-language services are delivered. Again, that is consistent with what I

have been hearing on the ground for the last few days, doing this inquiry.



JOURNALIST: Just to clarify, when you say a trial of skilled refugees, would the Government

consider favouring skilled refugees over unskilled refugees in terms of the intake?



LEESER: The nature of the refugee program is, in the main, is doesn't discriminate between

skilled and unskilled. But one of the Government's responses to the report is to say, we would

take a hundred skilled refugees and look to see if they can use the skilled migrant pathway.



JOURNALIST: But it would be not be a criterion for their admission into the country?



LEESER: I think the details of what they’re doing are still being discussed, but they are looking

at a skilled pathway for refugees.



JOURNALIST: Andrew Giles, what do you make of that? And also what Julian was saying

about a coordinator to coordinate the state responsibilities and the federal responsibilities?



GILES: Well, on the coordinator first, I agree with everything Julian said. I think it's a very

important idea. But what the report also tells us is these issues of settlement support are

urgent. If they were urgent in February when the report was handed to Government, why has it

taken ten months for the Government to get on with responding to it? That's the question I

have for the minister. It's disappointing he didn't face the media to talk about these things

yesterday. In terms of the issues around the skilled component of the refugee intake, I'm

strongly of the view, and we are, that the basis upon which we resettle refugees should be on

need, on their protection need. But I am interested in the notion of perhaps using skilled

pathways as vehicles through which we can resettle, appropriately, more humanitarian

entrants. And I think that's really what's being talked about here. And if the pilot works, that's

something, and I think we'd be very interested in seeing it being rolled out more generally. It's

something that's been talked about for a while and I think it’s an idea that has great merit.



JOURNALIST: What about the idea of making entry into the country conditional on a certain

period of time being spent outside metropolitan areas, so you kind of force people to go into

the bush?



GILES: I think the issue of relocating people in the regions is a complicated one. The

aspiration is something we are supportive of, but it really requires quite a bit of thought.

Obviously, the main issue for refugee resettlement is pathways to employment. So, we've got

to make sure that any resettlement is obviously done in a manner that will connect people to

long-term employment. And that obviously relates to the labour market demands of particular

areas, but also making sure that the broader settlement functions are there. And that's

something that the report touches on quite effectively. But one of the things the report says is

there are two types of regional resettlement - there's primary resettlement, where someone

arrives in Australia and goes to a regional area, and secondary resettlement, where people

may adjust to life in Australia, perhaps in a major city, and then look for employment and long-term settlement options elsewhere. And that's something I don't think the Government

response has fully addressed. It's something I think requires more attention.



JOURNALIST: Alright, we do want to get to our second topic this morning. The former US

president, Barack Obama, has given a speech talking about technology, saying that it's, you

know, this powerful tool but also saying that it's splintering our society.  Julian Leeser, do you

use technology and especially social media much? And do you think it's splintering our

society?



LEESER: I can't think of a parliamentarian that doesn't use social media. Technology is a

great servant but a bad master. And I think we need to try and put boundaries in our own lives

in terms of the way in which we use technology. You only need to think about the ‘Fires Near

Me’ app, which has been developed by the Rural Fire Service, and Tuesday week ago when

we had that catastrophic fire conditions in Sydney, 300,000 people downloaded that app. It's

absolutely vital. There's a great use of technology. Bad use of technology is the way in which I

think, through social media, particularly Facebook and other things, the distorted news feed

that we get often only gives us one side of an argument. The President makes the argument

well, that back when he was growing up, when I was growing up, you got your information from

news that we all shared, regardless of your views on things. Today the sources are narrower

and narrower, and I think that's a problem.



JOURNALIST: Andrew, is there any legislative response? Of course, we all know that we can

and should probably remove some of the social media apps from our phones and be more

responsible about how and when we allow our brains to be logged in to them, but is there

anything governments can do?



GILES: I think there are a couple of things governments can do. I think one thing we can do is

fully support public broadcasting, Josh. One thing that Julian said that really resonated with me

is that, really, our democracy rests on being able to have a shared political conversation. And I

think, while the broad media, traditional and social play into that, having a strong national

broadcaster to make sure that we can all enjoy Australian stories and understand what's

happening in our country is absolutely vital. I think the other thing we can do is, as political

figures, is to think about how we can encourage debate that is robust, but also respectful. And

I think there's plenty of things that Julian and I disagree on, but we should be able to, and I

think, Julian, hopefully you're able to agree with me on this, we're able to carry on those

conversations in a respectful way. I think I'm sure we always don't meet the standard we'd like

to, but how we carry on our political conversation is important. But I do think we need to have a

serious consideration of how people's curated consumption of news shapes how society

operates. That may involve a legislative component. But it first requires us to, I guess, agree

that there's a problem we've got to get on with solving.





JOURNALIST: Alright. There's a challenge there for all of us. Julian Leeser and Andrew Giles,

thank you so much for joining us this morning.



LEESER: Thank you.



GILES: Thank you.



END.



MEDIA CONTACT: LACHLAN POULTER 0423 937 655





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













