Media Release



Media Release  Human Rights Law Centre | For immediate release: Thursday 28 November 2019

Morrison Government loses appeal after attempt to ignore  Medevac applications

The full bench of the Federal Court of Australia today dismissed the Morrison Government’s  appeal of a Federal Court decision that required it to consider Medevac applications of sick  women and men in Nauru who are barred from engaging in telehealth consultations with  Australian doctors.

Following the passing of the Medevac laws in February 2019, the Nauruan Government passed  regulations that prevented refugees in Nauru from telehealth consultations with doctors  registered outside of Nauru.

In June 2019, the Morrison Government refused to consider the case of a critically ill refugee  because he was prevented from speaking to his Australian-based doctors by the new Nauruan  regulation. The Federal Court ruled that the two doctors’ assessment of his detailed medical  records and their opinion that he required urgent treatment should be considered by the  Government under the Medevac laws.

The Morrison Government appealed the Federal Court’s decision, but a full bench of the Federal  Court today unanimously dismissed the appeal.

David Burke, Legal Director with the Human Rights Law Centre, who acted for the refugee, said:

“The Court’s decision confirms the Morrison Government had been unlawfully ignoring Medevac  applications from sick women and men on Nauru. These applications are made for people who  have been blocked by the Nauruan Government from having a telehealth consultation with  Australian doctors. Every day in Australian hospitals, surgeons and specialists give advice about  the treatment patients need based on medical records and test results. The applications are  entirely in line with Australian medical standards.”

“In bringing this appeal to try to avoid simply having to consider applications from sick people  who need medical treatment, the Morrison Government has once again shown it is driven by  cruelty and pride on this issue.”

Human Rights  Law Centre

The Court’s judgment did not change the Medevac laws. It simply confirmed that people on  Nauru can apply for the Medevac process.

The critically ill man’s application was subsequently approved by the Minister after the  Independent Health Assessment Panel that is part of the Medevac legislation, agreed that he  needed to be transferred from Nauru for medical treatment.

“There are women and men who have spent more than six years languishing in offshore  detention without access to proper medical care. Rather than fighting tooth and nail to prevent  sick people even submitting Medevac applications, the Morrison Government should be finding a  solution to this humanitarian crisis,” said Mr Burke.

Media contact:

Michelle Bennett, Communications Director, Human Rights Law Centre, 0419 100 519



Human Rights Law Centre

Level 17, 461 Bourke Street

Melbourne VIC 3000

ABN: 31 117 719 267













