



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



MEDIA RELEASE  AMBASSADOR TO JORDAN

Today I announce the appointment of Mr Bernard Lynch as Australia’s next  Ambassador to Jordan.

Jordan is an important partner for Australia in the Middle East. The relationship is  underpinned by a history of friendship and cooperation dating back to Australian military  operations in the First World War during 1916-18.

Australia greatly values Jordan’s leadership and important contribution to stability in the  region. The two countries have a proud record of defence and security engagement,  working together to combat terrorism and violent extremism, including as members of  the Global Coalition against Da’esh. We also enjoy an increasingly diverse bilateral  relationship, including in agricultural trade, education and archaeological research.

Australia recognises Jordan’s generosity in hosting refugees who have fled from  conflicts in neighbouring Syria and Iraq. Since 2017, Australia has provided $249 million  in response to the Syria crisis, including $90 million in support of refugees and their host  communities in Jordan.

Mr Lynch is a career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT),  most recently serving in DFAT’s COVID-19 Coordination Unit. Mr Lynch has previously  served overseas in Riyadh, Dili, Jakarta and Tehran.

Mr Lynch is a former Jennings Randolph Senior Fellow in Middle East affairs with the  United States Institute of Peace. He is a graduate of the Australian Defence College’s  Centre for Defence and Strategic Studies and holds a Master of Arts (Strategic Studies)  from Deakin University. He also holds Masters degrees in International Law, Commerce  and Arts (Middle Eastern Studies) from the Australian National University; and a  Bachelor of Arts (Japanese Studies) from Tokyo University of Foreign Studies. Mr  Lynch speaks Arabic and Persian.

I thank outgoing Ambassador Miles Armitage for his contribution to advancing Australia’s  interests in Jordan since 2016.

Media Contact  David Wroe: 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: 0427 888 392

