

Media Release  Human Rights Law Centre | For immediate release: Tuesday 10 March 2020

Former Manus detainee addresses the UN calling on Morrison  Government to give freedom to refugees

Abdul Aziz Muhamat, a refugee and human rights defender, addressed the United Nations in  Geneva to call out the Morrison Government’s continued cruel treatment of people still held on  Nauru and in Papua New Guinea.

“Each day it gets worse for the vulnerable people still detained by the Australian Government on  PNG and Nauru. Human beings are being destroyed, physically and mentally. Twelve people  have died. This is a humanitarian crisis that requires urgent action. I am asking the UN and the  international community to demand the Australian Government act humanely,” said Mr Muhamat.

Mr Muhamat, who has just returned from witnessing the devastating conditions for people  seeking asylum in the refugee camps in Greece, spoke on behalf of the Human Rights Law  Centre at the UN Human Rights Council, the UN body responsible for protecting human rights  globally.

“Atrocities continue to happen right now while political leaders are so quiet as if nothing happens  at all. All countries should show compassion for people seeking safety. All countries must be part  of the solution. All countries must uphold their human rights obligations. The Australian  Government must not be allowed to detain people indefinitely. Because now other countries are  copying the human rights abuses of Australia,” said Mr Muhamat.

Edwina MacDonald, Legal Director at the Human Rights Law Centre, who has been in Geneva to  monitor the Australian Government’s role at the Human Rights Council, called on the Morrison  Government to end the suffering of people it continues to hold indefinitely.

"The Australian Government continues to act with breathtaking hypocrisy, claiming to support  human rights at the UN while indefinitely imprisoning men and women in offshore detention  camps.”

"These people - imprisoned for fleeing the same atrocities this Government comes to the UN to  condemn - have now been detained for nearly seven years. No government can truly stand for  human rights while choosing to severely damage the lives of innocent people," said Ms  MacDonald.

Watch Abdul Aziz Muhamat’s UN statement.

Read Abdul Aziz Muhamat’s UN statement.

Media contact:

Michelle Bennett, Communications Director, Human Rights Law Centre, 0419 100 519

