





Media Release  Human Rights Law Centre | For immediate release: Friday 31 July 2020

Refugees in Morrison Government’s care in PNG at risk of  COVID-19

The Morrison Government must act urgently to ensure the safety of people it continues to detain in  indefinite offshore detention in Papua New Guinea, with the country’s pandemic chief warning that  the COVID-19 outbreak could overwhelm its health system within days.

The Morrison Government continues to hold more than 175 people in PNG and 185 in Nauru.

On Thursday night, the PNG Government announced that the number of confirmed cases had  reached 72, a rapid increase from only 11 cases in mid-July. Almost all of the active cases are in the  capital Port Moresby, where refugees who were detained on Manus Island remain in limbo. The  PNG Pandemic Response Controller and Police Commissioner stated yesterday that COVID-19 is  now ‘widespread’ throughout Port Moresby. An isolation facility in the capital is quickly approaching  capacity. Prime Minister James Marape has warned that PNG’s health system would not ‘have the  capacity to deal with a widespread outbreak’.

Shaminda Kanapathi is a human rights activist and refugee who has been held in PNG since  arriving in Australia in 2013:

“After years spent in detention we are all susceptible to COVID-19. Our health has been left to  deteriorate over these past years without proper access to medical facilities for physical or mental  health. Many of us already have compromised auto-immune systems and PNG does not have the  capacity to look after non-residents.

“It is time to take immediate action in order to prevent the virus from spreading throughout the  community. Immediate evaluation is imperative in order to prevent a spike in infection and tragic loss  of life.”

Since 2013 New Zealand has continued to offer to accept 150 refugees each year from Australia’s  offshore detention centres on PNG and Nauru.

David Burke, Legal Director of Human Rights Law Centre:

“The Australian Government has always been responsible for the people it has cruelly detained in  indefinite detention offshore - that duty of care does not disappear during a pandemic. Everyone  deserves to be safe in this public health crisis including the people detained in PNG and Nauru.”

“New Zealand has repeatedly offered to provide a safe place for refugees to resettle. There is no  justification for the Morrison Government continuing to lock people up in offshore detention while a  compassionate path forward is on the table. Choosing to ignore a solution that would end a policy  that has intentionally ripped people’s lives apart is an unspeakably cruel act.”

“After seven long, painful years, the Morrison Government must let people rebuild their lives in safety  - either here on in New Zealand.”

Media contact:

Michelle Bennett, Communications Director, Human Rights Law Centre, 0419 100 519

