











THE HON JASON WOOD MP  ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CUSTOMS, COMMUNITY SAFETY AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

MEDIA RELEASE



20 November 2020

Appointment of Migration Advice Industry Advisory Group

Members of the newly established Migration Advice Industry Advisory Group met via  videoconference to discuss industry reform concepts being examined under the Department  of Home Affairs review of legislation for the industry.

The Assistant Minister for Customs, Community Safety and Multicultural Affairs, Jason  Wood, appointed 26 members to the advisory group following a recent public nomination  process, during which more than 100 nominations were received.

The advisory group members represent a broad cross-section of the migration advice  industry, community, and academia, and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. They will  provide expert advice to the Australian Government on matters relating to the migration  advice industry, including potential reforms to the legislative framework governing the  industry.

“I am pleased that we have a broad mix of experts on the Advisory Group, including  representation from the regions, refugee advocates and not-for-profits. This will ensure the  Department is able to consider all relevant interests,” said Mr Wood.

Minister Wood said he had been working closely with the migration advice industry to ensure  it can continue to support Australia’s migration program.

“The establishment of this advisory group reaffirms the government’s commitment to work  collaboratively with agents, peak bodies and the community, I am committed to ensuring we  eliminate the illegal operatives from the industry and ensure a level playing field” said Mr  Wood.

“Together we can build the industry's reputation and ensure a robust regulatory migration  advice framework that prevents misconduct and unlawful advice.”

This announcement follows public consultation to inform the Department of Home Affairs’  examination of how legislation can support a highly qualified and professional industry and  ensure the government can effectively combat misconduct and unlawful operators.

The list of Advisory Group members is available on the Department’s website at:  https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/reports-and-publications/submissions-and-discussion-papers/migration-advice-industry-advisory-group-nomination.

Media contact: (02)62774982

