

October 7, 2020



Federal 2020-2021 Budget Summary - Mental Health



and Wellbeing



vmiac.org.au



/federal-2020-2021-budget-summary-mental-health-and-wellbeing



The 2020 Federal budget has been released, albeit 5 months late as the Coalition



government struggled to come to terms with the last year of constant upheaval. The



bushfires followed by the Coronavirus pandemic mean that pre-existing issues within



Australia, both economically, socially, and mentally have been brought to the



forefront, and this year’s budget reflects the Coalition’s priorities during this time.



Mental Health



The only aspect of the budget that focuses on mental health is a welcomed increase to



the number Medicare funded psychology services from 10 to 20. This is in-line with



increases given earlier this year to Victorians struggling with ongoing lockdowns, but



now made accessible Australia-wide.



Alongside this, there are more announcements scheduled as part of the Productivity



Commission’s reports on mental health and suicide, but we will not hear about these



until sometime within the next few weeks.



Social Support



People currently on Disability and Aged Care Pensions will, alongside carers, receive



two cash payments of $250 as part of their regular payments. Those within the aged



care space will also benefit from a $1.6 billion increase in spending within this sector.



For those on Jobseeker, payments are set to decrease back to their pre-pandemic rates



by the end of December. This, coupled with the current and expected rise in



unemployment, is troubling for the overall wellbeing of countless Australians who rely



on these already subpar payments to get by.



There has also been no funding allocated for social housing despite this being a key



recommendation proposed to the government earlier this year by their own working



groups.



The government also aims to address youth unemployment by paying incentives to



business’ to hire people under the age of 35 who are currently unemployed. The



incentives, though, are minimal compared to the drastically high rate of youth



unemployment that has resulted from the current economic crisis.



Women and Migrants



1/2



The Budget’s mention of a Women’s Economic Security Statement has fallen



drastically short, with only $240 million set aside and no concreate plan or strategies



aimed at supporting women. Women have been some of the hardest hit by the current



economic crisis, and women’s mental health is currently of specific concern. A lack of



funding in female dominated sectors, as well as a lack of funding for childcare to assist



women in returning to work, means that this budget has done little to support women



during these times.



The Australian Government also plans to cap places on migration and refugees,



increasing the barriers faced by these demographics to settle in Australia. The



exception to this is that some benefits are coming to those looking to apply for partner



visas.



Conclusion



Overall this budget has earmarked a lot of funding for big business’ and tax cuts for



higher income earners, as well as industries like private construction. It is



disappointing that these are the priorities of the Coalition Government during a period



of rising unemployment, mental health challenges on the rise, and country-wide



uncertainty



2/2

