

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT  FRIDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Inter-state borders; Tony Abbott joins UK Board of Trade; China  trade.



DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST : And as we are joined every week, Angus Taylor is on  the line, the Energy Minister and Opposition Agriculture and Resources spokesperson,  Joel Fitzgibbon. Fellas, thanks for joining us.

ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION:Deb.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: A pleasure, Deb.

KNIGHT: Now the big focus, of course, National Cabinet - borders, and the Prime  Minister is hoping, he's got buckley's really, for all the states to join together, hold  hands and agree on a border lockdown easing by Christmas. Angus, when you've got  Queensland and WA walking into this meeting with their minds made up, it's  completely a pointless exercise.

TAYLOR: No, it's not a pointless exercise. We've achieved a great deal in recent  months. But look, Australia wasn't built to have internal borders, it's clear. There's  Premiers who are playing political games. We've got a Queensland State election  coming so they're prepared to play politics on something that's far more important than  that. Fortunately, many of the states are actually doing the right thing. We're seeing  that with South Australia, with New South Wales and that's good news. But, there is  some recalcitrants and we want to see them doing the right thing.

KNIGHT: And the double standards on this. I mean, when you've got the AFL  executives of 400 of them and their families allowed to head up to Queensland from  Melbourne, from the hotspot, for this AFL Grand Final announcement and you know,  pictures of them by the pool. They're in the AFL bubble, but it's a pretty luxurious  bubble, compared to what others have said. I mean, how do you cop the Queensland  premier standing up before the National Cabinet meeting and saying ‘I will not be

intimidated here’? The double standards, they are just screaming.

TAYLOR: Well, I think that's exactly right. I mean, we saw a terrible tragedy just this  time last week, of course. Health-affected young child, loss of life. Looks terrible,  terrible, heart-wrenching stuff, because Premiers are doing the wrong thing. I mean,  we weren't designed to have internal borders. Our constitution was set up to make  sure that we had free movement. There's a couple of Premiers who are not doing the  right thing. Fortunately, most are, but you know, we want to see that fixed and we're  going to keep applying the pressure.

KNIGHT: And Joel, this is straight out of the Joh Bjelke-Petersen playbook, isn't it?  Talk tough, be parochial, it wins votes and the Queensland election is coming up in  October.

FITZGIBBON: But what these Premiers are being accused of, Deb, is following the  word of their community. It's that leadership that comes first. And if it's the right sort of  leadership, then they can expect community support. And that's clearly, what they  have been receiving...

KNIGHT: ...But what about when that leadership doesn't make sense and when it's  cruel and lacks compassion?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I, like everyone else, Deb, have been distressed by some of the  medical emergencies, loss of life, people not being able to see their loved ones before  their passing. But, the Premiers, it appears to me, are following health advice. Now,  the Prime Minister said he was going to give us the sort of leadership to cut through  these issues. Now, let me give you an example. David Littleproud this week - well two  weeks ago - he said, the Agriculture Minister, said he'd give us an Agriculture  Workforce Code. He finally presented one to the Ag Ministers from the states this  week, but it had been rejected by the health expert committee. So, it's for the Prime  Minister and the Federal Ministers to present something to the state-based leaders  that they can accept. And that of course has to be something that is approved by the  medical experts.

KNIGHT: Well, we are hearing...

TAYLOR: ...The idea, the idea Deb, that Premiers are following health advice here,  that that's what's going on. I mean, come on, let's come out from under the rock here.  They are playing politics. They're playing politics with people's lives and livelihoods. It's  got to stop. It's no coincidence that the strongest in Queensland where we've got a  state election coming up. Let's actually do what our founding fathers, as they mostly  were, designed in the Constitution in Section 92, freedom of interstate trade and  movement. Let's get it right.

KNIGHT: We are hearing reports from Canberra too, that the National Cabinet will no  longer have a consensus approach. With Queensland refusing to agree to a national  definition of "hots pots", which was the other issue that was on the table, so we will  cross live to Canberra as soon as we get any upshot out of that. We'll hear from the

Prime Minister after one. Now I want to talk as well about Tony Abbott the former  Prime Minister. He's in the UK, likely to be appointed to the UK's Board of Trade, but  Boris Johnson, he's got a lot of criticism coming his way over this. Pollies from all sides  saying it's a bad idea, labelling Tony Abbott, a homophobe, a misogynist, a climate  change denier. Joel, these sort of personal attacks, do you think they're that fair?

FITZGIBBON: No, look Deb, I might be old fashioned, but I have respect for any  person that has risen to become the Prime Minister of this country. I don't think that  name calling, if you like, is very helpful to any of us. But, I do find it more than passing  strange that Tony Abbott as our former Prime Minister is looking to sit on the Board of  Trade in the UK, which axiomatically, Deb, puts him in a position where he's lobbying  for the interest of the United Kingdom at the expense of Australian interest. It's a really  weird situation.

KNIGHT: It's a valid point, Angus. I mean, a former Prime Minister, you'd think, would  be lobbying for Australian interests?

TAYLOR: Well, I just think that's completely wrong. I mean the trade is good for both  countries. That's why we do it. I mean, we've sold...

KNIGHT: ...shouldn't he be pushing the Australian side of things, not the English?

TAYLOR: We've sold wool to the UK, you know, since the early 1800s. And it was  good for Australia and it was good for the UK. That's why we trade. So I think, look, I  think a lot of this criticism of Tony Abbott is completely unhinged. Completely  unhinged. And I agree with Joel on that. He's a former Prime Minister and he should  be given the respect that a former Prime Minister deserves. He put in place three free  trade agreements, which were very, very effective. Of course, he's also over there  talking about borders and the extraordinary role he played there with, you know, what  was happening with asylum seekers. He deserves, he deserves great respect, not this  unhinged sort of attack.

KNIGHT: Alright. Now China, I want to talk about this. The tensions escalating  between Australia and China. Finding out this week that another Australian journalist,  Cheng Lei, detained without charge. How concerned are you, Angus, about this  growing list of trade sanctions? It's our farmers who are copping it and now our citizens  too.

TAYLOR: Well, of course, we're concerned. I mean, there's no doubt about that. Any  kind of trade sanction in whatever form is something we're always going to work to try  to alleviate and prevent. But we will also stand our ground. I've said many times in the  past on this program, Deb, we must stand our ground, it's very important we stand up  for our values, our beliefs, there will be a price to pay for that from time to time and  we're going to minimise that price as best we can always. You know, Labor likes to say  "Oh, this is all easy. This is all manageable." Well, you know, these are hard issues  and they will continue to be hard issues. But the one thing all Australians can rely on  the government doing is standing our ground and standing up for our values.



KNIGHT: And Joel, China's Foreign Ministry is now calling us infected with fear and  paranoia. And I'd argue we've got a right to be paranoid the way we've been treated.  But your colleague Penny Wong, she told us on the show yesterday that she rejects  this. She indicated Labors pretty much in lockstep with the government, when it comes  to China. Are you as well, are you on board?

FITZGIBBON: Well, Labor is in lockstep with the government when it comes to  defending our national interest. Always. I've said on your program before, we should  never take a backward step. But no one's suggesting that the relationship with our  largest trading partner is anything but a complex one and that's why the management  of it requires adept diplomacy. And what you have at the moment is the government of  China reacting to something that's anything but good diplomacy, and we were talking  about name-calling a bit earlier on, but the biggest problem here with the trade  sanctions Deb, is that our Australian Ministers are not even able to pick up the phone  to their counterparts in China. They are not taking our calls and that just demonstrates  how far both Malcolm Turnbull and now Scott Morrison have allowed that relationship  to fall.

KNIGHT: Alright, Just quickly. Dad Day coming up on Sunday. Can you give us your  best, or worst because the daggier, the better, dad joke, Angus?

TAYLOR: Well, we've got some shockers around here, but I live on a farm and there's  lots of jokes about sheep, Deb. I tell them to my dog but he's heard them all before.

KNIGHT: Ah, Heard them all before. Very good. Joel.

FITZGIBBON: Deb, I can't think of one and that's not a denial that I've been guilty  often. It just means memory loss. My son knows how to hurt. We affectionately called  my father by his nickname Ecca. His name was Eric and when I say something stupid  or not cool, my son calls me Ecca.

KNIGHT: There you go. That's what dads do. They're meant to embarrass us. That's  what you're here for. Have a wonderful Father's Day to both of you. Thanks for joining  us.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641









