TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO DRIVE MONDAY POLITICAL FORUM WITH RICHARD GLOVER

MONDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: NSW ICAC investigation; Federal integrity commission proposal;

Victorian response to Covid-19; Australian brands buy-back; Australian vernacular

study.



RICHARD GLOVER, HOST: Monday Political Forum on your radio Dai Le Independent

Councillor, Fairfield City Council, Tanya Plibersek Shadow Minister for Education and

Training, Labor MP of course and Dave Sharma Liberal Member for Wentworth. Dai,

Tanya and Dave welcome all. Thank you very much for talking to us.



DAI LI, COUNCILLOR FOR FAIRFIELD CITY COUNCIL: Thanks Richard.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: It's a

pleasure.



DAVE SHARMA, MEMBER FOR WENTWORTH: Thanks for having us.



GLOVER: I got three, I can hear three voices. So I've got all three. Now everywhere I go,

everybody is behind her. So said Liberal frontbencher Gareth Ward today expressing what

he sees is the public support for the Premier, despite the revelations of that secret

relationship with the disgraced MP Daryl Maguire. In the Liberal Party room the mood is

the Premier will survive the revelations. Do you think they're right Dave Sharma?



SHARMA: Look, I think what this has been as how you described it Richard, has been

revelations of a secret relationship and I feel very much for the Premier that she's had her

private life sort of exposed and discussed and dissected and scrutinised by everyone in in

this way. But I think you know as far as I can see that's  all there is to it. It was a

relationship that she kept private and secret and you know, good luck to her that's her

entitlement for a number of years. But that seems to be where this story ends. I don't think

there's much more to it. And if that's if that's the case, I don't see any reason why the

Premier should be stepping aside.



GLOVER: I suppose some people would say at the moment where somebody says to

expect an email from a property developer who's not their constituent, but they say look

she's got a problem in Western Sydney, you'd have to sort of think we'll why you

representing her? Why are you seeking favours for her, what's going on? You know that it

will be normal to be a bit suspicious at that point.



SHARMA: Well, I don't think there's any doubt and ICAC is going through this quite

exhaustively that the Daryl Maguire has done some things that are not befitting a proper of

a politician or any public official for that matter and I'm sure they'll look into this. But I

haven't seen the make of a further, subsequent leak and implicate the Premier in any of

this and I don't expect they will.



GLOVER: Tanya Plibersek, is the Liberal Party party room right in backing in the Premier

in this way?



PLIBERSEK: Well, I think ICAC has to be allowed to do its work properly. I mean people

are very fixated on the relationship between the Premier and Daryl Maguire. I actually

frankly couldn't care less. Her private life is a hundred percent her private life. The question

here that ICAC is investigating is has he done the wrong thing and has anybody helped

him or turned a blind eye to that wrongdoing. That's the important question to answer.



GLOVER: Is it fair enough for the New South Wales public though to set some of that

against the idea that she has been a very good Premier in terms of particularly this Covid

response, there's a certain self-interest that a voter should correctly use in this, isn't there?

If they believe that she's done well in saving lives, we're in still in the middle of a pandemic.



PLIBERSEK:  Look I'm not going to pre-empt anything that ICAC will find. I would say this

in a general sense, if someone has acted corruptly or if they have turned a blind eye to

corruption, it doesn't matter how sorry you feel for them, how much you like them. Whether

they're, in my case, if it was a Labor politician, you have to look beyond that and say our

democracy is too precious and integrity in decision-making is too precious to ignore these

sorts of issues. And I think it is important  that we continue to maintain a high standard.

Since the Liberals were elected in New South Wales, they have lost more than 10 people

to ICAC style, or ICAC investigations that have looked at property developer donations and

so on. We need to maintain a high degree of integrity. When Jodi McKay fought off the

corrupt developers up in Newcastle it cost her seat. She paid a very high price for it. We

need to stamp out that sort of behaviour in our public life.



GLOVER: Labor had some spectacular cases though hasn't it? From Eddie Obeid to Joe

Tripodi.



PLIBERSEK: We have and I'm not for a second saying that they should be treated any

differently because they betray the people that voted for them. They betray the Labor Party

members who work so hard to get them elected when they behave badly. I take no quarter,

you know, it doesn't matter who it is, doesn't matter which party they're part of, it doesn't

matter what the you know sad backstory is if you've done the wrong thing, you've betrayed

the trust of the people who rely on governments to make sure they've got a job, deliver a

good health or education system. That's what matters. It actually is frankly bizarre that this

guy even had time to be running a whole second business. Why isn't he looking after his

constituents, I wouldn't have time to run a consulting business on top of my work as a

Member of Parliament and that in itself is ludicrous that he would have time for a whole

second job.



GLOVER: There was one suggestion last week that he was selling a Chinese-made, you

know, the small electronic devices from his office in his spare time. But anyway Dai Le,

what do you think is the Liberal Party party room right in back in the Premier over this?



LE: Can I say that, look people being having been part of the machinery at one, stage

people will always a find a way to knock off the leader whichever side of politics they're on.

I don't think that you know, it's a while they might come out and this is the one thing that

I've always said over the years, a lot of politicians will go out that don't say what they mean

and they don't mean what they say. And so, you know, they might be supportive. They

might come across that they're supportive but behind the scenes the numbers are being

done and being crunched to make sure that there will be changes happening.



GLOVER: So you believe she won't last in the end?



LE: Look I have, I believe, I would like to believe that she will take the Liberal Party to the

next election, but knowing the way how politics work people find a way to you know, they'll

find a way. And I think that it's a shame because she has definitely done a great job and

her personal life should have been left at that and I think, I agree with Tanya that you know

in general sense ICAC has to look at corrupt behaviour, find those who are better at those,

you know, people have behaved corruptly and actually should expose that but I think

watching so many personal lives, of personal, the personal lives of people being exposed

and aired out like, you know as a laundry, it's just terrible and I think there has to be a way

that ICAC can, a body of ICAC can actually keep some of these personal you know

stories...



GLOVER: They did make some effort to hold some of it. Someone inadvertently published

the...



LE: *INAUDIBLE* Yeah. That's to me that is appalling. How can you know, how can that

happen in this day and age? How can information beyond the internet for half an hour? I

just think that it's appalling, so something has to be done to improve that whole security

system. Otherwise it's you know, that that will completely, could undermine the work that

ICAC is doing.



GLOVER: Can I ask a quick supplementary question to all three of you. Why do we see it

seem so slow in terms of getting a federal ICAC and with teeth when we can see, putting

the premier to one side, when we can see and in terms of some of the others have been

caught up in it. It's doing pretty effective work. Dai Le what's your view about a federal

ICAC?



LE: Look, I think that I think it's very important to ensure that a body of federal body similar

to the New South Wales ICAC being setup has to have some, real Integrity that it works,

so that in a way I wouldn't want to see what's happening where by people's lives get

exposed this way, but actual corruption gets eliminated and can we ensure that that's

going to happen at a federal level. So, you know, I just think that's just a hard work.



GLOVER: Tanya Plibersek, we seem to be very slow about actually getting there with a

federal ICAC.



PLIBERSEK:  Yeah, well two years ago the Government said they started work on it a

year earlier and still nothing and do you know why? Dodgy water buy backs, sports rorts,

airport land that was bought for $30 million, it's worth $3 million. The letter that was plainly

forged that Angus Taylor provided the media Stuart Roberts trip to China, purporting to be

a representative of the Australian Government and getting a Rolex for his troubles. I mean,

do you really have to ask why we've got no federal ICAC? And the proposal that this

Government has put forward is a toothless ICAC. It's the Integrity Commission you have

when you don't want to have an Integrity Commission. It cannot look at anything in the

past, so it could only look at things that happen after it was established, after its legislation

had passed and it can only look at things that the Government refers to it. So no whistle-blowers, no brave whistle-blowers coming forward and saying I saw something wrong in

my workplace or I was asked for a bribe or I believe this is wrong. So you've got a

government that says shall I investigate myself? Mmm. No, it's not very convenient to do

that. I don't think I will refer myself to the new Federal Integrity Commission. Oh what a

joke.



GLOVER: Dave Sharma, there was a quite amusing Moir cartoon in the herald on

Saturday of Mr. Morrison going to a pet shop and asking for a guard dog, but could it be

one with very small teeth, please?



SHARMA: I didn't see that. Look I think it's important to get the design right here. And I

think Dai made some important points. I mean, I think some of the stuff we've seen coming

out in the New South Wales ICAC this last week or two reminds me a little of the Kenneth

Starr Commission, which was the body that investigated Bill Clinton and ultimately led to

his impeachment for what would undoubtedly personal and character failings, but I think

that the level of exposure and the level of voyeurism that accompanied them were kind of

unnecessary or unrelated to the public interest at work here. And I think we need to make

sure that anybody that we design, yes does hold government officials and politicians to

account, but it also doesn't become a sort of a you know, a body that unnecessarily

invades the privacy and people's lives are exposes things of a personal nature.



GLOVER: Yeah but look at the...I know there's been some mistakes along the way of

which Nick Greiner might be, who set it up might be the prime example, but you know,

they've also managed to get some pretty serious sculpts from both sides of politics of

people who really were involved in serious corruption.



SHARMA: But I think you know, I mean ultimately that the sculpts are there law

enforcement is because people have broken the law and we've got the laws there for a

reason and this is why their held to account, the media does this as well. So, you know,

absolutely we need to make sure that happens but I think we just need to be careful in the

design that we don't set up a body that ends up doing things with, you know, unintended

consequences.



GLOVER: Tanya, I could hear you wanted to have a word?



PLIBERSEK: I really do because I think the relationship is a complete distraction. It

wouldn't matter whether it was Premier's boyfriend or brother or squash partner or

childhood friend if they're, if what's being suggested is there was a blind eye turn to

corruption that's what matters. It doesn't matter what the nature of the relationship is. What

matters is: have we fully discharged our responsibilities as public figures? That's the only

question that is being asked or should be asked and I know people had titillated by the

personal elements of this. That should be private, that should not be part of this. Let's

focus on the issues at hand. What has Daryl Maguire done? Who knew? What did they

know?



GLOVER: Suppose the only personal thing that might touch on is if it's if you feel he has

been a person who has exaggerated his feelings for her in order to target her because he

saw that she was a person who could make his business more profitable. At that point you

do feel a bit of sympathy for her, a bit more additional sympathy.



PLIBERSEK: Well, of course, but that's a side issue what matters is have all of us

discharged our responsibilities as public figures according to the law and not just according

to the letter of the law according to the spirit of the law. Have we discharged our

responsibilities to the people of New South Wales properly? That's the question.



GLOVER: Monday Political Forum. Dai Le is here. Sorry David another word from you?



SHARMA:  Well, I just say I've been I think that's true up to a point, but ultimately the

guardians of whether elected officials have discharged their duty to the people properly is

the people themselves at elections, and I think that's what we need to make sure we

maintain. Ultimately all political leaders are accountable to the public who elect them and

bodies that enforce the law have an important role to play but the ultimate accountability is

to the people.



GLOVER: The good old voters. Dave Sharma is here, Tanya Plibersek and Dai Le. And

now Daniel Andrews has been much criticised for the tough Victorian lockdown, but it

seems to have worked. Some say Victoria has smashed the second wave in a way that's

not been achieved anywhere else in the world. Whatever the government's mistakes early

on with hotel quarantine, should they now be getting three cheers from the rest of the

country for what they've managed to achieve? Dave Sharma.



SHARMA: I think we should be very encouraged and plays and cheering on the Victorian

government for what they've, you know, for suppressing this this second wave, I think

that's important. But I think there's still a legitimate question to be asked, were the

measures taken always necessary to fulfill that aim? Things like curfew, things like the 5k

limit, things like the limitations on business, because it's undoubtedly true that the level of

personal hardship that's been imposed upon people, and economic hardship imposed on

people, has been much more severe in Victoria than in any other state in Australia for

much the same or in fact worse (inaudible).



GLOVER: But hasn't that been the actual cause though of the success which is world

class?



SHARMA: I don't think so. I mean, I don't think we've seen things like that in New South

Wales. I mean, there were no cases new cases of community transmission in New South

Wales in the past 24 hours. But if you, if you've had anyone, I had the Treasurer Josh

Frydenberg visit last week in my electorate, and he was astonished at the level of normal

life that was going on in Sydney because it's like nothing that has been seen in Melbourne

for several months now and I think that has come at a significant cost of people and that's

what needs to be weighed up here.



GLOVER: Wentworth is not normal Dave. Let's face it.



SHARMA: It's a pretty extraordinary part of the world, no doubt about it, Richard.



GLOVER: Dai Le is here ,Tanya Plibersek and Dave Sharma.  Dai Le, does, I know they

will you know, they produced their own misfortune in the hotel quarantine stuff up, but we

need to cheer them on for managing to take a wave, which at one point was, you know,

700 cases, over 700 cases a day to virtually nothing now.



LE: Well, look, I will agree that to some extent with Dave Sharma in terms of yes, we, you

know, it's great what Victoria has done but I just came off a Cisco mental health forum and

speaking to people in Melbourne and you, the mental health issue is huge, not just

obviously in Melbourne, but obviously across the country in terms of the impact of Covid-19 on people's mental health and well-being. That's, I think, a major issue that we still will

actually see, you know, the outcomes of that subsequently. Secondly, I think businesses

have suffered and I think you weigh up it's great now that's going to come out of it, but then

what's going to happen to the happen to the economy, to the businesses out there that,

and people losing jobs and I'll be interested to find out, you know, if they've got the plan for

that. So it's a really interesting, I mean, luck going to what Dave Sharma said, New South

Wales, we've done pretty well, businesses have you know, we did not obviously take all

those measures that Victoria did and we still performed quite well.



GLOVER: Hmm. Yeah the last time you were with us Dai, you said that the level of

compliance in places like Fairfield is really quite high, partly maybe a cultural thing, people

already quite used to wearing masks. But is that still continuing?



LE: Yes, that's right, everywhere you go people just wearing masks as a normal without, a

normal piece of, like a carrying a phone. They were a mask. So early on our area have

people in the community have been just wearing masks, has been great. And I think that

has really also stemmed the spread of the virus.



GLOVER: You got to get some way of saying "Vote Dai Le" on them and hand them out.



LE: I will!



GLOVER: We've got Dai Le, independent Councillor of Fairfield City Council, Tanya

Plibersek, the Shadow Minister for Education and Training, and Dave Sharma the Liberal

Member for Wentworth. Tanya Plibersek, there has been a lot of criticism of Daniel

Williams, of Daniel Andrews, sorry, but he does seem to have come through with the data

in the end?



PLIBERSEK: Yeah. They've smashed it in Victoria. I really take my hat off to them. It has

been so hard. I can't imagine how difficult it's been to be in such a long lockdown but

Victorians should be really, really proud of themselves. And it's been quite disappointing to

see some of the Federal Victorian MPs giving a hard time to the Victorian state

government, and what would have been much more helpful is if the Federal government

did its share including taking care of things like aged care, which is wholly a Federal

government responsibility and has been a source of real danger in Victoria, and looking

after the 29,000 Australian still stuck overseas and actually having a COVID tracing up that

worked so that the economy could have opened up faster because we knew where, you

know, where the hot spots were, where people had come into contact with people who

might have been infectious. I mean, it is really sad that what people responded to so well

at the beginning of this, which was a state and Federal government working, states and

Federal government working together, has been dropped as time has gone on.



GLOVER: I mean it was sort of doing spectacularly well, I hasten to add, but he was

solving a problem that his government had caused in the first place.



PLIBERSEK: Look, there were obviously problems with hotel quarantine, just as we've

had problems with the Ruby Princess that had to be cleaned up afterwards, but I don't

think it's very helpful to have a Federal government piling on and if you look at the failures

in aged care. The failures in aged care are wholly the responsibility of the Federal

government. The failure of the tracing app, I mean, this is an app that cost $70 million and

has found 14 people. Imagine if the tracing app worked, how much earlier we could have

opened up?



GLOVER: Yeah, although it's, you know partly failed because people have been putting

others from downloading it in the first place, there's been, there's so much criticism of it

from various sources that, you know, only is it seven million in the end downloaded it.

Would have been more advantageous if we'd all downloaded it.



PLIBERSEK: And I was encouraging people to download it. I was out there on my Twitter.

So, you know, I'm an early adopter. I'm going to download it, I’ve made all my family

download it. It's absolutely true. But, you know, that, if that had have worked it would have

made a huge difference. That's the Commonwealth's responsibility.



GLOVER: But it works though, it's important to say it works to some extent though. We

don't want to get in the situation where we are discouraging people from having it on their

phones because it sometimes has worked.



PLIBERSEK: 14 times.



GLOVER: Well in14 times when there hasn't been a case, there hasn't been an alternative

means of finding the person, often you can find a person by multiple means which doesn't

mean it hasn't worked or am I getting too old?



PLIBERSEK: I don't know. I reckon for $70 million you would want you would want to do a

bit better than net 14 extra, wouldn't you?



GLOVER: or you could get a pigeon to deliver the message to each of them individually.

Tanya Plibersek, Dai Le and Dave Sharma are here. Now Australia has lost many of its

iconic brands to overseas firms over the years, from Arnott's biscuits to Foster's beer. But

at least one of them is coming home with Andrew Forrest’s buy back of R.M. Williams.

Does it matter that these firms have foreign owners, and what else would you like to see

back in Australian hands? Tanya Plibersek?



PLIBERSEK: Well, I would like to get my SAO biscuit and eat it while I'm wearing my

Speedos and my Ugg boots and know that all of them were Australian owned and made in

Australia.



GLOVER: I think Speedo went in 1968 something like that.



PLIBERSEK: And actually no one wants to see me in my Speedos but Jay Weatherill,

when he was Premier of South Australia brought Violet Crumble back to South Australia. It

was an iconic South Australian chocolate bar, brand. More seriously, look, I think it's a real

shame that we've lost manufacturing capacity in some areas, particularly the automotive

industry. I think it was terrible that we goaded the car industry into leaving Australia and

what we really need, we do need foreign investment. It's very good for Australian

development, but we need a bedrock of Australian investment in our own ideas and

ingenuity. We need better investment in research and development. We need to protect

and expand the research and development that's happening in our universities and in our

businesses. The government tried to cut a billion and a half dollars from research and

development tax concessions recently. Now they've announced some extra support for

manufacturing. Well, it's a shame that it's come after so many years of this being hollowed

out and undermined, and just incidentally, we need to we need to be training more

apprentices. We've got 140,000 fewer apprentices than we did when the Liberals came to

office. We can't build things in Australia without the skilled workers. We need cheaper

power. We need to invest in cheaper, cleaner renewable energy that can power a new

manufacturing revolution.



GLOVER: All right. Dave Sharma, is it important that these brand names be brought back?



SHARMA: It's a heartwarming story but I think the more important thing is that these

brands are identifiably Australian, the content, the design, the lifestyle that they go with and

that's not going to be lost, I don't think, no matter, you know, who's on the share register of

these things and I think it's important when you have these discussions, I mean recognise

the nostalgic value of them, but let's not look too far back with rose tinted glasses at, you

know, a mythical era of Australia in the 1950s or 60s when we know when we made things,

and things like that. I think we should be excited about the future. I think there's things like

quantum computing, like space, like medical devices, artificial intelligence, where there's,

you know, a whole lot of world leading Australian companies and businesses and

researchers and investors and that's really where we need to be pointing the direction of

Australia if we are to remain a prosperous, vibrant and intellectually creative country in the

years ahead. So, you know, I think this is a nice story. It's great. Of course, it's great to

have it back but I don't think that can be the, you know, that can really dictate our national

economic agenda.



GLOVER: Yeah. Dai Le, Tanya Plibersek, and Dave Sharma here. Now Australian slang is

to be put under the microscope after Monash University's Kate Burridge was awarded an

ARC Grant to study its various wonderful forms. What are some of your favourite pieces of

Australian vernacular she should have on her list. Dai Le you got to confront Australian

vernacular when you arrived without English, how is that?



LE: Exactly! I thought, oh I don't know, 'reffo'. I mean, you know, I learned English as my

second language, so I can't I don't know what some of the Australian vernacular is, that

could be included. My goodness. I can't contribute.



GLOVER: Well, what were the what were the words that left you most confused when you

first came?



LE: Lollies.



GLOVER: Oh yeah, OK.



LE: Yeah, because I didn't know what lollies were so but because we're in refugee camps

they were called candies because we had two Americans, missionaries, so I came here

and they talked about lollies. I'd never heard the word lollies.



GLOVER: Would you like a lolly, Dai? No, she said not knowing what they were. Tanya

Plibersek, what's your favourite bit of the vernacular?



PLIBERSEK: Well, Dai has just reminded me of my mum telling me a story that she, when

she first came to Australia, she was invited to someone's house for tea. So she ate before

she went because she thought she was getting a cup of tea. Then she got there and they

offered her, you know, they put dinner in front of her and she said 'I'm really full, sorry'.

Why did you eat before you came here?



GLOVER: There's that whole thing about bring it bring a plate and so you do.



PLIBERSEK: She actually also sent me to a birthday party with an empty plate because

the invitation said 'bring a plate'. So I did. My favourite, I'm not sure if I can say it on the

radio, Richard, it starts with a 'B' , it starts with the word 'Bull' and it ends in 'it' and the

second word is artist. BS artist. I think that is so Australian and it and it calls it out so well.



GLOVER: It is pretty good. Dave Sharma. What's your favourite bit of the vernacular?





SHARMA: Well, I think the great bit about vernacular is it involves and kind of every

generations' use of it is different. So I'm always picking up stuff from from my kids. I think

one of my middle daughter Estella was telling me yesterday that something was a bit of a

flex and I was like, what do you mean it's a flex? And she was like you should put that on

social media, dad, that'll be a real flex. Apparently, a flex like some sort of display of

strength or courage or pride in what you do, but it's a bit of a thing and I love that, I mean

the whole generation that's growing up now, they find our own my generations' vernacular

completely antiquated and unfashionable, and they would never, never deign to use it.



GLOVER: Dave. Don't take her advice. That's my only advice. Hey we're out of time but

thank you to Dai Le, Tanya Plibersek and Dave Sharma. Thank you everyone. Thanks for

talking to us.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



