

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



CHRIS HAYES MP

CHIEF OPPOSITON WHIP

MEMBER FOR FOWLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 24 MARCH 2021



SUBJECT: Chris Hayes not recontesting next Federal election.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Welcome.

Today, Chris Hayes will make a very important statement to the assembled gathering here.

And then I will make some comments after Chris. My friend and comrade, Chris Hayes.



CHRIS HAYES, CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP: Well, thanks very much, Anthony. Just very

short and sweet that I indicate that I am not going to recontest the next election. I have been

here now for 16 years. As you may recall, I was first elected at the by-election in 2005 when

our former colleague, Mark Latham, imploded. In 2010, not that I was particularly happy about

it, but I was transferred to the seat of Fowler. Werriwa was an area I spent a lot of time growing

up. But working in the electorate, Werriwa was about sports, we had families, it was about

making sure you cooked the barbecue at the under 10s grand final and all that sort of stuff.

Fowler was pretty different. It was the most multicultural community in the country. And up to

that point, I don't think I've ever even met a Vietnamese person. If I did, I probably wouldn't

distinguish whether they were Vietnamese, Chinese, they were Asian. So I had a lot of

learning to do. Since 2010, the Vietnamese community have been very patient with me as I

learned the customs, the traditions, things that are important to the various diasporas that

make up Fowler. The Vietnamese communities have been pretty central. It's the largest

Vietnamese diaspora in the country. And something that always resonated with me is before

2005, which was the fall of Saigon in April 2005, we had very few Vietnamese in this country.

And since then, we have had people come here as refugees who have certainly taken their

place in this country. You'll find that their children are so well-represented right throughout our

professions but have made a huge contribution. So I consider it an absolute honour to be

associated with this community that has contributed so much in fundamentally such a short

period of time. That is the strength of our multiculturalism. And I know issues about diversity

have been in the public eye for a while. But in my community, it is something that is welcomed,

it is something we celebrate. So whether it's the Vietnamese, the Chinese, the Cambodians,

the Thais, or the more recent arrivals from the Middle East, our community has always been a

welcoming community. But as I say, after 16 years, I think it's time to pull the pin. I

unfortunately had a rather neglectful motorcycle accident a couple years ago and spent a lot of

time in Canberra Hospital. And thank you for the doctors and nurses and orderlies and all

those people who looked after me there. And I had a pretty well publicised incident in the

Parliament last year. So I do have a couple of health issues and I do need to go back to

hospital to have further corrections. I feel that I am slowing down. And I've always thought

being a Member of Parliament is here for you making a contribution. If you start resting on the

oars, I think if you truly believe why you're here in the first place to make a difference for the

better, you know in yourself that it's time to call it a day. And in doing so, that's what I intend to

do. I will, as I've indicated to the Leader, I'll serve out the rest of the term as Chief Whip, but I

will not recontest the next election.



Now, as Fowler is one of the most multicultural communities in the whole of Australia, it is

certainly the largest Vietnamese diaspora in the nation, me leaving, or my departure, at least, I

think will give the Party the opportunity to consider someone, not only who has the necessary

commitment and drive and energy to perform the task of a Member of Parliament representing

that community, but also represents the face, the aspirations, of what is one of the most

diverse communities in the country. And while the Party will go through its normal selection

processes in its normal way, I certainly have a young woman in mind who I think would be

ideal to represent the community. Young lawyer, very competent in her own right, working in

community law, so not out there to make a million dollars, but someone of Vietnamese

heritage, and importantly, the daughter of refugees to this country. So someone who has

grown up in our local area, has been the product of our education system, and has

demonstrated now for a long period of time her ongoing commitment to advancing the interests

of our area. Now, I don't intend to put a name out at the moment. But I would be encouraging

her to nominate for preselection for the seat of Fowler. Now, I have invited a few of our friends

from our Vietnamese diaspora, Quang Luu, who used to be the head of SBS, which we do a

lot of work with him. But can I just say to the Vietnamese diaspora, (speaks in Vietnamese). If I

can translate, the Vietnamese people have a very, very special place in my heart. Thank you.



ALBANESE: Well, before I pay tribute to Chris Hayes and to his contribution that he's made

up to this point and the one he will continue to do, I welcome a few people here. The most

special person in this room is Bernadette. And this is the day that she has been asking for. A

motorbike accident, heart issues on the floor of the Parliament. She has been a rock beside

Chris. And we welcome you here to our Party room. Can I welcome other members of Chris'

family, particularly Gerard, the National Secretary of the HSU. And can I welcome our National

President, Wayne Swan, and welcome former Leader, Bill Shorten, as well and other

parliamentary colleagues who are here, and members of the Vietnamese diaspora who are

here as well. Chris Hayes is one of the people in this building, it's a really small group, that

don't have any enemies in the building. Not behind him or in front of him. He's someone who is

respected across the board. He's respected because of who he is. His contribution has been

quite extraordinary. The job of a Chief Whip is a difficult one. You have to be a confidante. You

have to be completely trustworthy. And you have to not put your own interests first. It's a hard

job. It's a tough job. And Chris Hayes has done it for a long period of time now both in

Government and in Opposition. He came into the Parliament in 2005, in difficult circumstances

to replace the former Leader who had resigned in quite a memorable press conference in that

park that day in January. And Werriwa is not a lay down misere, certainly not in a by-election.

Chris Hayes received the support from across the Party to be the candidate at a time where

we needed it. Post-2004, the Party was traumatised. And we had re-elected Mark as leader.

And then the circumstances happened with the tsunami in Indonesia. And then quite a difficult

period. So Chris had to also restore faith with his local constituencies, going out there and

making sure, in the best of Labor tradition, that he represented them and their views and their

values and their interests, not his own. And he did that diligently. Which is why after a

redistribution, as redistributions happen, Chris, of course, then moved to Fowler, which

enabled us to have another fantastic member in Werriwa to follow Chris, in Anne Stanley.

When Chris had the incident, we'll call it, last year in the Federation Chamber, a thing went

around this building of concern, it's hard to describe. People were genuinely just distraught at

the idea that this bloke had an extreme health issue, call it for what it is, that required, thank

goodness his neighbour, Dr Mike Freelander, and others were present at the time. And I think

it's fair to say that was across the entire Parliament, not just the Labor Party. And that is

something that is extraordinary. I know that he served Julia Gillard in Government, he served

Bill Shorten as Leader and he has served me as Leader very, very loyally indeed. Bill and I

had a chat about it last night, indeed, about how you couldn't hope for someone better to run

that office. So to Chris and Bernadette, on behalf of the Australian Labor Party, really simple,

thank you. Thank you for what you have done. Thank you for the sacrifices that you have

made, including to your health. Call it for what it is, there's a link between the sort of pressures

that are in a job and health outcomes. Chris deserves a very happy and long retirement, not on

the motorbike. Bernadette has asked me to say that. And it may well be that as a gesture for

whoever replaces Chris as Government Whip after the next election that we hold on to Chris'

motorbike jacket and helmet that are in his office just to make sure and that we build a little

statue. That would be a shrine to Chris Hayes on behalf of Bernadette, who has consistently

tried to keep Chris off the bike. I do note, when I read Chris's bio, you were born in

Camperdown. Always a good start in life. Always a good beginning. So to Chris, we'll do

something more formal for you. You hold a special place in our heart. Thank you.



JOURNALIST: Congratulations on the decision. You just quite candidly endorsed someone

you'd like to see replace you. Would you just like the Party to (inaudible) and get it over and

done with?



HAYES: I'm quite confident that the person I have in mind could easily win a rank-and-file

preselection. But that's up to the Party. And they'll follow the normal processes. We will

cooperate with that.



JOURNALIST: And is her name Tu Le?



HAYES: I will let you do the research. Thank you.



ALBANESE: Thanks, everyone.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



