

Media Release   | For immediate release: Wednesday 20 December, 2021

Major UN human rights review highlights need for  Australia to raise the age of criminal responsibility

Australia’s human rights performance was in the spotlight tonight as the Australian Government  appeared before the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva for its major human rights review that  happens every four to five years.

At the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), UN member countries questioned Australia about its  human rights record and recommended improvements. 122 countries made close to 250  recommendations. Key issues of concern included the very low age of criminal responsibility in  Australia and the Australian Government’s treatment of refugees and people seeking asylum. The  need for greater action on climate change to protect human rights also featured in the review.

The Human Rights Law Centre, Kingsford Legal Centre and Caxton Legal Centre coordinated an  NGO coalition which prepared a detailed report to inform the review and briefed UN member  states ahead of tonight’s appearance. The NGO report was endorsed by over 200 Australian  NGOs.

Hugh de Kretser, Executive Director, Human Rights Law Centre:

“At this major review, 122 countries highlighted the need for Australia to better protect people’s  rights. The fact that children as young as 10 are being locked up in jails across the country is  clearly an issue of significant international concern, as is the ongoing mandatory indefinite  detention and offshore processing of people seeking asylum.

“Australia’s very low age of criminal responsibility is out of step with international standards. 31  countries recommended that Australia raise the age. All Australian governments must heed this  call and follow the ACT Government’s lead by committing to raise the age of criminal  responsibility to at least 14.

“The review recognised important progress on marriage equality, addressing modern slavery and  Australia’s ratification of the torture prevention treaty, as well as the effectiveness of Australia’s  public health response to the COVID-19 pandemic. But Australia’s record continued to be  plagued by human rights failures, and particularly by its treatment of Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islander Peoples.

“As a wealthy, stable democracy, Australia should be leading the world on human rights, yet too  often Australian governments breach people’s rights in critical areas. The Australian Government  needs to comprehensively protect human rights in an Australian Charter of Rights and  Freedoms. Our lives are better and our communities are stronger and healthier when  governments promote human rights.”

Priscilla Atkins, Co-chair, NATSILS:

“It is embarrassing for Australia that five years since the last Universal Periodic Review,  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people remain the most incarcerated people on earth. With  over 441 Aboriginal deaths in custody since 1991, the death penalty has never ended for our  people. The Universal Periodic Review is a critical opportunity for the Australian Government to  reimagine the justice system and commit to ending the over-incarceration and deaths in custody  of our people, including raising the age of criminal responsibility to at least 14 and implementing  the recommendations of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, 30 years on  from it being handed down. The world is watching.”

Cathy Eatock, Co-Chair of the Indigenous Peoples’ Organisation-Australia (IPO), a  coalition of 285 Aboriginal and Torres Strait organisations and individuals, who  contributed Indigenous content to the NGO report:

“Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples’ issues were a major focus in Australia’s review,  reflecting our over-representation across all negative social indicators, In particular, the  Morrison Government must realise our right to self-determination. There must be an elected  Indigenous representative body to provide a voice on legislation and policies that impact  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, with all positions elected by and accountable to  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. There must be a Makarrata Commission, to  establish a truth telling and treaty process, which is crucial to move Australia to a post conflict  process of decolonization.”

Edwina MacDonald, Acting CEO, Australian Council of Social Service:

ON CLIMATE: “The Australian Government’s weak emission reduction targets, its lack of a  transition plan for people on low-incomes, affected workers and communities; and the dismissal  of views of groups most impacted are contrary to its obligations to protect and promote human  rights.

“The Government must immediately increase its weak emission reduction targets, including  committing to net zero before 2050, accelerate the phase out of fossil fuels like coal and gas, and  develop equitable and inclusive transition and resilience plans with communities.”

ON INCOME SUPPORT: “The Australian Government is undoing the good work it did last  year to tackle poverty when it doubled income support payments in response to COVID-19. After  25 years without a real increase to income support payments, people without paid work were  finally able to put food on the table and keep a roof over their head.

“With the COVID-19 support payments now being cut back, people are once again struggling to  cover basic costs and we are seeing the gains made on poverty reduction last year slip away. To  ensure our human rights obligations are met, we must permanently increase unemployment and  other income support payments, index them to wages, and abolish paternalistic policies like  cashless debit so people can rebuild their lives.”

Teresa Sands, Disabled People’s Organisations Australia:

“Very little progress has been made by Australia to implement the 2011 and 2015 Universal  Periodic Review (UPR) recommendations for people with disability. This means that people with  disability in Australia continue to be subjected to law, policy and practice that denies or limits  our human rights, and in many cases condones harmful practices.

“We want to see urgent action to establish a national Supported Decision-Making Framework; to  end all forms of segregation; to prohibit forced sterilisation and forced medical interventions; to  end indefinite detention for unconvicted people with disability; and to eliminate chemical and  physical restraints, seclusion and other restrictive practices in all settings.”

Paul Power, CEO, Refugee Council of Australia:

“Australia enters 2021 with a worse track record on upholding the rights of refugees and people  seeking asylum than in 2015, when we last appeared before the UN Human Rights Council for a  major review of our human rights record. The average length of immigration detention is at  record high, hundreds of people subject to offshore processing remain in limbo after eight years  and, during one of the worst economic crises of our lives, people seeking asylum have been left  behind by the Australian Government. If we do not urgently review our mandatory and indefinite  detention policies, end offshore processing and provide a basic safety net for people seeking  asylum in the community, we will further erode Australia’s capacity to advocate for other nations  to respect human rights and the rule of law.”

Bill Mitchell OAM, Principal Solicitor, Townsville Community Law:

“Older Australians have been living in a human rights vacuum, where our domestic laws fail to  provide them with enforceable human rights in their daily lives including their care. Additionally,

Australia’s international engagement on the human rights of older persons has been lacklustre.  The time has come to support the call for an International Convention on the Rights of Older  Persons.”

Nolan Hunter, Indigenous Rights Lead, Amnesty International Australia:

“Australia locks up vulnerable children as young as 10, taking away childhoods and causing them  serious harm at a crucial time of development, when they are being shaped into the adults they  will become. The UN has benchmarked 14 as the absolute minimum age of criminal  responsibility. Experts in child development and health from around the world agree that we  must act on this now.

"State and Territory governments have the opportunity to make this powerful legislative reform  right now - the ACT Government has recently committed to it as a priority. Raising the age will  go a long way to improving Australia's record on its treatment of First Nations people as well as  driving down over representation of Indigenous people in our jails, which is the highest in the  world.”

Ghassan Kassisieh, Legal Director, Equality Australia:

“While Australia has received praise for implementing the previous country recommendations on  marriage equality, it’s time to focus on other areas where Australia falls short of ensuring all  Australians are free and equal, no matter who they are or whom they love.

“LGBTQ+ people continue to experience discrimination and conversion practices aimed at  ‘curing’ them, trans Australians still face barriers to accessing gender-affirming healthcare and  being recognised as who they are, and intersex Australians still experience medical interventions  on their bodies without consent.  These are some of the key LGBTIQ+ human rights issues on  which Australia is likely to face international scrutiny.”

Tina Dixson, Acting Program Manager, Australian Women Against Violence  Alliance:

“Australia is rightly proud that it broke new ground by implementing the first National Plan to  Reduce Violence Against Women and Their Children in 2010. However, there has been no  appreciable drop in the levels of gendered violence in Australia. With increased visibility and  reporting of violence, Australia must learn from the experience of the 2010 Plan and ensure that  the second National Plan includes adequate funding for specialist women’s services, specific  measures to address violence against women of diverse experiences, and a monitoring and  evaluation system for all action plans. It’s also essential that there is a specific focus on violence  against Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and girls.”

Nassim Arrage, CEO, CLCs Australia:

“All the members of the UPR NGO Coalition are seeking to improve Australia’s human rights  record. We need the Australian government to be more willing to create democratic and open  spaces where civil society and human rights defenders can collaborate and be consulted. We  welcome any opportunity to contribute to the development of a framework that will implement  the recommendations of the UPR process and result in improved access to justice and the  elimination of all forms of discrimination.”

Simon Henderson, Head of Policy, Save the Children Australia:

“Australia ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child more than 30 years ago, but we still  have no coherent or overarching strategy, plan or framework for protecting children’s rights.  Substantial gaps in Australian laws remain, contributing to significant ongoing rights violations  towards children. Australia must fully incorporate the Convention into domestic legislation and  policy, and develop a National Plan for Children to comprehensively protect children’s rights.”

The review took place in Geneva on Wednesday 20 January 2021 7-10pm AEDT. A  recording of the review can be found here.

The NGO Report was coordinated by the Human Rights Law Centre, the Kingsford Legal Centre  and the Caxton Legal Centre, working with an Advisory Group comprised of 16 NGOs, and  authors from 57 NGOs. Over 200 Australian NGOs have endorsed the report. A copy of the Joint  NGO Report can be found here.



Media contacts:

Michelle Bennett, Human Rights Law Centre: 0419 100 519

Danielle Veldre, Media Lead, Amnesty International: 0408 972 997

Maria Graterol, Engagement manager, Community Legal Centres Australia: 042 0488 996

Bill Mitchell OAM, Townsville Community Law: 0459 430 849

Simon Henderson, Head of Policy, Save the Children Australia: 0450 388 681

Paul Lampathakis, Refugee Council of Australia: 0488 035 535

Therese Sands, Disabled People’s Organisations Australia: 0412 935 128

ACOSS Media: 0419 626 155

Lucy Brown, Communications Advisor, NATSILS: 0435 866 462

David Imber, Equality Australia: 0413 274 204

Tina Dixson, Acting Program Manager, Australian Women Against Violence Alliance: 0428 541  396

