











THE HON PETER DUTTON MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

STATEMENT



1

www.minister.homeaffairs.gov.au

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the hard working men and women of the  Home Affairs Department led by Mike Pezzullo and its portfolio agencies for the incredible  work they do to keep Australians safe.

Secretary Pezzullo has served both sides of politics, but his first priority is to serve our  country and he has done an exceptional job.

I’m incredibly proud to have been the inaugural Minister for Home Affairs in its modern  form.

Together we have thwarted 20 terrorist attacks, invested record amounts into ASIO and  AFP, seized record amounts of drug importations and worked day and night to keep women  and children and the broader public safe from threats.

Commissioner Reece Kershaw and his leadership team has turned around the AFP and they  go from strength to strength.

Mike Phelan and the ACIC contribute to our successes in ways that will never be made  public and they deserve our appreciation.

I’m incredibly proud of the $70 million investment in establishing the Australian Centre to  Counter Child Exploitation. The men and women there who save and protect children on a  daily basis are world leaders in their field. Stamping out the exploitation of children has  been our greatest achievement in this portfolio. This is a battle we must win and I will  continue to be a strong ambassador for this cause.

I would like to really honour the leadership of Commissioner Michael Outram and the  Australian Border Force in halting the evil people smuggling trade and preventing deaths at  sea. Under my watch, there has not been a successful boat arrival or a death at sea.

I have worked diligently to clean up Labor’s regional processing mess. The Government has  removed every child from Nauru and PNG. Of the remaining adults none are in detention -  they all live freely in their local communities. In total, there are now less than 240  individuals in Papua New Guinea and Nauru. We have removed all the children from  onshore detention that were put there by Labor.

2



We have dealt with an unprecedented risk of foreign interference and espionage against our  country, and committed significant resources, including the establishment of the joint  agency Counter Foreign Interference Taskforce to protect our nation and our way of life.

Director-General Mike Burgess is one of the finest leaders in this space and ASIO will  continue to achieve success under his watch.

Since strengthening the character test provision of the Migration Act in 2014, I have  cancelled more than 6,300 visas of non-citizen criminals. This included cancellations for  domestic violence related offences, child sex and child sexual exploitation offences, assault  and armed robbery. These cancellations have made Australia a safer place.

AUSTRAC is a world leader and I am proud of their enforcement work and engagement with  the private sector. Nicole Rose is an exceptional leader of that organisation.

There is no greater honour than to represent the men and women of the Australian Defence  Forces in Government.

It comes at a crucial strategic time for our country and our region.

I am very much looking forward to continuing the work of my predecessor Linda Reynolds  who has done an exceptional job in this portfolio.



29 March 2021





