

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY    DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE    SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS    SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   NATIONAL PRESS CLUB Q&A  CANBERRA   TUESDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Government accountability; National Integrity Commission; Opposing the  IR bill that cuts Australians’ pay; the Home Affairs Department; Federal Quarantine;  Political Appointments; Scott Morrison’s Priorities.

MARK KENNY, NATIONAL PRESS CLUB: Can I also congratulate you on your post as  Shadow Minister for Government Accountability. It strikes me that that's one of the core  functions of an Opposition to hold a government to account. I'm wondering, does your remit  also extend to designing systems that will improve and ensure accountability under a Labor  Government?

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER AND SHADOW MINISTER  FOR GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY: That's a good question. And as I have assured my  parliamentary colleagues upon Anthony's decision to appoint me to this role, that my job is not  to take over their responsibilities in their portfolios, but rather to assist them to amplify them.  The responsibility, for example, for the National Integrity Commission is legislation and its  detail, sits with the Shadow Attorney General, Mark Dreyfus.

But I think you have hit upon an important point here, is that it is not enough just to point out  the scandals, the corruption, the mismanagement and the waste of the Government, but also  to advocate and propose how all governments should hold themselves to account to the  people.

And some of the things I mentioned in my speech that we haven't yet had the time to, to  propose and explore today, around freedom of information processes. I'm sure many people in  the room here have experienced the joy of putting in a Freedom of Information request to the  Government, and not getting a response, or having it ignored.

In my other capacity as Shadow Minister for Home Affairs, you know, I was quite alarmed to  see the excoriation of the Information Commissioner, that he put upon the Department of  Home Affairs for their absolute failure to respond to or even understand Freedom of  Information requests, robust protections for whistleblowers.

And as a member of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, I was  part of the report that delivered greater contestability for journalists’ information warrants and  stronger protections for public interest journalism.

These are all areas where Labor has, either through its committee work or through its  advocacy, made clear the things that we would do differently to ensure that we're building trust,  extending sunlight and holding up those important democratic principles of accountability,  integrity and transparency.

DAVID CROWE, SYDNEY MORNING HERALD: Thank you, Mark. Thank you, Senator  Keneally for your speech. Just on the National Integrity Commission, which you've mentioned,  there's a big difference between where the Government stands and other others’ stand on how  that Commission ever gets going, what it can do in the current form, as advanced by the  Government. It can't necessarily hold public hearings on those matters, can't initiate inquiries,  would have to have it referred to it. The definition of corruption is fairly narrow, it doesn't  include criminal matters, for instance. These are all constraints that outside observers have  criticised.

Can you commit Labor to pushing for a more powerful Commission on all those fronts? And  when we get to a Senate debate, assuming that we do some time before the next election,  would Labor basically oppose a National Integrity Commission that's too weak and leave it to  the crossbench to try and get what they can? Or do you think Labor would be better off  accepting what it can get now in order to go to an election and promise a more powerful  commission under a Labor government?

KENEALLY: Thank you, David, for the question. On the first part of it, it's fairly easy to say  yes, of course, Labor, and we already have advocated for a much stronger transparent  Commission that's able to both look at historical acts of corruption, or of suspected corruption,  as well as to be able to hold public inquiries, make their own referrals.

And in that I can point to, during my time in the NSW Parliament, my observation about the  success of the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC). And I think the fact  that it is able to hold public hearings, that it is able to make its evidence transparently able to  be understood by the community is a key part to the community having confidence in the work  that the Commission does, and confidence when it finds that there are acts of corruption, or  indeed, when they find as they did with the planning system, that there were no acts of  corruption, in one particular inquiry. So I think that's fundamentally important.

And the second part of your question, it assumes a lot of hypotheticals and I don't think I can  precisely answer it without knowing the shape and the scope of a bill that might be before the  Parliament. But we have been robust in our criticism of this Government's weak bill, we  endorse comments that people like Geoffrey Watson, the special counsel to the ICAC, who  has observed that this Commission is weak. And in fact, rather than expose corruption, it  would actually allow it to be concealed.

CROWE: Just quickly on that, though, the arguments for and against in respect of whether you  would vote for a weak Commission are that something is better than nothing. But then there's  also the argument that it might take the sting out of all the impetus out of any public push for a  Commission if you go to a weak one. So, you would have to make that judgement,  presumably.

KENEALLY: Well, and, welcome to the life of the Senator. That is constantly the judgement  you have to make. And that's why I don't want to give a, you know, in absence of a concrete  piece of legislation, a firm decision, also, because Penny Wong isn't here. And that will really  be...Katy, and I know the value of consulting our leader.

However, I think, David, if I can say, you have a great deal of confidence that the bill is going to  make it to the Senate before the next election when the Government won't even bring it on for  debate in the House of Representatives, where they have the numbers.

TOM STAYNER, SBS NEWS: Senator, thank you for your speech. You spoke about the  United States during your address. We've recently seen US President, Joe Biden, announced  that he wants to drastically increase the cap of their intake of refugees. That seems to be in  contrast to the Australian Government here who has announced that it's going to scale back its  increase during the pandemic. What do you think about this issue? Do you think the Australian  Government needs to reconsider their approach on this matter and continue to consider taking  out more of this load?

KENEALLY: First of all, I'd like to acknowledge the commitment made by President Biden not  just in terms of increasing the intake for that country, but also his determination to reunite the  families who were separated at the border.

Of course, we will announce all of our policies prior to the election. But let's look at Labor's  commitment at the last election on refugees and asylum seekers to increase the intake and to  deliver a community sponsorship programme for refugees.

Now, that's hard to do when the borders are closed. I acknowledge the government's decision  in the last budget to recognise that it was difficult to bring people in across the border while the  borders are closed, while only citizens are effectively able to come into the country. That being  said, the Government's decision in the last budget is opaque. They on the one hand assert that  it's a temporary measure, but the budget would actually suggest it's an ongoing measure  across the forward estimates because of the cuts that they are making to settlement programs  and the like.

I have an extraordinary concern for the vitality and capacity of our resettlement system, which  is taking an increasingly complex load in terms of refugees and asylum seekers, and  particularly people who are here on temporary visas, people they were never previously asked  to support. To be able to survive and manage the cuts to their funding and to be there for  refugees and asylum seekers when we're able to start bringing them in across the border  again.

TEGAN GEORGE, NETWORK 10: Thank you for your speech. In that you mentioned the  Government's IR legislation, we've heard that Labor is not keen to support it because it will  allow below-award pay in certain circumstances. Does that mean that you're against or don't  think there will ever be a circumstance where below-award is appropriate?

KENEALLY: We think a fair day's pay for a fair day's work is still an idea we're striving for.  Scott Morrison said if you have a go, you get a go. There's nothing fair in people having a go  and getting cuts to their pay and their conditions.

Understand this. The Industrial Relations Bill proposed by Scott Morrison and Christian Porter  has a big black hole in the centre of it. It rips off the Better Off Test, it takes away the safety

net. And who is going to fall to the ground but the Australian workers?

So, whether it's talking about taking away people's right to get their fair award pay, whether it is  taking away their right to ensure that they are not missing out because of the better off overall  test. This Bill also legalises wage staff, let's make no mistake about it. Scott Morrison and  Christian Porter get up and say, oh, it's going to make it easier for casuals to become  permanent. That's not true either. This Bill is unsupportable. Labor will not support it and we  will fight it.

RICHARD FERGURSON, THE AUSTRALIAN: Thanks very much for your speech. Senator,  you're in a very tight preselection contest for the top Senate ticket in New South Wales Labor  with your colleague Deb O'Neill, would you consider a move to the lower house or is it the  Senate or nothing for you at the next election?

KENEALLY: I'm not moving. Can I say this...

KENNY: You tried that already, didn't you?

KENEALLY: I did, it was Bennelong. No. Let me say this, Richard. First of all, it would be an  honour to represent Labor at the next election.

Secondly, I've known Deb for 20 years. She's a fantastic representative for the people of New  South Wales. She always works hard to represent their interests.

But thirdly, with 2 million Australians unemployed or underemployed, with 1.6 million  Australians still relying on JobKeeper. The only job I'm really interested in is a secure job for  Australian workers. And that's what my focus is.

ANDREW TILLET, FINANCIAL REVIEW: Andrew Tillett from the Fin, thank you. In the lead  up to the last election, one of the debates within Labor was about, this goes to a question  about your Home Affairs portfolio, one of the debates within Labor was about whether keep the  Home Affairs super-department that was created. Bill Shorten ended up saying “I will keep it,”  with changes and things like that.

I was just wondering, given the party has put every policy under review, is that a policy that is  under review or are you committed to keeping Home Affairs in its role and given what we've  seen in the pandemic, do you think there is perhaps some room to maybe reshape or  restructure sort of, perhaps its, some of its remit or anything like that?

KENEALLY: Thanks for the question, Andrew.

One, as Anthony Albanese made clear when he announced the reshuffle, that the  arrangements that he has in place in terms of portfolio so, for example, I hold the Home Affairs  portfolio, is to ensure that we best match the Government in terms of our accountability  responsibilities. But he's indicated that is not necessarily the arrangements we will have in  Government.

Secondly, as the Shadow Minister for Home Affairs, it's my observation and as the evidence  shows, that so far the Department of Home Affairs has not lived up to all the promises that it  was meant to deliver in terms of efficiency of operation.

And, thirdly, the Department of Home Affairs is a, well, there's no other way to put this, it's a  diabolical mess in terms of things like satisfaction. It ranked dead last of all public sector  agencies for employee satisfaction, some 30% of the people who work in the Department of  Home Affairs say they would rather work somewhere else. It has incredibly poor functioning  when it comes to things like FOI. And there has been an extraordinary turnover in the  Department, meaning that there's been a loss of capacity, particularly when it comes to  processing citizenship, visas and supporting settlement services.

So, I'm quite concerned about the vitality or the capacity of that organisation. And lastly, I see  little evidence that the supposed superstructure of bringing every national security agency  conceivable under one umbrella, whilst supposedly maintaining independence, is actually  creating anything that is more effective than what was there before.

So I suppose you could take that as, this is a, we are keeping a very close watching brief. And  there are plenty of things to be done when we come to government to fix up the Department of  Home Affairs.

TOM CONNELL, SKY NEWS: Senator, just a couple of your criticisms were of the Audit Office  effective cut and advertising spend. So will you restore the full funding for the Audit Office?  And what would you do, a billion dollars you said Scott Morrison spent, so what would Labor  spend on advertising if it wins government?

KENEALLY: First of all, I now feel like this might be a revenge question for all those crosses  on To the Point to Tom Connell? Thanks for the question, Tom.

One, I'm not going to make any spending commitments here without them going through the  Expenditure Review Committee and the Shadow Minister for Finance, Senator Katy Gallagher.  But I think it's pretty clear that we are quite critical of the Audit Office cut and want to see  robust integrity and oversight agencies properly supported.

That's a hypothetical question and a slightly cheeky one about what would Labor spend on  advertising. I tell you what we wouldn't do: we wouldn't be handing out advertising contracts  without tenders, we wouldn't be commissioning market research reports without tenders, we  wouldn't be seeking to keep those things secret from the public. These are the things that  undermine trust in government. And when you've got Liberal-aligned agencies getting  contracts from a Liberal Government without oversight or tenders, then you've got a problem.  And that's where you need sunlight and accountability.

SARAH ISON, THE WEST AUSTRALIAN: Just on your comments regarding quarantine and  the federal responsibility. Obviously in WA, the State Government’s quite interested in if  Christmas Island could be used again, a federally, you know, and for the Federal Government  to come into that. Scott Morrison recently said, listen, that's just not a possibility. Do you  agree? Do you think that from what we've seen from how that facility has been used at the very  beginning of the pandemic, it definitely can't be used again. What are your thoughts does it  need to be back on the table?

KENEALLY: There are a lot of things that need to be on the table when it comes to national  quarantine and most of them are in Jane Halton's report. Last year, Scott Morrison got briefed  in August by Jane Halton. He's been briefed three times now about her National Review of  Hotel Quarantine. She made the observation that it is unsustainable - the system that we are  running. She made the recommendation that the Federal Government should set up a national

quarantine system in order to deal with surge capacity, she called it, to bring home the  standard Australians before the northern hemisphere winter hit. She made mention of several  Air Force bases that could be used.

She made clear that quarantine can be operated under a federal system. I mean, the great  vanishing act of Scott Morrison during this COVID crisis is extraordinary. The extent to which  he has pulled the wool over the eyes of the Australian people and has tried to pretend the  quarantine suddenly has nothing to do with him. Nothing to do with the Federal Government.

When we look back at this crisis, as Richard Marles observed on Sunday (on Insiders), when  we look back at this crisis, the one thing we will notice is the absence of the Federal  Government. Scott Morrison is the first prime minister since Federation, at a time of crisis to  shrink the federal presence, to shrink the national government’s leadership. At a time of crisis.  Australians look to their national government. I tell you what, stranded Australians are looking  to their national government, and they feel abandoned.

Now you specifically ask about Christmas Island. There is a practical challenge right now with  using Christmas Island and that is that the Government have moved people who are preparing  for deportation for Section 501 character visa cancellations to Christmas Island because they  can't be deported for one reason or another due to border closures around the world or COVID  restrictions. So, there's practical challenge to that particular facility and that it's being used for  some other purpose.

But let's go back to the beginning of this pandemic and remember that when there were  Australians on the Diamond Princess in Japan, when they were Australians in Wuhan and  needed to come home - the Federal Government brought them home, the Federal  Government put them into federal quarantine.

But when it became clear this scale and the scope of this pandemic, Scott Morrison did what  he always does, he ducked the responsibility. He's hidden behind the premiers - he's made it  their problem. He doesn't want the political risk for quarantine. And it's gobsmacking in his  audacity in year after year, Scott Morrison stood up and proclaimed that he was the guy that  can manage Australia's borders. He's now the guy that's abandoned Australia's borders.

ISON: Do you think that being used as that detention facility is a convenient way to shirk that  responsibility?

KENEALLY: No. In fact, I have acknowledged that we had the unusual circumstance as  people were coming out of prison and they needed to go into an immigration detention facility.  So, we had an unusual problem in that while the borders were closed, the population of  immigration detention centres was actually growing.

And in order to manage COVID risk in immigration detention, you need to be able to maintain  social distancing, physical spacing, etc. So, I acknowledge that there is a legitimate problem  the Government is trying to resolve with a growing immigration detention population as a result  of border closures.

AMY REMEIKIS, THE GUARDIAN: Thank you, Senator for your speech. You said an  Albanese Labor Government will build a recovery where no one is held back and no one is left  behind. But how can Labor promise to leave no one behind when you're already looking at cost  cutting?



KENEALLY: Cost cutting?

REMEIKIS: Well, we know that ahead of any National Conference, you look for cuts that can  be made to the Budget so you can pay for things. We know that the Budget is pretty tight at the  moment. We know that your leader has asked for each Shadow Minister to send forward their  cost cuts. How do you make those cuts and that same time promise that no one, which in this  new world includes self-funded retirees and pensioners as well as the traditional people we  see as being vulnerable, being left behind?

KENEALLY: I wanted you to flesh that question out a bit more...

REMEIKIS: By just making sure I knew my stuff?

KENEALLY: No no, I know you know your stuff. I wanted to see if you're going to mention the  directive that was in the paper that Shadow Ministers should do their job, and identify  objectives that support working families, be strategic in the policies they're developing, be  responsible in the decisions they're making, about funding commitments. I mean, if that's the  charge against us - guilty as charged - that's what we're doing.

REMEIKIS: But how can you promise to leave nobody behind in that world?

KENEALLY: I just gave a fairly long speech that details the billions of dollars that this  Government is syphoning off to use for its political purposes. The way that it is using and  wasting money.

Let's take that Great Barrier Reef grant alone: half a billion dollars, given out in a 30-minute  meeting, to an organisation that had about six employees, and didn't even know what the  meeting was about. The Prime Minister of the day Malcolm Turnbull walked in and said: ‘would  you like half a billion dollars?’ And they said, ‘of course, yes, please’. I mean, Gerard (Gerard  Hayes HSU Secretary), I don't know about you, but I think aged care workers would be  delighted if the Prime Minister walked in and said, ‘would you like half a billion dollars?’. You  know, half your luck.

They hit the jackpot that day, the Great Barrier Reef Foundation, I don't begrudge them for  taking the money. But I begrudge as hell the Government for giving it out in such a wasteful  way.

NIC STUART, CANBERRA TIMES: Can I take you up on something similar? You mentioned,  for example, that half of Tony Abbott's first Ministry have got appointments at the moment. The  implication is that's inappropriate. Does that mean that an Albanese Labor Government would  askew and guarantee that no Labor Members of Parliament or former Ministers will ever be  appointed to places? Or if so, would you say 25%? What's the right amount?

KENEALLY: It is a fair question and if I were in your shoes, I would have asked the same  question. And of course, I'm not going to say we'll never appoint a former Member of  Parliament to a position. And I’m going to acknowledge right now that there are some cases  where, for example, I think Joe Hockey did a pretty good job as an American Ambassador. I  actually think it was useful to have somebody who had political nuance…

KENNY: Who could play golf…





KENEALLY: Well who had Greg Norman’s mobile number....

STUART: Could you give us another example?

KENEALLY: Well, no, my point being that sometimes it is useful to have someone who has  political context in certain roles, but just to stack the AAT with political party junkies. To be to  be appointing people like Peter Crone, who's now got a $500,000 job. Shane Stone, former  President of the Liberal Party is getting paid the same as the Prime Minister in a Government-appointed job. I mean, this is a jobs for mates mentality that is happening here.

STUART: So, you’re saying Labor would never do this?

KENEALLY: Let me put it this way, let me contrast the way in which Scott Morrison looks after  his Liberal Party mates with well paid jobs with his pursuit of the penniless during the  RoboDebt (scandal). Now here you have people who supposedly got an overpayment of  taxpayer dollars in their social security support. Their punitive pursuit of the penniless, some of  them to their death, in what is turned out to be an illegal scheme contrast that with their  approach to jobs for mates - hundreds of thousands of dollars given out to political mates.

Companies who got JobKeeper support, who then turned a profit - they don't have to give the  money back.

Shane Stone - the job he got was advertised at $434,000 with $100,000 bonus - he got the  $100,000 bonus.

That's my point. Whose side are they on?

They're on the side of their mates. They are not on the side of ordinary Australians. How can  they be looking after ordinary Australians when they are too busy looking after themselves in  their lives?

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY BRADLOW 0427 280 390



