

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER



ADDRESS TO THE FIFTH HOWARD GOVERNMENT RETROSPECTIVE

CONFERENCE: THE COALITION



DELIVERED ONLINE

2.30PM TUESDAY, 2 MARCH 2021



**CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY**



TEN LESSONS FROM THE HOWARD YEARS



There is great utility in reflecting on - and indeed celebrating - the legacy of long-term governments.

The Howard Government certainly enjoyed longevity.

But the real value in such revision is the opportunity it affords us, to learn from  both the conquests and the failures.

When Andrew invited me to present today, I accepted without hesitation.  Having  first been elected on March 2, 1996, I watched all the Howard years up close.  For  me, it was a very long eleven and a half years to November 2007.  But I learned  plenty from the experience and I’m sure the Labor Party can still learn from it too.

Today I share with you 10 key lessons we can learn from the Howard years.  I have not consistently kept detailed diaries over the course of my 25 years in the  Parliament. So, I thought it would be helpful to turn to John Howard’s own record  of the period as a memory refresh, and to critically analyse his own account of  his long reign.

Lazarus Rising is a long but excellent read.  I can recommend it to those who  have not had the pleasure.

John Howard is an intelligent and wily politician.  He was also, at times, a lucky  politician.  But  in  politics  as  in  sport,  you  make  your  own  luck.  Or  more   particularly, good politicians fully exploit every fortuitous opportunity that comes  along.

John Howard was very good at doing so.  He was probably also deserving of a  bit  of  luck  because  he  didn’t  enjoy  too  much  of  it  in  Opposition  during  the   1980s.  The 1987 “Joh for PM campaign” is but one example and a relevant one  for today’s discussion.

Which  takes  me  to  one  of  today’s  themes,  the  Coalition.  John  Howard  was   fortunate to have in Tim Fischer, John Anderson and Mark Vaile, solid and loyal  National Party Leaders. Each of them in turn, led a relatively united and stable  Nationals  Party  Room.  Certainly,  when  compared  with  the  group  Michael   McCormack now leads.

Nothing could ever test Coalition cohesion and unity like gun law reform did in  1996 but the Nats stuck solidly with the then Prime Minister throughout what was  a difficult period.

In a rare outcome, the Liberal Party could have governed after the 1996 election  without an arrangement with the National Party.  But John Howard was shrewd  enough  to  know he’d  need  them  at some  point in  the  future.  The decision  to   maintain  the  Coalition  arrangement  after the  1996  election  turned  out to  be  a  wise one.  He would need them sooner than he might have imagined.

That’s Lesson No.1:

To be a successful party of government in a two-party system, you must  build a broad coalition of community support.

Critical to achieving that broad support base is accommodating the diverse range  of  thoughts  and  attitudes  held  by  the  representatives  of  many  very  diverse   electorates.  In John Howard’s case, that meant an on-going commitment to the  Coalition arrangement which has served the two parties so well.

For  the  Labor  Party  it  must  mean  the  policy  accommodation  of  those   representing - or hoping to represent - both our resource-rich regions, and the  typically progressive suburbs of our capital cities.

Building  a  broad  range  of  electoral  support  is  more  challenging  for  the  Labor   Party than it is for the Coalition Parties, themselves two very different creatures.  The  Coalition  arrangement  allows  National  Party  candidates  to  say  much   different things in far-away regional seats than the Liberal Leader is saying in our  capital cities.

It’s  a  form  of  Constitutionally  sanctioned  cheating.  More  scandalous  is  the   secretive  nature  of  the  so-called  “Coalition  Agreement”  which  allows  the  two

parties to form a government, despite Labor’s superior House of Representatives  numbers.

It’s easy to think about the Howard Government as one which was pretty much  invincible for most of its lifetime, but that is far from the reality.  For several long  periods, Labor’s years in the wilderness looked like being somewhat shorter.   The fact that it wasn’t, is testimony to John Howard’s shrewd political judgement  and political skill.  I’ll make a passing comment here; Scott Morrison has learnt  much from him.

But Prime Minister Howard was almost a oncer.  He lost both the popular and 2  party preferred vote at his first attempt at re-election in 1998.

In fact, I believe that if it had not been for Labor’s ill-conceived promised changes  to capital gains tax arrangements - and to a lesser extent the proposed 4WD tax  - Kim Beazley would have been Australia’s 25th Prime Minister.



Gun laws, the emergence of One Nation, and a courageous promise to introduce  a GST had all taken their toll on the young government.

Fast forward  to  2001. Of the  17  Newspoll’s to  August 26, 2001, 15 gave  Kim   Beazley a comfortable lead, including a favourable 56-44 2PP split in May that  year.  But then came the MV Tampa which single handily took eight points of  Labor 2PP vote in one fell swoop.

The  election  of  Mark  Latham  as  Labor  Leader  in  2004  offered  new  and   unexpected  challenges  for  John  Howard.  In  the  early  period  of  Latham’s   leadership  John  Howard  struggled.  Latham  was  young,  fresh,  energetic  and   smart.

He  carried  little  baggage  and  was  unpredictable.  He  wrong-footed  the  Prime   Minister on several occasions, the United States Free Trade Agreement and the  potential impact on our Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is an example which  remains vividly with me.

Six months on from Latham’s elevation, Labor led the Coalition in Newspoll 54-46.  There were 24 Newspolls between Mark Latham’s election and polling day  2004.

Labor led or shared the lead for 20 of them.  Three of the four in which Labor  lagged the Coalition were both taken in December 2003, the same month he was  elected Leader.

The  2PP vote  on  polling  day was 52.7  for the  Coalition, 47.3  to  Labor. Labor  suffered  a  devastating  5  seat  loss  and  its  Senate  result  was  a  shocker.  It’s   amazing  how  much  impact  a  walk  through  an  old-growth  forest  with  Dr  Bob   Brown - and a bad handshake - can have on an election outcome.

That’s Lesson 2:



In a two-horse race, each of the jockeys is a chance all the way to the  finish line.

Lesson 3 is:

Never underestimate your opponent.

This is a particularly important lesson for the Labor Party which is too often prone  to doing just that. Indeed, amongst some in the Party, an unhealthy belief in our  intellectual and moral superiority has led to a form of institutional elitism. Yet we  keep losing elections.

Scott  Morrison  is  the  latest  to  benefit  from  Labor’s  failure  to  take  its  main   opponent sufficiently seriously. Labor massively under-estimated him when he  took the Liberal Party leadership in 2018. I vividly recall too, hearing senior Labor  people dismissively speaking of John Howard in 1996.  Many Cabinet Ministers  since, have been similarly under-estimated.

By contrast, I don’t believe John Howard was ever guilty of underestimating Mark  Latham.  I watched him closely. The Prime Minister was wrong footed for many  months, but he eventually found his balance.  The rest is history.

Most  Australians  would  mark  the  Howard  Government  quite  highly.  While  I   acknowledge the impact of the Asian Financial Crisis, it is still true John Howard  governed  in  good  economic  times  and  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  strong  tax   revenues.

In the GST, he can claim a significant economic reform and while at the time I  didn’t  agree  with  all  the  Government’s  priorities,  Budget  repair  was  also  an   important achievement.

No  one  would  now  argue  that  a  broadening  of  the  tax  base  through  the   introduction of a tax on the growing services sector was a mistake.  But back  then, despite Paul Keating’s 1983 flirtation with a consumption tax, no one was  surprised  the  Labor  Opposition  opposed  the  Government’s  proposed  tax   package in the lead up to the 1998 election.

But  what  was  surprising  to  many,  was  Labor’s  decision  to  oppose  the  GST   legislation following John Howard’s 1998 election victory.  In doing so we chose  to ignore the re-elected Government’s mandate and sidelined ourselves from the  Senate debate.

That’s lesson No.4:

Mandates are important, they should be respected and factored into the  policy development processes.

Lesson No.5 is:



In  the  relative  irrelevance  and  obscurity  of  Opposition,  parties  of   conviction should not easily forgo an opportunity to shape policy.

The National Party must understand this.  It’s relationship with the Liberal Party  is an uneasy one but it puts them in the policy game.  The Ministerial Wing offices  are more attractive too.

Labor could have achieved much more by leaving itself open to negotiation and  policy amendments, than it did by simply opposing the GST package.  In failing  to  do  so,  it  left  the  matter  to the  minor  parties  and  the  other  Senate   crossbenchers, so few Australians voted for.

The decision to quarantine Defence from Budget cuts was a significant Howard  initiative  and  helped  to  consolidate  the  Government’s  national  security   credentials.  As did our historic intervention in East Timor.

John  Howard  said  he  wanted  Australians  to  be  relaxed  and  comfortable  and   while some of the more hard-line policy decisions caused pain for many, most  were during most of his time in office.

But  like  all  governments,  there  were  mistakes,  scandals,  resignations,  and  at   times, poor judgement.  John Howard would be the first to concede that. In fact,  he does just that in Lazarus Rising.

There, John Howard attributes Labor’s 1983 election victory largely to Hawke’s  capacity  to  bring  people  together.  Indeed,  Hawke’s  campaign  slogan  was   “Bringing Australia Together”.

It was an interesting observation because John Howard didn’t always follow that  course of action.  When he did, he did well.  When he didn’t, he did not do so  well.  But his longevity must tell us he sought to unite more often than he chose  to divide.

Lesson 6:

Parties of protest seek success in the ugliness of division. Consensus  building offers a more likely path to sustained success.  It is also more  likely to produce good policy outcomes.

John Howard was often slow to learn this lesson and re-visited the strategy of  division  as  late  as  2006/2007  with  his  WorkChoices  legislation.  It  was  an   aggressive policy which in the end played a significant role in the demise of his  Government.

In my view industrial relations was John Howard’s blind-spot, as evidenced by  the  water-front  dispute  of  1998,  and  indeed,  the  Rio  Tinto  dispute  in  my  own   electorate during 1998/99.

The Rio Tinto dispute remains fresh in my mind.  I vividly recall being thrown out  of  the  House  of  Representatives  chamber  during  Question  Time  following  an   angry intervention on the then Prime Minister who, whatever he believed to be  the merits of his case was revelling in the division of the dispute and was railing  hard  against  the  legitimate  cause  the  Union  was  pursuing  on  behalf  of  its   members.

That brings me to Lesson 7:

Politically motivated policy over-reach too often ends in tears.

Both major parties have failed to fully learn this lesson.  Labor’s overreach on  climate change is a recent example.

There  is  much  to  suggest  John  Howard  is  a  stubborn  person.  It’s  almost  a   prerequisite  for  leadership.  Often  this  is  a  strength  and  produces  good   outcomes.  On other occasions it can be counterproductive.

On issues like the apology to the stolen generation - in my view - John Howard’s  stubbornness came at great political cost and taints his legacy still.  At the time  he argued that while we should acknowledge the wrongs of the past, the current  generation of Australians should not be held responsible.  I think that was wrong.

To  his  credit,  in  Lazarus  Rising,  Howard  acknowledges  some  missteps  on   indigenous policy.  While I’ve no doubt he has a good appreciation of the extent  of indigenous disadvantage, I was never convinced - particularly given the tone  of the debate during the Wik induced amendments to the Native Title Act - that  his approach was designed always to unify.

I’m  sure  too,  that  John  Howard  sought  to  divide  not  unite  when  devising  his   approach to refugee and national security policy. He was master of the political  wedge and used it to great effect.  Often so successfully, it weighs on Labor’s  vote to this day.

That’s Lesson 8:

Avoid a good political wedge at all cost, particularly when the issue is  not  fundamental  to  the  most  important  issues  facing  Australians   families.

Adhering to long-held values and principles is admirable but if doing so consigns  you  perpetually  to  the  Opposition  benchers,  it  delivers  little  more  than  warm   feelings and denies the opportunity to govern and to do good things.  As Gough  Whitlam once said, “the impotent are pure”.

Along with his ability to read the mood of the electorate, agility and pragmatism  were amongst John Howard’s greatest strengths.  He was no doubt assisted by  the presence of National Party Members in his Cabinet who would have kept him  abreast of what people were thinking in the bush.  By contrast, Labor’s lack of

sufficient regional representation in the Parliamentary Party is a barrier to policy  and electoral success.

Unsurprisingly, the term “Howard Battlers” appears in Lazarus Rising on more  than one occasion.  It was originally a reference to the many traditional Labor  voters - largely blue-collar workers - who deserted Labor and voted Liberal during  the ill-fated 1996 by-election.

They also became known as “aspirational voters”, those who work hard to deliver  a better future for their families.  Those who want a tax system which incentivises  and  rewards  hard  work.  Those  who  want  their  government  to  focus  on  their   personal and economic security. Those who want less government in their lives  not more.

Amongst  the  issues  driving  traditional  Labor  voters  from  Labor’s  arms  still,  is   environment policy.  This is not a new phenomenon. Indeed, it had its beginnings  in the mid-1980s when Bob Hawkes environment minister Graham Richardson  cleverly plugged votes leaking to the green parties by developing Labor’s own  green  agenda.  At the  time,  and  for  a  long  time  after, this  proved  to  be  a  net  electoral positive for the Labor Party.

But  the  hare  Richardson  set  running  - and  which  led  to  the  timber  truckies   blockade of Parliament House of 1995 - ran right into John Howard’s political  machine  in  2004  when  Labor’s  forestry  policy  debacle  caused  blue-collar  unionists to cheer John Howard into Launceston’s packed Albert Hall only days  before polling day.

Since  then,  the  Labor  party  has  been  struggling  to  successfully  balance  the   aspirations  of  its  traditional  support  base  and  its  more  recently  arrived   progressive base.  It is task made much harder by the 2010 deal Julia Gillard did  with the Greens to form a minority government.

Labor’s  2019  equivocation  over  the  Adani  coal  mine  further  compounded  the   problem.

Too  many  punters  remember  both  the  2010  signing  ceremony  and  the  Bob   Brown Stop Adani convoy too well.

Lesson 9:

A political party that deserts its traditional base - or is perceived to be  deserting its base - is an unelectable one.

It’s a lesson Labor has been slow to learn.

It was often said of Tony Abbott: “you might not like him, but at least you know  what he stands for”.



Being clear about what you stand for is possibly the most important building block  to successful leadership.

The trick in politics is to be both liked and clear about what you stand  for.

John Howard managed to do just that for most of his time as Prime Minister.

That’s Lesson No.10

Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock.









